Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference: Chromatin and Transcription held on July 5-10,
               1997, at the Conference Center in Snowmass Villiage, Colorado.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9604722

Award Number: 9604722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly M. Emerson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Winston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9604722  Emerson  The fourth FASEB Summer Research Conference on "Chromatin and
              Transcription," will be held on July 5-10, 1997, at the Conference Center in
              Snowmass Village, Colorado.  A primary objective of this meeting is to bring
              together researchers who study transcription factors, chromatin structure, and
              higher-order nuclear organization.    The program and confirmed session
              chairpersons are as follows:     Session Topic       Chairperson    1.
              Nucleosomal Regulation of Transcription   Carl Wu  2. Chromatin Structure and
              Transcription Factors  Gary Felsenfeld  3. Transcriptional Regulation by
              Chromatin   Sharon Roth   and non-Histone Proteins  4. Developmental/Epigenetic
              Regulation   Mitzi Kuroda  5. Nuclear Organization      Jasper Rine  6. DNA
              Replication and Silencing    Barbara Wakimoto  7. Heritable Chromatin States   
               Sally Elgin  8. Heterochromatin and Position-Effect Variegation  Bruce
              Stillman  9. Chromatin Remodeling Factors    Jim Kadonaga    The prevalent
              theme of this meeting is the role of eukaryotic chromosome structure in the
              function of basic cellular processes. While the analysis of chromatin and
              transcription is the central topic of this meeting, the function of
              chromatin/nuclear structure extends beyond this domain.  For instance,
              chromatin assembly is a key step in the cell cycle, and for this reason, a
              session on DNA Replication and Silencing has been included.  There is also an
              important relation between nuclear structure/localization and gene expression,
              and these topics are represented by sessions on Developmental/Epigenetic
              Regulation, which includes locus control regions and boundary elements, as well
              as Heterochromatin and Position-Effect Variegation, and Nuclear Organization. 
              Moreover, questions of genomic stability and instability will be addressed in a
              session on Heritable Chromatin States.  The timing of the 1997 conference is
              ideal for the presentation and discussion of data in these rapidly evolving
              areas.  ***
