Title       : Role of CHD1 in Chromatin Remodeling and Transcriptional Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9604154

Award Number: 9604154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604154  Perry  The protein CHD1 is associated with transcriptionally active
              regions of extended (decompacted) interphase chromatin.  The structural
              features of this protein have been preserved over a long period of evolution,
              suggesting that it performs analogous functions in organisms as diverse as
              yeast, flies and mammals.  These features include a chromo domain, relating it
              to proteins like HP1 and Polycomb; an ATPase/helicase domain, relating it to
              proteins like SNF2/SWI2 and Brahma; and a DNA-binding domain that specifically
              interacts with the minor groove of A(T-rich DNA.  This research is aimed at
              gaining deeper insight into the roles played by CHD1 and its associated
              proteins in the remodeling of chromatin structure and the regulation of gene
              expression.  Experiments with Drosophila, in which several target genes of CHD1
              activity have been identified, will include (i) immunocytochemical localization
              studies of polytene chromosomes from flies in different developmental and
              physiological states; (ii) genetic studies of the consequences of directed
              mutations in the signature domains of CHD1; (iii) determination of the
              particular regions of target genes that interact with CHD1; and (iv) a genetic
              screen for CHD1 mutants and for enhancers and/or suppressors of these
              mutations.  This research should contribute substantially to the knowledge of
              gene regulation.  In particular, it should help illuminate mechanisms by which
              modifications of chromatin structure determine accessibility to the
              transcriptional apparatus.  %%%  The protein CHD1 is associated with
              transcriptionally active regions of extended (decompacted) interphase
              chromatin.  The structural features of this protein have been preserved over a
              long period of evolution, suggesting that it performs analogous functions in
              organisms as diverse as yeast, flies and mammals.  This research is aimed at
              gaining deeper insight into the roles played by CHD1 and its associated
              proteins in the remodeling of chromatin structure and the regulation o f gene
              expression.  In particular, it should help illuminate mechanisms by which
              modifications of chromatin structure determine accessibility to the
              transcriptional apparatus.  ***
