Title       : Combined Atomic Force and Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy for
               Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9604785

Award Number: 9604785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashutosh Chilkoti chilkoti@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farshid Guilak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Truskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Reichert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Cellular and Biosurface Engineering at Duke University  requests
              funding to purchase atomic force microscopy (AFM)  instrumentation for the
              shared use of faculty within the Center. No  such instrumentation currently
              exists within the Center for shared use.  A significant number of the core
              investigators have used atomic force  microscopes at other institutions. The
              requested Digital Instruments  MultiMode/BioscopeTM AFM allows simultaneous
              optical microscopy and AFM  imaging. We propose to further extend the
              capabilities of the  BioscopeTM AFM by incorporating total internal reflection
              fluorescence  microscopy (TIRFM) into its optics. This instrument will enhance
              the  research of six members in the interdisciplinary Center for Cellular  and
              Biosurface Engineering (from four departments) in the following  research
              projects: (1) characterization of crystalline, two-dimensional  bacterial
              s-layer protein arrays and nanopatterned protein arrays  directed by the
              s-layer nanotemplates; (2) elucidation of the mechanism  of mechanical signal
              transduction in musculoskeletal cells; (3)  characterization of photopatterned
              antibody arrays designed for a  multianalyte integrated optical waveguide
              sensor; (4) quantitative  imaging of endothelial cell attachment and spreading
              processes on  novel, micropatterned cell-adhesive ligand substrates; (5) 
              characterization of a DNA chip: multiplexed, spatially-localized 
              oligonucleotide arrays on silicon substrates; (6) analysis of motor  proteins
              by AFM; and (7) development of a biophysical model to relate  protein-ligand
              recognition energetics to AFM-measured intermolecular  forces. The acquisition
              of an AFM will also significantly enhance the  educational mission of the
              Center for Cellular and Biosurface  Engineering at Duke University. The Center
              was the recent recipient of  a special opportunity award from the Whitaker
              Foundation for  educational enhancements to the program at both the
              undergraduate and  graduate levels. The Center is committed to  developing
              innovative  laboratory classes that utilize contemporary experimental
              techniques to  understand, quantify, and visualize the fundamental forces,
              stresses,  and recognition processes at the molecular and cellular levels that
              are  central to biological phenomena. The ability of the atomic force 
              microscope to investigate these phenomena in a biologically-relevant  milieu in
              real time combined with its relative ease of use makes it an  ideal
              experimental technique for a number of the laboratory components  of a new
              graduate course under development.
