Title       : Establishing the First Neuronal Fate in the Developing Drosophila Retina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9604090

Award Number: 9604090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross L. Cagan cagan@molecool.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  960490  CAGAN    Normal fetal development requires a carefully
              choreographed interplay of many molecules.  One of the most important
              discoveries biologists have made in recent years is that these molecules seem
              to arrange themselves as pathways or 'cassettes':  one cassette of molecules
              allows cells to communicate with one another while another cassette might
              direct cell movement.  Dr. Cagan's laboratory is studying one of the most
              widely used cassettes in development, the Notch pathway.  The Notch pathway
              plays a central role in the making of most tissues in a wide variety of
              organisms, including insects and humans.  This includes our immune system,
              musculature, skin, heart, nervous system, etc.  Defects in the Notch pathway
              have been implicated in leukemias and are undoubtedly involved in a host of
              other diseases as well.  Dr. Cagan's laboratory uses a model system, the
              developing eye of the fruitfly, Drosophila, to investigate the role of the
              Notch pathway in development.  They are using a variety of tools to understand
              how the different molecular components of the 'Notch cassette' interact with
              one another.  Abnormal Notch function results in an abnormal eye.  By shedding
              light on this critical pathway in the eye, Dr. Cagan's research will further
              our understanding both of how the eye is made and how structures of the body
              are properly assembled.
