Title       : US-Myanmar Workshop: Circulation and Mixing of the Andaman Sea - Yangoon,
               Myanmar, August 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9604942

Award Number: 9604942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold L. Gordon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,5989,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support participation by six scientists from
              the United States in a workshop with scientists from Myanmar, to be held in
              Yangon in August 1997.  The US team leader is Dr. Arnold Gordon from the Lamont
              Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, and the Leader of the Myanmar
              team is Dr. Swe Thwin, Department of Marine Science, University of Mawlamyine
              in Yangon.  The purpose of the workshop is to formulate a research program
              whose goal is to develop a regional circulation model for the Andaman Sea,
              forced by wind, river plume, tidal mixing, sea-air heat and fresh water fluxes.
               The model of choice is the Princeton Ocean Model.  The model will have
              application to studies of spreading of pollutants, primary productivity
              research and meteorological phenomena in the Myanmar region.  A broader
              application is to better assess the role of the Andaman Sea in the larger scale
              climate system, primarily the Asian Monsoon.  The specific interest in the
              Andaman Sea stems from the effects of suspected internal wave and tidal derived
              elevated vertical mixing processes, which may alter the regional vertical
              stratification and circulation pattern.   It is anticipated that the result of
              the workshop will be a plan for a joint research project.   Scope: This award
              is to fund travel of five of six U.S. scientists who will meet with
              approximately fifteen scientists from Myanmar in a workshop where discussions
              will deal with a topic of great importance to oceanographers and atmospheric
              scientists in the US, and in Asia.  The meeting is expected to result in a
              proposal to be submitted to the Foundation, to support joint research that will
              include American scientists and scientists from Myanmar.  This activity is
              particularly worthwhile because it opens avenues for American scientists to
              work in Myanmar and with scientists from that country.  The project meets the
              objectives of the Division of International Programs in promoting collaboration
              with foreign scientists in areas of mutual interest.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
