Title       : Shapes of Biomacromolecular Complexes by Solid-State NuclearMagnetic Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9604860

Award Number: 9604860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Schaefer schaefer@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604860  Schaefer  The goal of the work is the characterization by solid-state
              NMR of proteins and DNA that are part of a supramolecular structure or
              assembly.  These include cross-linked proteins in insect cuticle, marine
              organisms and plant cell walls, as well as proteins encapsulated in stabilizing
              lyoprotectant matrices, and DNA compacted by dendrimer-like macromolecules. 
              Dipolar couplings between stable-isotope labels will be measured directly in
              these complicated biomacromolecular assemblies by REDOR (Rotational-echo double
              resonance) and REDOR-like NMR recoupling experiments.  In the work on insect,
              mussel, and plant proteins, specific chemical questions will be answered as to
              how these structures are cross-linked and stabilized.  A search will be made
              for new ways to stabilize fragile protein complexes in a buffered sugar glass. 
              These matrices will then be used to examine the natural-substrate reaction
              intermediates of enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate synthase which have been
              trapped in the glass.  Finally, a dopant will be created for dynamic nuclear
              polariation experiments by burying a stable free radical in the core of an
              amphiphilic particle that complexes proteins and compacts DNA.  REDOR will be
              used to characterize the local structure and the resulting distances will be
              used as constraints in molecular dynamics simulations designed to visualize the
              overall shapes of the complexes.    Many biochemical and biophysical processes
              are carried out by or in molecular superstructures.  These superstructures are
              macromolecular complexes or aggregates for which there is no atomic-level
              structural information because they are not soluble (no solution NMR) and don't
              crystalize (no x-ray crystallography).  This work will provide specific
              insights into important practical problems (insect pest management, barnacle
              fouling of ship hulls, enzyme reaction pathways, DNA compaction) and generate a
              new kind of biophysical structural tool with atomic-level resolution
              (solid-state NMR) that is applic able to otherwise intractable systems.
