Title       : Limonene Hydroxylases as a Model for Cytochrome P450 Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9604918

Award Number: 9604918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney Croteau croteau@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604918  Croteau  The cytochrome P450 hydroxylases are an important class of
              enzymes in both plants and animals. They are responsible for key biosynthetic
              steps in the formation of plant and animal hormones and play essential roles in
              detoxification of environmental toxins in animals and herbicides in plants. As
              a class, the cytochrome P450 hydroxylases have been difficult to study because
              they are recalcitrant to crystallization for x-ray structure determination and
              they are highly diverse in form and in reaction type, thus providing limited
              opportunity to understand the relationship between enzyme structure and
              specific function. The limonene hydroxylases of mint species provide a unique
              opportunity for exploring how enzyme structural features determine the
              three-dimensional course of the reaction catalyzed. Three distinct limonene
              hydroxylases have been cloned from common mint species, each of which carries
              out the specific addition of a hydroxyl group to a different position on the
              same, very simple terpenoid substrate limonene. These cytochrome P450 enzymes
              are very similar in primary structure (amino acid sequence), and it is likely
              that very subtle differences in the shape of the active sites determine the
              specific position of hydroxylation on the substrate. Photoactive substrate
              analogs are being used to locate the active sites, and mutagenesis studies are
              being employed to determine which specific amino acids of the active site
              direct the position of hydroxylation. Fluorinated analogs of limonene have been
              synthesized and will be used in conjunction with nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectrometry to correlate the precise binding geometry of the substrate with
              the reaction carried out by each native and mutant enzyme.  Completion of these
              experimental objectives will provide a level of structural understanding that
              has not been possible with other types of cytochrome P450 enzymes. The
              information gained may allow the manipulation and redesign of important
              metabolic pathways in plants, broad  implications for the production of novel
              plant products, such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and industrial
              intermediates, and for the improvement of disease, insect, and herbicide
              resistance of crop species.    This project is concerned with a class of plant
              enzymes called cytochrome P450s. They catalyze a variety of reactions that are
              necessary for plants to make important secondary metabolites such as taxol,
              defense mediators, and hormones. In addition, P-450s can detoxify pollutants
              and breakdown compounds such as herbicides. This project will result in new
              information about exactly how these enzymes interact with their substrates to
              direct synthesis of diverse products. The work has implications for metabolic
              engineering, bioremediation, and crop disease resistance.
