Title       : Comparative Physiology of Renal Transepithelial Phosphate Transport in Three
               Vertebrate Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1999   
File        : a9604070

Award Number: 9604070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234400             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Larry Renfro jlrenfro@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604070  Renfro      Inorganic phosphate has important functions in all cells
              and is a vital part of structural components of the body such as bones and
              teeth.  The amount of phosphate within an organism can alter calcium balance,
              acidity of body fluids, and growth.  Dietary phosphate intake and renal
              excretion determine the availability of inorganic phosphate for normal
              metabolism.  Inadequate dietary phosphorous intake can cause hypophosphatemia,
              which, if chronic is a potentially deleterious state, especially in a growing
              animal.   Hypophosphatemia is avoided by rapid mobilization of phosphate from
              muscle and bone.  This can result in hypercalcemia and increased renal calcium
              excretion.  Thus, the kidney mechanisms of transport as well as their control
              are important areas of investigation.  Renal excretion of phosphate is
              regulated, or otherwise influenced, by a variety of factors including serum
              phosphate concentration, acid-base balance, and calcium metabolism as well as a
              variety of hormones.  In the vertebrates, a multitude of hormones has been
              shown to alter renal phosphate transport, but our understanding of the control
              of this process is incomplete.  Recently, both stanniocalcin and somotolactin,
              hormones which were thought to be unique to fish, have been found in other
              vertebrate classes including mammals (rats and humans).  Because these hormones
              stimulate phosphate transport in flounder, it is important to examine their
              effect on phosphate transport in other vertebrates.  Dr. Renfro will examine
              the processes by which these factors alter body phosphate.
