Title       : Avian Same-Different Concept Learning and Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9604359

Award Number: 9604359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Cook rcook1@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9604359  Cook    Birds behave as if the perceive, learn and act upon an
              object-filled visual world.  The ultimate goal of this research is to
              understand how these small autonomous systems form accurate perceptions of the
              visual world and use this information to learn and predict information about
              the relations among objects and events.  The proposed research examines these
              questions by looking at the visual and cognitive mechanisms of one highly
              visual non-mammalian system - the pigeon (Columba livia).  Pigeons are ideal
              for comparative cognitive studies because the demands to minimize body weight
              for flight have caused birds to evolve small, compact, and powerful central
              nervous systems capable of exceptional visual perception and the learning of
              complex discriminations.  The new research builds on the PI's prior
              NSF-supported research by examining the mechanisms underlying the visual
              discrimination and abstract conceptualization of same-different relations by
              this animal.  The capacity to direct and recognize difference and similarity
              implications for our understanding of perception, conceptual behavior,
              intelligence-related behaviors, and their symbolic mediation by language.  One
              powerful means of studying these relations has been the same-different judgment
              task.  In this task, the subject is asked to respond "same" when two or more
              stimuli are different from the others.  The current proposal follows up on the
              PI's recent success in producing this type of discrimination in pigeons, and is
              designed to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying this
              important and little studied discrimination in animals.  The aims of the new
              research are to analyze and separate the perceptual and conceptual mechanisms
              of odd-item and 2-item same-different discriminations using multiple types of
              stimuli.   Besides its general implications for our understanding of the
              learning, study will address interaction of bottom-up, stimulus driven,
              perceptual processes and top-down, subject-driven, control  process in the
              government of pigeon discrimination and choice behavior.  Where appropriate,
              comparisons to the theories and findings of human and machine perception and
              conceptual learning and behavior will be made.  Overall, this project will
              provide new evidence concerning the structure and processes of visual-based
              concept learning - in birds specifically, and in animals more generally.
