Title       : Regulation of mRNA Stability in Plastids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9604658

Award Number: 9604658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilhelm Gruissem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604658  Gruissem  Current information suggests that regulated mRNA stability is
              an important control point of gene expression in light-dependent development of
              chloroplasts and activation of photosynthesis. Recent work on mRNA processing
              and turnover in prokaryotes, eukaryotes and cellular organelles indicate the
              3'end plays a key role in generating functional mRNA and regulating its
              degradation.  This laboratory previously has shown that mRNA 3' stem-loop
              structures act in concert with nucleases and regulatory proteins to direct
              correct mRNA processing or degradation in chloroplasts.  These nucleases are
              assembled into a high molecular weight (HMW) complex, which is similar in
              function to the recently reported RNA 'degradosome' in E. coli, but in
              chloroplasts is regulated by ancillary nuclear-encoded CS-type RNA binding
              proteins to produced correctly processed and stable mRNA 3'-ends. Plants
              expressing antisense RNA to the CS-type proteins die early in development
              consistent with the critical role of these proteins in chloroplast function. 
              Once a stable mRNA has been formed, its degradation is determined by RNA
              binding proteins that regulate the endonucleolytic removal of the stabilizing
              3' stem-loop structure.  Degradation of the cleaved RNA is accelerated by 3'
              polyadenylation, which also can accelerate degradation of the mature 3'
              stem-loop RNA by a light-regulated mechanism.  These results indicate that in
              plant cells polyadenylation of cytoplasmic and plastid mRNAs operates in
              parallel but with different consequences for the metabolism of the respective
              mRNAs.  This research will focus on the functional dissection of the
              chloroplast HMW nuclease complex using component proteins which have been
              purified and cloned.  Combined biochemical and genetic approaches will clarify
              the roles of enzymes that participate in mRNA metabolism and establish the
              function of the CS-type RNA binding proteins in light-regulated chloroplast
              mRNA processing and decay.  Understanding the mechanisms by which pla stid mRNA
              decay is regulated will provide important new information on the nuclear
              control of organelle gene expression,  and because of the importance of
              photosynthesis for plant productivity, will have relevance to future plant and
              agricultural biotechnology.    Current information suggests that regulated mRNA
              stability is an important control point of gene expression in light-dependent
              development of chloroplasts and activation of photosynthesis. This research
              will employ combined biochemical and genetic approaches to clarify the roles of
              enzymes that participate in mRNA metabolism and to establish the function of
              RNA binding proteins in light-regulated chloroplast mRNA processing and decay. 
              Understanding the mechanisms by which chloroplast mRNA decay is regulated will
              provide important new information on the nuclear control of organelle gene
              expression,  and because of the importance of photosynthesis for plant
              productivity, will have relevance to future plant and agricultural
              biotechnology.
