Title       : Characterization of Proteins that Interact with CDPK Gamma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9604647

Award Number: 9604647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice C. Harmon harmon@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9604647  Harmon  Technical  Calmodulin-like domain protein kinases (also
              called calcium-dependent protein kinases or CDPK) are a new family of protein
              kinases that are directly regulated by calcium. They contain not only a
              catalytic domain, but also a calcium-binding domain that is similar to
              calmodulin. These enzymes are maximally stimulated by micromolar concentrations
              of Ca2+ and are thought to play a role in cellular responses to diverse stimuli
              such as light, growth regulators, pathogen attack and environmental stress. A
              large family of CDPKs is present in plants. Since the activity of these enzymes
              is regulated by free calcium, they are capable of perceiving and transducing
              intracellular calcium signals evoked by numerous stimuli. However, information
              about the specific roles of these kinases in signaling pathways is still
              lacking. Few protein substrates of CDPKs have been identified, and it is
              unknown if the enzymes interact with regulatory or anchoring/targeting
              proteins. To identify proteins that are substrates or regulators of CDPK or
              serve to target them to specific cellular locations, interaction cloning was
              undertaken. Screening of a soybean cDNA expression library with three
              32P-labeled recombinant CDPKs, identified twelve cDNA clones that encode
              proteins that interact with CDPKg. Eight of these clones encode known proteins,
              and several are phosphorylated by CDPKg in vitro. Two of the interacting
              proteins are serine acetyl transferase (SAT) and glutathione S-transferase
              (GST), which are involved in cysteine synthesis and glutathione metabolism,
              respectively. Another is polyubiquitin, which is the precursor of monomeric
              ubiquitin that is involved in protein degradation pathways. Current evidence
              points to roles for glutathione (a cysteine-containing tripeptide) metabolism
              and protein degradation in cellular responses to stress or pathogen attack. The
              objective of this proposal is to characterize the interaction between the
              proteins identified in our screen and CDPKg in vitro and t o use a soybean cell
              culture model system to study their interactions and roles in vivo. We will
              test the hypothesis that CDPKg activity and its interaction with ubiquitin,
              SAT, GST and other proteins play roles in the response of soybean cells to
              stress or pathogen attack. These studies are an important step towards
              identifying specific roles of CDPKg in vivo and may provide insight into
              cellular components involved in plant defense responses. The objectives of this
              project are to first characterize the interaction  of CDPKg with the proteins
              identified by interaction cloning. Clones encoding known proteins will be
              expressed as a fusion proteins with maltose binding protein or another affinity
              tag. Antibodies to interacting proteins will be made and the subcellular
              location of the proteins determined. Binding of the interacting proteins to
              recombinant CDPKg on protein blots and in solution will be characterized.
              Phosphorylation of substrate proteins will be characterized, and the effect of
              phosphorylation on these proteins will be determined. Initial work will focus
              on serine acetyltransferase whose activity is regulated on cultured cells or
              protoplasts for characterization of the role of CDPKg in vivo.
              Autophosphorylation of CDPKg and phosphorylation of substrate proteins in cells
              or protoplasts in response to changes in by phosphorylation. 2. Use a model
              system based intracellular free calcium concentration induced artificially or
              in response to stimuli will be measured by immunoprecipitation of proteins
              metabolically labeled with 32P. The hypothesis that activation of CDPKg and
              phosphorylation of substrate proteins identified by interaction cloning are
              involved in cellular responses to stress or pathogen attack will be tested.
              Initial work will focus on serine acetyltransferase.  Nontechnical  How
              environmental changes are detected in order to evoke specific responses in
              plants is one of the large questions of plant biology for which there is
              presently little information. Calcium ions appear  to have an important role in
              transmitting the signal from sensors to downstream effects of protein synthesis
              and alterations. This project will analyze how a calcium-dependent protein
              kinase attaches phosphate molecules to specific proteins in response to biotic
              and abiotic stress. This modification of specific proteins is proposed to be a
              critical step in the stress reponse. This research is important because it will
              address a fundamental aspect of how plant perceive stress situation and
              transmit the signal to initiate a response.
