Title       : Cytoskeletal Determinants of the Physical and Material Properties of Cytoplasm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9604594

Award Number: 9604594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Luby-Phelps   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604594  Luby-Phelps    Technical    Much current thinking about cellular
              biochemistry and metabolism is extrapolated from assays performed in
              homogeneous, dilute solutions, in which the diffusion of the reactants is
              unhindered.  However, the interior of a cell is neither dilute, nor
              homogeneous.  The intracellular  concentration of certain enzymes is orders of
              magnitude higher than the  concentrations commonly used to assay enzyme
              activity in vitro, and the  total protein concentration may be as high as 200
              to 300 mg/ml.  In addition, a large body of theological, biochemical, and
              electron  microscopic evidence suggests that cytoskeletal filaments interact to
               form a three-dimensional network in the cytoplasm.  This network may  present
              a barrier to diffusion as well as providing a framework that  allows cells to
              establish asymmetric shapes and resist mechanical stresses.  The translational
              diffusion of test particles in the cytoplasm of living cells is observed to be
              hindered in a size-dependent manner.  A model developed from studies of these
              test particles in solution  suggests that in living cells diffusion is slowed
              by a combination of collisions with other macromolecules and sieving by a
              network of  entangled or crosslinked filaments.  In addition, particles  50 nm
              in  radius are excluded from some subcompartments of the cytoplasmic volume. 
              Many of the intracellular components involved in protein synthesis, 
              respiration and particle transport are also absent from these compartments,
              raising the possibility that they represent functional, as well as structural
              differentiation's of the cytoplasm. Although it is presumed that the
              cytoskeleton is responsible for both hindered diffusion and the differential
              partitioning of large and small  particles, this has not been tested directly. 
               In response to mechanical stimuli, cytoplasm does not behave as a simple,
              visous fluid.  A variety of evidence indicates that cytoplasm is viscoelastic. 
              That is, interactions among its constituent macromolecul es prevent it from
              flowing freely under shearing stress and cause it to  recoil when the stress is
              removed.  The most likely source of the elasticity of cytoplasm is the
              cytoskeleton.  Individual cytoskeletal filaments are highly elastic and
              solutions of these filaments exhibit viscoelastic behavior similar to
              cytoplasm.  However, direct tests of this hypothesis are few and none of them
              have been carried out under physiological conditions.  The objectives of this
              proposal are to define the constraints on   diffusion in non-excluding
              compartments, to determine the role of each of the three main types of
              cytoskeletal filament in restricting the diffusion and partitioning of test
              particles, and to examine the contribution of these filaments to the material
              properties of cytoplasm.  A multi-disciplinary approach will be employed,
              combining microinjection of proteins and inert fluorescent test particles into
              living cells,  fluorescence recovery after photobleaching and single particle
              tracking  to measure intracellular diffusion coefficients, and digital
              fluorescence microscopy to study the partitioning of injected molecules.  The
              mechanical response of cytoplasm to physiological tensile stress will be
              studied by using microinjected fluorescent microspheres as  markers of
              cytoplasmic deformation.  Drug treatments and molecular  genetics techniques
              will be used to disrupt specific subsets of cytoskeletal filaments. 
              Fluorescent antibody localization of endogenous  molecules will be used to
              correlate effects on the diffusion and  partitioning of test particles or on
              the mechanics of cytoplasm with  changes in the cytoskeleton.  Ultimately,  the
              information obtained from this research should lead to a better understanding
              of how cytoarchitecture affects the kinetics and mechanisms of biochemical
              reactions in the living cell, the transport and localization of intracellular
              components and the mechanical responses of cells.      Non Technical    The
              interior of cells is a fluid space termed cytoplasm that  has been
              characterized as a solution in which various subcellular structures freely
              move.  Recent results indicate that this model is incorrect and that the
              cytoplasm is highly structured.  Cytoplasmic structure is maintained by
              filaments of the cytoskeleton that traverse through the cell.  Dr. Luby-Phelps
              will study how the various components of the cytoskeleton mediate the partition
              of the cytoplasm into distinct domains.  Her research will define how the
              filaments of cytoskeleton constrain particles within the cytoplasm into
              specific domains.  This research is important because it addresses a
              fundamental question of how the fluid environment contained within all living
              cells is organized to facilitate the activities necessary to maintain the
              living state.  ***
