Title       : Protein-Protein Interactions in Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9604339

Award Number: 9604339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry M. Bricker btbric@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie K. Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604339  Bricker  Part 1-Technical  This research will further elucidate the
              structural organization of proteins within Photosystem II.  Protein-protein and
              protein-cofactor interactions among the components of the photosytem will be
              studied using  a combination of biochemical and molecular tools.  First, the
              site-specific protein-labeling reagents NHS-biotin will be used o probe
              interacting  domains on the extrinsic proteins of the photosystem.  Labeling
              will be performed on a number of biochemically resolved Photosystem II
              complexes and on the extrinsic proteins free in  solution  The modified domains
              on the 33 kDa, 24 and 17 kDa extrinsic proteins will be identified by a
              combination of affinity purification, protease digestion and matrix-assisted
              laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry.  Second, suppressor analysis
              will be performed on spontaneous and chemically induced revertants of the CP 7
              mutants W167S and RR384385EE.  Intergenic suppressors will be identified,
              mapped and sequenced to determine the identity of proteins interacting with
              these location in the CP 47 protein.  Third, protein footprinting using the
              non-specific chemical protease Fe-EDTA will be used to map interactions within
              the photosystem.  Photosystem II complexes in various states of biochemical
              resolution will be subjected to chemical protease treatment.  Protected domains
              on a number of Photosystem II components (CP 47, D1 and the 33 kDa extrinsic
              protein) will be identified by "Western blotting" and probing with N-and
              C-terminal specific antibody reagents.  These experiments should  provide
              relatively high resolution information concerning interacting domains on these
              protein components.    Part 2-Non Technical  Elucidation of the functional
              properties and structural organization of membrane protein complexes is one of
              the central objectives of current biochemical investigation.  Biological
              membranes are involved in virtually every aspect of cellular organization and
              activity.  One of the most intriguing aspects  of membrane function is its role
              in the mediation of energy transduction in photosynthetic organisms.  Light
              energy, which is the product of a most violent physical process, fusion, is
              transformed into biological energy equivalents utilized by the photosynthetic
              cell.  The photosynthetic process provides both the carbohydrate which lies at
              the base of virtually all food chains and, as a byproduct, all of the
              atmospheric oxygen utilized by higher organisms.  This project investigates the
              structural interactions between the proteins involved in oxygen evolution.  An
              understanding of the structure of the oxygen evolving complex will yield new
              insights into the how this important membrane protein complex functions.
