Title       : Microglial Factor(s) Regulate Differentiation of Cholinergic Neuronal Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9604168

Award Number: 9604168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene Miller Jonakait   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 9604168 Jonakait    Dr. Jonakait's laboratory is interested in finding
              out what molecules prompt developing neurons to acquire their mature
              characteristics.  They examine developing neurons using cultured cells from
              embryonic rat brains, and have been particularly interested in a population of
              cells located in the front part of the base of the brain that use acetylcholine
              as their chemical transmitter.  A neuron that uses acetylcholine as its
              transmitter is called a "cholinergic" neuron.  Having studied this population
              for some time, they now know that particular kinds of non-neuronal cells in the
              culture -- cells called microglia -- can be stimulated to produce a molecule
              that causes immature brain cells in this brain area to become cholinergic.  The
              biochemical nature of this molecule is unknown.  Thus, a major goal of this
              project is to find out, using biochemical techniques, the identity of the
              molecule.  Toward that end, Dr. Jonakait has established a collaboration with
              Drs. John Winslow and Glenn Hammonds at Genentech, Inc., who are trained
              biochemists.  While the biochemical identity of this possibly novel molecule is
              being determined, the investigators will ask other biological questions:  Will
              all immature brain cells -- no matter what their normal fate -- be prompted by
              this molecule to become cholinergic neurons?  Alternatively, does the molecule
              have a more general effect on development, coaxing all immature cells to
              develop more quickly and efficiently?  Importantly, they will also ask whether
              immature cells, now known to be present even in adult brain, respond to the
              molecule by assuming cholinergic characteristics.
