Title       : Studies in Theoretical Nuclear Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9604894

Award Number: 9604894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Shakin casbc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis S. Celenza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Protons and neutrons(nucleons) are the basic  constituents of matter. 
              However, t has become clear that  these particles are composed of even more
              fundamental  particles called quarks.  The description of the properties  of
              protons and neutrons, and their interactions, using  quarks as fundamental
              degrees of freedom, represents a  significant part of our research.  In
              addition, we can also  study the properties of mesons.  The exchange of mesons 
              between nucleons gives rise to their interaction at  relatively low energies. 
              If we work at low energy, we can  use effective theories that are meant to
              describe only the  low-energy properties of the systems considered (The theory 
              of strong interactions, quantum chromodynamics, is very hard  to treat in the
              low-energy domain and effective theories  have found extensive application.) 
              The fact that free  quarks are not seen in nature leads one to say that quarks 
              are `confined`.  Introduction of a model of confinement in  the effective
              theories we study is an important part of our  program.       In addition, we
              study the nature of the potentials  found in nuclei.  These potentials have
              been found to have  an interesting relativistic structure.  (They contain parts
               which transform differently when one describes the system  with alternate
              coordinate frames, making use of Lorentz  transformations.  Our detailed
              analysis of the force between  nucleons allows us to understand the properties
              of the  potentials found in nuclei from a fundamental point of view.  The
              success of the entire project will yield a good  understanding of mesons,
              nucleons, and nuclei that has its  basis in quantum chromodynamics, the modern
              theory of strong  interactions.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
