Title       : Androgen Receptor Expression in Developing Forebrain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9604487

Award Number: 9604487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lydia L. DonCarlos ldoncar@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604487  DonCarlos         Testosterone plays a fundamental role in the 
              development of the vertebrate nervous system.   Exposure to  this hormone
              during sensitive periods influences the  morphology, connectivity, and
              chemistry of the central  nervous system.  These early developmental effects of
               testosterone set the stage for adult sex differences in  physiological and
              behavioral functions.  Brain regions that  are known to be sexually
              differentiated in the presence of  perinatal testosterone include areas
              involved in the control  of reproductive physiology and behavior, learning and 
              memory, cognition, play and social behavior, and aggression.  While
              testosterone is the major hormone of the perinatal  testes, this steroid can be
              converted enzymatically to  estrogen and to other androgens in the brain. 
              Thus, it  became widely believed that most, if not all, of the effects  of
              testosterone during the sensitive periods of development  resulted from its
              metabolism.  Indeed estrogen and estrogen  receptors are known to be present in
              the brain during  development and to participate in the differentiation 
              process.   More and more evidence is accumulating, however,  that suggests
              testosterone itself plays an important role.  Since androgen receptors are
              believed to be an integral  component of its action, Dr. DonCarlos will use   
              in situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry to identify  when, where, and in
              what cell types androgen receptor is  being expressed in the developing brain. 
              She will also  determine whether there are sex differences in androgen 
              receptor expression, and, if so, when such differences are  evident.  The
              results from these studies will contribute to  our understanding of the normal
              developmental process of  sexual differentiation of brain function, and will
              also  provide more general insights into how intrinsic properties  of neural
              development are modified by exposure to external  signals.
