Title       : Probing Chromosome Structure and Function With Phage Mu Transposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9604875

Award Number: 9604875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman P. Higgins nphiggins@bmg.bhs.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Higgins  9604875  A new method has been developed to probe the structure of
              bacterial chromosomes inside living cells.  This technique, which is called
              Muprinting, uses PCR reactions to generate a high-resolution picture of the
              transposition target sites in a bacterial population infected with phage MU. 
              With Muprints, it is possible to detect the location of sequence-specific DNA
              binding proteins like repressors and RNA polymerases, to identify hot spots and
              cold spots for transposon insertion, and to follow changes in chromosome
              structure when cells are placed in different physiological environments.  Two
              primary objectives will be pursued.  First, detailed Muprint maps will be made
              for a 40 kb segment of the S. typhimurium chromosome, which includes the cob
              and pdu operons (1% of the whole genome).  These operons are tightly repressed
              under aerobic growth conditions but become actively transcribed and translated
              under anaerobic growth conditions.  The Muprint profile will provide detailed
              information about the binding of proteins involved in repression or activation
              of these operons, including ArcA, ArcB, PocR, and CRP.  The second objective is
              to use the Muprint mapping to discern how a large segment of DNA can become
              shielded from transposition.  Transposition immunity means that when a copy of
              phage Mu already exists at one chromosomal site, the frequency of a second Mu
              transposon moving near the first is very low.  Thus, as a chromosome becomes
              infiltrated with replicating Mu elements, immunity guarantees that the
              replicating Mu elements become spaced relatively evenly over the bacterial
              chromosome.  The immunity distance will be measured for a Mu insertion in the
              cobT gene.  Genetic factors and DNA sites that influence how and how far
              immunity spreads through a chromosome will be defined.    Developing methods to
              systematically investigate the mechanics of protein-DNA movement inside living
              cells has been one of the most challenging and perplexing problems in modern
              molecular biology.  T he information gained from Muprinting technology will
              provide a perspective on chromosome structure that may stimulate new genetic
              and biochemical models for genome function.  It will also provide a model for
              understanding processes that generate stochastic gradients along the DNA
              sequence like silencing in yeast and immunoglobulin recombination in higher
              vertebrates.
