Title       : Analysis of TGF-Beta/BMP-mediated Signaling During Drosophila Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9604769

Award Number: 9604769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203179             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristi A. Wharton Kristi_Wharton@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wharton  96-04769    The long term goal of the research outlined in this
              proposal is to understand how TGF-Beta signaling molecules facilitate the
              communication between cells.  Cellular communication is essential to the proper
              manifestation of cell movements, growth and differentiation in multi-cellular
              organisms.  Members of the transforming growth factor-Beta (TGF-Beta)
              superfamily of cell signaling molecules are found in both  invertebrates and
              vertebrates, from C.elegans to humans.  The diverse roles performed by these
              signaling factors during development has been attributed to the dimeric nature
              of these ligands and the multiple combinations of monomer/monomer as well as
              ligand/receptor associations possible.  During development cells must receive
              and interpret many different signals and it is essential to our understanding
              of development that  we elucidate the process by which this occurs.   The
              developmental consequences and in vivo regulation of TGF-Beta signaling are
              best understood for the Drosophila member, dpp.  As a first step towards
              determining the functions of two different TGF-Beta signals and investigating
              the means by which their signals are interpreted, Dr. Wharton previously
              isolated a second member in Drosophila, the 60A gene, made mutations in the
              gene and determined that it is essential for embryogenesis and adult limb
              development.  In this proposal, she intends to define the specifics of these
              requirements by 1) identifying the tissues in which 60A is required through the
              generation of mosaic clones and analysis of mutant phenotypes. She will  2)
              determine the developmental consequences of 60A function by examining the
              effect of 60A mutations on genes known to be important in patterning the midgut
              and the adult eye and wing.   She will also examine the regulation of 60A by
              these genes.  She will address the potential for overlap of 60A and dpp
              signaling using misexpression, generation of mutant clones and analysis of
              downstream factors.  She intends to investigate the me chanism by which 60A
              signals and compare it to what is known for dpp signaling through 3) the
              identification of components mediating 60A signaling.  Potential genetic
              interactions with mutations in known TGF-Beta signaling components will be
              investigated.  Her findings will provide insight into the dynamics of cell
              signaling in the context of a developing organism.  Understanding the in vivo
              function of TGF-Beta signaling factors and the mechanisms by which they signal
              will ultimately aid in our knowledge of fundamental processes in vertebrates,
              as well as in invertebrates.  Understanding the biology of cell signaling is
              central to many medical applications and will ultimately be useful in the
              prevention and treatment of disease.
