Title       : Indo-US Workshop on Ground Improvement Using Geosynthetics March 26-28, New
               Delhi, India. Award in US and Indian Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1997    
File        : a9604985

Award Number: 9604985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mysore S. Nataraj   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support participation by scientists and
              engineers from the United States in a `U.S.-India Workshop on Ground
              Improvement Using Geosynthetics` to be held  March 26-28, 1997 in New Delhi,
              India.   The organizers are Dr. Mysore Nataraj from the University of New
              Orleans and Dr. D.V. Singh, Director of the Central Road Research Institute in
              New Delhi.  The workshop program will include three themes: use of
              geosynthetics in barrier systems, drainage, filtration in expansive soil areas
              and in erosion control; use of geosynthetics in low and high volume roads and
              railway embankment construction; and use of geosynthetics in embankments on
              soft soils and marginal soils.  Presentations will be made by scientists,
              engineers, and practitioners from academic and industrial organizations in the
              two countries.  An exhibition of materials currently in use and available from
              manufacturers in the US and India will be available.  The participants will
              discuss the potential for expanding the use of these new materials, and others
              in their class, to solve many of the pressing problems in civil infrastructure
              in India and in the United states.  They will also discuss problem areas that
              require further research and development in the materials research, materials
              processing, or applications' technologies areas.   Scope: This award is to fund
              travel of a team of U.S. scientists to participate in an important binational
              workshop where discussions will deal with a topic of current economic
              importance to most of the countries concerned with building their civil
              infrastructure such as India and other developing countries.  The topic is also
              important to countries interested in rehabilitating their civil infrastructure
              such as the United States.  The practical experiences  and research results to
              be discussed, and the deliberations on future research, are intended to
              accomplish the objective of reducing the cost of building or repairing roads,
              bridges, tunnels, and large structures in general, while reducing the need for
              polluting materials that the geosynthetics replace.  The results could include
              collaborative research involving US and Indian engineers and scientists, as
              well as enhancing the potential for the use of materials that are primarily
              produced, at least for the time being, by US companies.  The project meets the
              objectives of the Division of International Programs in promoting collaboration
              with foreign scientists and engineers in areas of mutual interest.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
