Title       : Role of Glutamate Metabotropic Receptors in Synaptic Function in the Spinal Cord
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9604654

Award Number: 9604654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mirjana Randic cervin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604654  Randic    The perception of pain requires excitatory synaptic
              transmission from  primary afferent sensory fibers to secondary projection
              neurons in the  dorsal horn (DH) region of the spinal cord.  It is now well
              established  that the primary afferent fibers use glutamate, or  related amino
              acid, to  mediate this initial excitatory step in the pain pathway.  Glutamate 
              produces its effects through two broad categories of receptors called 
              ionotropic and metabotropic.  The activation of ionotropic glutamate  receptors
              is essential for fast excitatory transmission in the brain and  spinal cord. 
              Multiple metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are  expressed in neurons of
              the spinal cord dorsal horn (DH), the site of  processing of sensory signals,
              but their roles in synaptic function, and  contribution to the spinal
              somatosensory transmission, including  nociception, have yet to be elucidated. 
              Until recently, progress in  identifying the physiological and
              pathophysiological roles of mGluRs has  been hindered by the lack of selective
              agonists and antagonists.  The  recent development of ligands that bind
              specifically to these receptors has  provided a means of characterizing the
              important roles they may play in  tuning of fast synaptic transmission,
              including the induction of long-term  changes in synaptic efficacy.    Three
              major objectives of the proposed study are:  1. To pharmacologically  identify
              mGluR subtype(s) involved in modulation of primary afferent  neurotransmission
              and synaptic plasticity in the spinal cord dorsal horn  (laminae I-II).  2. To
              examine whether activation of the Group I mGluRs  (mGluR1 and/or mGluR5)
              mobilizes Ca2+ from internal stores in LI-II  neurons.  3. To study
              characteristics of Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release  mechanism in the generation of
              Ca2+ signals in LI-II neurons.  A  combination of fura-2 imaging,
              extracellular, intracellular (sharp  microelectrodes) and whole-cell and
              perforated-patch recordings, and  pharmacological techniques, will be employed 
              to study the effects of  selective mGluR agonists and antagonists on excitatory
              synaptic responses  and mobilization of Ca2+ from internal stores in the in
              vitro preparations  of acutely isolated DH neurons (LI-II), and also in the
              LI-II neurons  within rat spinal cord slices.  LI-II cells in the spinal slices
              will be  visualized using infra-red videomicroscopy and intracellular labeling
              with  biocytin and rhodamine.    Delineating the physiological roles of
              individual subtypes of the mGluR in  the spinal DH, and cellular and molecular
              mechanisms underlying their  actions, is an important step toward understanding
              of implications of  glutamate-mediated transmission in the spinal cord DH
              synaptic function,  but in particular for synaptic plasticity.  Finally, this
              study may  contribute to our understanding of pathophysiological processes in
              the  spinal cord, especially pain, and thereby may lead to the development of 
              rational therapies.
