Title       : A Mass Spectrometer for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9604633

Award Number: 9604633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic M. Desiderio ddesiderio@utmem1.utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               The Biochemistry Division in the Department of Chemistry and  Biochemistry at
              the University of Colorado, Boulder will purchase a  state-of-the-art four
              channel 600 MHz NMR spectrometer with partial  support from the NSF Multi-User
              Biological Equipment program. This  instrument is required to perform
              multi-nuclear multi-dimensional NMR  experiments used in the solution structure
              determinations of  isotopically labeled proteins and RNAs. Triple-resonance 
              multi-dimensional NMR techniques now allow complete through bond  resonance
              assignment of proteins which means that the primary  bottleneck in solution
              structure determinations of the proteins (the  assignment of the resonances)
              can now be made much more unambiguously  and in much less time than previous
              techniques. The modern NM R  solution structure determinations of a protein
              requires isotopically  labeled protein and access to a triple-resonance
              instrument that has  pulse shaping and pulqe-field gradient capabilities. The
              multi-nuclear  and multi-dimensional NMR techniques that have proved so
              successful in  solution structure determinations of proteins can now be applied
              to  structural studies of RNAs and protein-RNA interactions. This  additional
              NMR instrumentation is required to meet the demand for NMR  time arising from
              the recent expansion of the faculty (Dr. Wuttke) in  the Biochemistry Division.
                  The requested instrumentation will vastly improve the NMR  capabilities and
              will accelerate research in the following areas:      - Solution Structural
              Studies of RNA and Protein-RNA Systems (Pardi)    - Development of NMR
              Techniques for Solution Structure Determinations  of RNA (Pardi)    - NMR
              Structural Studies of Cardiac Troponin C (Falke)    - Structural Studies of the
              Active Site of the Group I Ribozyme (Cech)    - Structure and Function of
              Catalytic RNAs (Uhlenbeck)    - Solution Structural Studies of the trans Acting
              Viral Proteins Tax,  pX and Their Complexes (Wuttke)
