Title       : Ecological Research Aircraft with Remote Sensing and Flux Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9604793

Award Number: 9604793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter C. Oechel oechel@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5219,9184,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to purchase and equip a very-light aircraft (RANS S-12 
              Airaile) with remote sensing instruments (e.g. ground penetrating  radar,
              infrared digital multispectral camera, hyperspectral radiometer,  and
              high-speed true and false color video), net CO2, H2O vapor, energy  balance
              sensors (NOAA-ATDD Mobile Flux Platform), and meteorological  sensors.  This
              instrumentation will provide users with   integrated ecophysiological and
              biophysical data for arctic tundra and  semi-arid shrubland and woodland
              ecosystems, and builds on existing  research efforts by all users who have
              ongoing ecosystem research  programs sponsored by NSF (OPP) and others (e.g.
              DOE, NIGEC, EPRI, and  USGS). By combining instruments and research needs on a
              single  aircraft, a dedicated reliable system for integrated data collection 
              will be established. This aircraft fills a critical need of a group of 
              researchers from several universities and agencies working on the  effects of
              global change and on ecosystem and landscape processes in  the arctic and
              southwest US.    Projected ecological factors, such as impending climate change
              and  increasing concentrations of atmospheric CO2 and other greenhouse  gases,
              have the potential to alter global ecosystem structure and  function. These
              regional and global phenomena highlight the importance  of large-scale,
              process-based research. For example, although much  process-based C balance
              research has recently been conducted, the  challenges of scaling these
              predominantly plot-level estimates of  ecosystem C exchange has been hampered
              by the inability to directly  assess the scaled, regional-level estimates. The
              technology for  directly assessing regional C balance and the biophysical
              controls on  ecosystem C balance has recently become available. Aircraft
              platforms  have been used extensively in recent initiatives to determine net
              CO2,  H20, and energy exchange of terrestrial ecosystems (FIFE, ABLE 3 A, 
              BOREAS, and NSF-LAII), and when linked with remote sensing  instrument ation,
              significant progress has been made in understanding  spatial feed backs between
              surface features and ecosystem C exchange.
