Title       : Molecular Analysis of Mating Type Loci in Heterothallic and Homothallic
               Cochliobolus spp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9604856

Award Number: 9604856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Gillian Turgeon bgt1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Turgeon  9604856  Filamentous fungi typically reproduce by both sexual and
              asexual processes.  Sexual ascomycetes may be either heterothallic (require a
              partner for mating) or homothallic (mate without a partner).  The term
              homothallic as used for filamentous fungi means that a single individual is
              capable of completing the sexual cycle, usually, but not always, because each
              nucleus carries both mating type (MAT) genes.  In the yeasts, homothallism
              refers to a change in mating type in some of the cells within a culture of a
              formerly uniform mating type, followed by mating of "switched" cells with
              "unswitched" cells.  Certain genera of filamentous ascomycetes contain both
              heterothallic and homothallic species.  One of these, Cochliobolus, a pathogen
              of maize, has been chosen for this study because of its natural diversity of
              life styles (asexual vs. sexual, heterothallic vs. homothallic, saprophytic vs.
              parasitic), ready availability of field isolates from a variety of natural
              habitats and geographical locations, and amenability to molecular genetic
              manipulation.  Like other ascomycetes, the type species (heterothallic C.
              heterostrophus) has a single mating type locus (MAT) with alternate forms
              (called idiomorphs and designated MAT-1 and MAT-2) which are each about a
              kilobase in size, unrelated at the nucleotide level, and encode different
              transcriptional regulators.  The idiomorphs are highly conserved among all
              Cochliobolus species; in heterothallic species each strain carries a single MAT
              idiomorph, whereas in homothallics each strain has both idiomorphs within about
              a kilobase of each other.  The sequences on both flanks of the idiomorphs are
              nearly identical between mating types of the same species and well conserved
              among species.  However, it has recently been found in Neuropora species that
              one flank of the idiomorph carries a variable region which is about twice as
              large (7 kb) in homothallic species as in heterothallic (3-5 kb).  In addition,
              the variable region is adjacent to a short ( 57-59bp) constant region which is
              highly conserved in both mating types and among all species.  Although the
              function of the MAT idiomorphs is clear, the significance of the variable and
              constant regions is unknown and not easily tested in Neuropora because the
              genus is not readily amenable to efficient gene targeting.  Preliminary
              evidence suggests variable and constant regions in Cochliobolus analogous to
              those in Neurospora.  One goal of this project is to utilize the efficient
              gene-targeting ability of Cochilobolus to investigate the functions of these
              regions:  are they important in mating, in the homothallic vs. heterothallic
              life style, in speciation, or are they dispensable for all of these processes? 
              The analyses will be performed by a combination of sequence analyses,
              heterologous expression in various genetic backgrounds and by specific gene
              deletions, replacements, or nucleotide substitutions.  Another goal is to
              construct a phylogeny based on sequences of MAT idiomorphs and flanking regions
              from a large number of heterothallic and homothallic strains.  The intention is
              to track the evolutionary histories of the various Cochliobolus life styles
              mentioned above.  A practical benefit of the project will be the demonstration,
              if successful, that a homothallic species can be converted to heterothallic by
              differential disruption of its MAT genes.  This would facilitate genetic
              analysis of homothallic plant-pathogenic fungal species by forcing crosses and
              eliminating selfs.
