Title       : Selection on Natural Preference Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9604226

Award Number: 9604226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136500             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Wagner wwagner@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No. 9604226    PI: William Wagner    "Selection on natural preference
              behaviors"    NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT      In many animals, females select mates
              based on variation in traits possessed by males.  Numerous hypotheses have been
              proposed to explain the evolution of such preferences, and many studies have
              examined the benefits that females receive from mating with males with
              particular traits.  However, there have been few detailed studies of both the
              costs and benefits of female preferences.  This study will begin a detailed
              analysis of selection on female mating preferences in the variable field
              cricket, Gryllus lineaticeps.  Males of this species call to attract females,
              and females select mates, in part, based on variation in male calling song. 
              Females tend to prefer males that produce chirps at higher rates, and they tend
              to prefer longer chirps. Higher chirp rates are energetically more expensive to
              produce, and males in better nutritional condition are capable of sustaining
              higher chirp rates.  First, variation between females in their preferences will
              be examined.  Selection can act on female preferences only if different females
              possess different preferences.  Second, correlations between preferences based
              on different aspects of male calling behavior will be examined.  Selection on
              one preference can result in indirect selection on other preferences if
              preferences are correlated.  Third, the relationship between female preference
              and searching behavior during mate choice will be examined.  If females with
              stronger preferences engage in riskier searching behavior, search costs can act
              against the evolution of strong preferences.  Fourth, the direct benefits of
              female preferences will be examined.  Specifically, the correlation between a
              mate's call type and female fitness (egg number, egg size, egg hatching
              success, offspring development rate and offspring survivorship) will be tested.
               Males transfer a spermatophore to females during mating, which females eat
              approximately 40  minutes after attachment.  There is thus the potential for
              nutritional benefits that accrue to females or to offspring.  If females that
              mate with preferred males obtain a benefit from doing so, selection can favor
              the evolution of strong preferences.  This research promises to increase our
              understanding of why females prefer certain male traits, and the factors that
              act against the evolution of such preferences.
