Title       : A Fluorescence Light Microscope for Subcellular Localization Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9604682

Award Number: 9604682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43293              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Lemmon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Piet A. de Boer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hsing-Jien Kung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susann Brady-Kalnay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0512202   Improved Resolution & Sen               
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This group of researchers is interested in diverse aspects of  fundamental
              cell biology. Dr. Lemmon studies vesicular transport in  yeast. Dr.
              Brady-Kalnay investigates lgsuperfamily protein tyrosine  phosphatases and
              their link to the cytoskeleton through an association  with cadherin adhesion
              molecules. Dr. Kung's research focuses on  transcription factors and their
              regulation by the cell cycle. Dr. de  Boer studies the mechanisms of
              cytokinesis and septum formation in  bacteria. Each of the researchers uses
              immunocytochemical approaches to  address issues of protein localization. This
              group of investigators  require full access to a light microscope in order to
              explore basic  cell biological questions.          A committee, of the Pl and
              Co-Pls of this grant, was formed to do  an extensive analysis of the available
              microscopes that have phase,  fluorescence and DIC capabilities. Week long
              demonstrations were given  by the following manufacturers: Nikon, Olympus,
              Leica, and Zeiss.  During these demonstrations each of the investigators
              examined samples  from their particular research applications. A consensus was
              reached  that the Zeiss microscope best suited the needs of all the 
              investigators. A quote was issued by Zeiss that included only the parts  that
              we required to visualize each of our samples. This quote is  included in the
              application.
