Title       : Role of a Chaperone-Insertase in the Maturation of Dinitrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9604446

Award Number: 9604446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary P. Roberts groberts@bact.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9604446  Roberts  Part 1 (Technical)  Dinitrogenase is an important enzyme
              because of its role in the global nitrogen cycle, but it is also one of the
              best understood complex metalloproteins.  This base of understanding makes it
              an excellent model system for understanding how metal clusters are formed and
              inserted into apo-proteins.  This research addresses a central issue in that
              phenomenon, namely, the requirements and role of the ( protein that inserts the
              active site metal cluster into apodinitrogenase.  The results will have broad
              implications for   metal protein maturation, as well as for the mechanisms by
              which metals are efficiently utilized by cells.    Active dinitrogenase is an
              (2 (2 complex with an Iron-Molybdenum cofactor (termed FeMo-co) at its active
              site.  The PI identified a protein, termed ( , that is central to the
              maturation of dinitrogenase. ( is a homodimer that monomerizes upon the
              specific binding of FeMo-co.  In the presence of dinitrogenase reductase and
              nucleotide, it donates that FeMo-co to ApoI, creating active dinitrogenasae. 
              When FeMo-co is limiting, ( associates  with ApoI, acting as a chaperone to
              stabilize ApoI in an altered conformation.  ( is therefore a
              chaperone-insertase and this project will address a number of the critical
              features of that complex role.  The monomer-dimer transition of ( upon binding
              FeMo-co and ('s chaperone role with ApoI suggest that these steps are supported
              by dramatic changes in protein structure and this research will seek to
              understand the nature and role of those structural changes.      The goals of
              this proposal are the following: (i) Determination of the mechanism by which ( 
              serves as a FeMo-co insertase.  (ii) Development  of a "structural"
              understanding of the role of ( in FeMo-co insertase and ApoI maturation.  (iii)
              Identification of the requirements for dissociation of ( from ApoI following
              FeMo-co insertion.  An activity that promotes the dissociation of ( from ApoI
              following FeMo-co had been detected and it will be pu rified and characterized.
                 The information gained will provide a uniquely defined insight into
              metalloprotein maturation, particularly because many of the other relevant
              factors  in the process have already been characterized.  Because the
              structures of dinitrogenase and dinitrogenase reductase are known, the
              structure and properties of ( will  serve to define the maturation process at
              the molecular level.  It will also address the larger issue of  how chaperones
              assist other proteins in attaining their final active conformation.    Part 2
              (Non-technical)    Proteins that contain metal atoms perform many of the most
              critical functions in virtually all living organisms.  It has been estimated
              that one-third of all enzymes require metals for function, and work over the
              past 20 years has provided a growing understanding of the role of metals in
              many of these enzymes.  Surprisingly, however, very little is known about how
              metal atoms are actually placed within the appropriate enzymes.  This process
              must involve a number of factors that have the ability to both identify and
              bind specific metal atoms and then to find the appropriate enzymes that should
              receive these specific metals.  The PI identified one such protein, which
              inserts the critical metal complex into the active site of dinitrogenase, the
              enzyme responsible for all biological nitrogen fixation on earth.  He will
              characterize the precise way in which this protein recognizes only one specific
              metal complex, how it protects that complex from degradation and how it inserts
              that complex into dinitrogenase.  This process will certainly have similarities
              to the processing of other metal complexes and will therefore have broad
              biological implications.
