Title       : The Mechanism of Folding of Dihydrofolate Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9604678

Award Number: 9604678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. R. Matthews crm@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604678  Matthews  The overall goal of this research is to understand the 
              mechanism by which the amino acid sequence of a protein  directs its rapid and
              efficient folding to its native  conformation.  A combination of biophysical
              and genetic  engineering methods will be used to probe the mechanism of 
              folding of homologous dihydrofolate reductases from a common  bacterium, E.
              coli, and from humans.  Circular dichroism,  NMR, fluorescence and x-ray
              scattering studies will provide  insight into the secondary and tertiary
              structures, as well  as the dynamics and sizes of transient, partially-folded 
              forms that have previously been observed to appear during  the folding of both
              proteins.  Ultrafast mixing will probe  the collapse of unfolded forms and the
              development of  nonpolar surfaces within 100 microseconds.  Mutational 
              analysis will probe the involvement of nonpolar side chains  in several
              hydrophobic clusters that appear to play key  roles in two classes of folding
              intermediates.  Protein  engineering will test the potential of fragments to
              fold.  Finally, the role of a bacterial chaperone, GroEL, in  influencing the
              folding of human dihydrofolate reductase  will be investigated.    Progress in
              understanding the structures and dynamics of  partially folded species that
              appear during folding should  provide insight into the process by which the
              amino acid  sequence of a protein spontaneously directs the formation of  its
              unique three dimensional structure.  A solution to the  protein folding problem
              would have an important effect on  biology, biochemistry and the biotechnology
              industry.  The  folding and transport of extracellular proteins is often 
              coordinated with their own synthesis or with the synthesis  of other proteins
              with which they form complexes.  Thus,  folding plays a key role in the normal
              functioning of cells.  Because the biological activities of proteins are
              directly  related to their three dimensional structures, an  understanding of
              the sequence/structure relationship is a   critical component of the processing
              of the genetic  information stored in the DNA sequence.
