Title       : Catalytic Mechanism of Vaccinia Virus Protein VP39 in 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9604188

Award Number: 9604188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Gershon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604188  Gershon  Part 1-Technical   RNA methyltransferase, viz. vaccinia virus
              protein VP39, methylates the ribose 2'-O- of the penultimate nucleotide of the
              mRNA cap structure leading to formation of the type I mRNA cap. The
              three-dimensional structure of this enzyme, recently determined by the P.I.,
              affords a structural basis on which to investigate the catalytic mechanism of
              RNA methylation. Since other structurally-defined methyltransferases methylate
              base rather than sugar moieties, this system provides also an unusual
              opportunity to examine nucleic acid ribose methylation.  VP39 is a bifunctional
              protein whose second function is as a poly(A) polymerase processivity factor,
              interacting with both mRNA ends. This study investigates whether VP39 possesses
              more than a single RNA binding site to satisfy its dual function, using
              competition assays between polyadenylation and methyltransferase substrates for
              wild-type VP39 and mutants with substituted surface residues at possible RNA
              binding sites. Functional and RNA binding assays will also be done.  Due to the
              greater affinity of monomeric VP39 for capped than uncapped RNA, the effect on
              capped RNA binding on VP39 interaction with its dimerization partner, VP55,
              will also be investigated.  Further experiments will aim at the study of the
              bimolecular methylation reaction sequence for the interaction of VP39 with
              capped RNA, such as the involvement of substrate ionization, and of specific
              residues in catalysis. Whether cap 2'-0-methylation correlates with inversion
              at the methyl carbon center will also be determined.    Part 2 Non -Technical 
              Vaccinia virus is a benign poxvirus whose notoriety stems from its extensive
              use as the vaccine that led to the first global eradication of a human disease,
              namely smallpox. Vaccinia is virtually unique in its ability to express its
              genes autonomously, without needing most of the machinery present in the cells
              it infects. It does this by carrying its own analogs of host cell enzymes that
              it would other requi re. Many of these analogs are much easier to study than
              the host cell equivalent, because they can more easily be produced in large
              quantities and purified, yet maintain an equally informative, molecular
              information. One of these enzymes, named "cap specific 2'-O-methyltransferase",
              plays a role in the expression of all genes, and is considered a prototype for
              this class of enzymes. This study is aimed at understanding the precise
              mechanism by which the enzyme operates.The three-dimensional structure of RNA
              methyltransferase, viz. vaccinia virus protein VP39, affords a physical basis
              on which to investigate the catalytic mechanism of RNA methylation. The
              elucidation of the interaction of VP39 with capped RNA, structurally and
              biochemically, is one example of advances in Molecular Biochemistry towards the
              understanding of reaction mechanisms.
