Title       : A Molecular Genetic Analysis of Polyhydroxyalkanoate Metabolism and
               Inclusion-Body Structure in Bacillus Megaterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9604450

Award Number: 9604450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maura C. Cannon mcannon@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cannon  9604450  Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) are polyesters that accumulate
              within inclusion-bodies in many bacteria and archaea as carbon and energy
              reserves. Despite the fact that the gene for PHA synthase has been cloned and
              sequenced from more than twenty strains of bacteria, the genetic regulation and
              the links between PHA accumulation and other metabolic pathways are poorly
              understood. Most of our present knowledge in this area comes from studies of
              Pseudomonas and Alcaligenes. Apart from some inclusion-body structural studies,
              very little of our present knowledge comes from studies of the Bacillus genus.
              The decision to diversify and pursue this study of PHA accumulation in B.
              megaterium is likely to reveal important new insights into the regulation of
              PHA accumulation and its links with other cellular processes.  An understanding
              of the regulation of PHA inclusion-body synthesis and its coordinated
              regulation with other aspects of cellular metabolism is the subject of this
              research. The following strategy is being undertaken:                (1) It has
              been shown that PHA accumulates in a growth phase dependent manner, and  the
              sequence and characterization of the phaB/phaC region of B. megaterium has been
              determined. Three novel genes and two divergent promoters associated with PHA
              accumulation have been identified. This research seeks to demonstrate the
              functions of the three novel gene products and to determine what regulates the
              two divergent promoters (pl and p2). The effects of over-expression (gene
              dosage) and deletion (knock-out by marker substitution), of each of these three
              genes, individually and in combinationq with each other, will be tested.
              Effects of these mutations will be measured in relation to transcription from
              the pl and p2 promoters, translation of the messages, PHA accumulation, and
              size and shape of inclusion-bodies throughout growth of the culture.  (2) It is
              hypothesized that spore formation is not occurring during PHA accumulation,
              based on promoter studies of  the genes involved. This suggests that PHA
              accumulation has a regulatory role in spore formation. This hypothesis will be
              tested by examining the relationship of transcription from the p2 promoter to
              spore formation. For example, replacement of p2 with a constitutive promoter
              would be expected to block sporulation, while a deletion mutation in the p2
              promoter, may result in very high sporulation rates.  (3) A PHA over-producing
              transposon mutant of B. megaterium has been isolated and the tagged DNA has
              been identified as a cluster of gas vesicle genes (gvp). The relevance of gas
              vesicles to PHA inclusion-bodies in B. megaterium is being examined. This is
              being done by measuring the effects of deletion or over-expression of gvp genes
              on PHA accumulation (as in 1, above).  The accumulation in bacteria of the
              biodegradable polymer PHA is the result of the combined effects of pha gene
              products and prevailing environmental conditions, which are reflected in many
              cellular processes. The results of these experiments should increase our
              understanding of the integrated genetic regulation of these processes with PHA
              accumulation.
