Title       : RUI: Planning Visit to Initiate Interdisciplinary Paleoclimatic Investigations
               in the Peninsula de Mejillones Region, Northern Chile
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9604813

Award Number: 9604813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9815               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Emslie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western State College
	      
	      Gunnison, CO  81230    303/943-3035

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9604813  Emslie    This Americas Program award will support travel and related 
              expenses for five senior researchers and two graduate and  one undergraduate
              students from Western State College,  Colorado, the Paleontological Research
              Institute, New York,  and the Florida and New Mexico Museums of Natural History
              to  travel to Antofagasta, Chile, to plan a collaborative  interdisciplinary
              research project with the Universidad de  Antofagasta on the paleontology of
              marine shell beds in  northern Chile.  The major objectives of this planning
              visit  will be  to gain insight on the stratigraphic sequence of  marine shell
              beds and seabird guano deposits exposed on the  coast and in the Atacama
              Desert.  Small samples of marine  vertebrates and invertebrates from selected
              stratigraphic  units within these deposits will be collected to determine 
              their significance for future investigation.  The visit will  allow the
              establishment of professional relationships  between U.S. and Chilean
              scientists and initiation of a long-  term research program that will benefit
              researchers and  their students in both countries.    Climate on the west coast
              of South America fluctuates  considerably today under the influence of shifting
              ocean  currents and temperatures from the El Nino Southern  Oscillation (ENSO)
              events. The impact of these events not  only affects human responses to the
              environment, but also  the entire marine ecosystem.  The planned project will
              be to  document the long-term climatic record in this dynamic  region in an
              effort to determine how climate change has  influenced marine communities and
              faunal turnover.  ***
