Title       : Mechanistic and Structural Studies of Novel Heme-Containing Peroxidases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9604004

Award Number: 9604004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335250             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Dawson dawson@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah A. Woodin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yung-Pin Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lukasz Lebioda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604004  Dawson  Heme-containing peroxidases catalyze organic substrate
              oxidation with concomitant reduction of hydrogen peroxide to water.  Two novel
              heme-containing peroxidases, one able to incorporate halogens into aromatic
              substrates and the other able to remove them, have recently been isolated from
              marine organisms and initially characterized.  The properties of these enzymes
              challenge the current dogma of how peroxidases function:  one chlorinates
              substrates without having a thiolate proximal ligand and the other both
              oxygenates and dehalogenates haloaromatics including the defluorination of
              fluoroaromatics.  To better understand the unusual properties of these two heme
              peroxidases, spectroscopic, structural and mechanistic investigations will be
              carried out.  These studies will involve the use of magnetic circular
              dichroism, EPR, and resonance Raman spectroscopy as well as high resolution
              crystallography to fully characterize the metal coordination structure and
              complete three dimensional structures of these two enzymes.  Their mechanisms
              of action will be extensively examined including the use of isotopically
              labelled hydrogen peroxide to compare and contrast their mechanisms of hydrogen
              peroxide activation with those of the well studied plant peroxidases.    Two
              novel enzymes from marine sources which are capable of generating and/or
              handling halogen-containing aromatic compounds have been isolated and will be
              thoroughly investigated including the determination of their mechanism of
              action and three dimensional structure.  The first enzyme is able to
              incorporate halogens into aromatic substrates and may find applications as an
              industrial biocatalyst in the synthesis of halogen-containing aromatics.  The
              second enzyme is able to remove halogens from aromatic compounds and is likely
              to have applications in bioremediation of water or soil contaminated with
              haloaromatics.
