Title       : RUI: PTL-1, A Tau-Like Microtubule Binding Protein in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9604180

Award Number: 9604180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie J. Aamodt saamodt@pilot.lsus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State Shreveport
	      8515 Youree Drive
	      Shreveport, LA  711152301    318/797-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9604180  Aamodt     Technical Abstract:  The mammalian tau
              microtubule-associated proteins have been implicated in axonal outgrowth,
              microtubule spacing and microtubule bundling.  A caenorhabditis elegans gene
              with homology to the repeat region of tau was identified and characterized. 
              This gene was named ptl-1 for Protein with Tau-Like repeats.  The ptl-1
              transcript, like mammalian tau transcripts, is alternatively spliced to produce
              messages that encode proteins with variable numbers of repeats.  The predicted
              ptl-1 products have strong sequence homology to tau over the repeat region and
              are similar to tau in size, amino acid content, charge distribution, predicted
              secondary structure, hydrophobicity , and flexibility  Bacterially expression
              PTL-1 bound to microtubules in vitro.  These results show that tau-like
              proteins evolved early and suggests that they may be present in many different
              phyla.  C. elegans is a powerful system amenable to genetic, molecular and
              cellular analysis in which to study the functions of the tau class of proteins.
               Three major questions will be addressed:  Does PTL-1 promote tubulin
              polymerization in a manner similar to that of mammalian tau?  Where is the gene
              expressed?  And what is the function of the gene product?  Recombinant PTL-1
              will be tested to determine whether it increases microtubule nucleation and
              assembly in vitro as tau does.  Antibodies will be produced against PTL-1 and
              ptl-1::lacZ fusion genes will be made to determine when and where ptl-1 is
              expressed. Finally, a strain of C. elegans that does not express ptl-1 will be
              made.  If absence of ptl-1 induces a phenotype, the mammalian tau gene will be
              expressed to determine whether it can rescue.  These studies will provide
              information about the role of ptl-1 in C. elegans and the relationship between
              PTL-1 and tau.  The relevant of this project derives from its contribution to
              our understanding of basic cellular and developmental mechanisms.    Lay
              Abstract:  Microtubules are fundamentally important  structures in eukaryotic
              cells.  They function in cellular and intracellular motility, serving as the
              means whereby cilia and flagella beat, chromosomes are distributed to daughter
              cells during cell division, cellular extensions are properly shaped and
              oriented, and intracellular components are moved from one part of the cell to
              another.  These last two functions are notably critical in neuronal cells that
              bear extremely long axons (some axons in higher animals may be several feet in
              length!).  The axons need to connect the cell bodies to the right terminal
              point elsewhere in the body, and neuroexcitatory and other materials need to be
              transported from their site of synthesis in the cell body to the terminal end
              of the axon in order for the neuron to function properly.   Many accessory
              proteins are known that bind to microtubules and are somehow involved in their
              proper formation and/or function; these are known collectively as
              Microtubule-Associated Proteins, or MAPs.  One of the predominant MAPs in
              neuronal cells is called tau, and although it has been studied extensively in
              mammalian systems, there are still many fundamental questions about tau's
              function in the cell that remain unanswered.  In this project, the recent
              discovery of a tau-like protein in the simple model organism, C. elegans (a
              nematode worm), will be exploited.  The simplicity and well-established
              background information about the worm, together with the power of genetics,
              will allow new discoveries about the function of this tau-like protein in both
              the worm and other animals.  ***
