Title       : The Role(s) of Forked Proteins in Actin Fiber Bundle Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9604409

Award Number: 9604409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. Petersen petersen@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nancy S. Petersen  9604409  (Technical Abstract):  In Drosophila melanogaster
              forked  and singed mutants, actin fiber bundles are dramatically reduced in
              developing bristles.  As a result, in the adult fly, the bristles are twisted
              and branched.  The normal genes corresponding to these two mutations have
              recently been cloned and sequenced.  The singed  protein is homologous to sea
              urchin fascin and bundles actin fibers in vitro,  indicating that it may play a
              role similar to fimbrin in intestinal brush boarder microvilli.  The forked
              gene in Drosophila is essential for normal bristle development and encodes six
              proteins with overlapping coding regions which differ primarily in their
              amino-terminal ends.  Preliminary data indicates that the forked proteins are
              also actin binding proteins.  Their amino acid sequences are similar to the
              predicted sequence of a newly-identified actin binding protein called espin,
              has been found in rat testis ectoplasmic specializations.  Furthermore, an
              antibody to espin specifically recognizes forked proteins on Western blots. 
              This suggests that forked  belongs to a new family of actin binding proteins
              that are involved in actin fiber bundle assembly.  The aim of this project is
              to study the role of forked  proteins in actin fiber bundle formation in
              Drosophila bristles.   Preliminary data using confocal microscopy, affinity
              chromatography and actin sedimentation assays indicates that the forked 
              proteins bind to actin and are involved the initiation of actin fiber bundle
              formation as well as in connecting actin fiber bundles longitudinally in the
              very long (> 100 mm) bundles.  The actin binding sites in the forked proteins
              will be identified and characterized using quantitative assays involving in
              vitro co-sedimentation with F-actin.  Specific antibodies will be made for each
              of the different forked  proteins, which will be used to examine the
              distribution of forked proteins in bristles from normal pupae and several
              forked mutations in which certain of the forked  proteins are not synthesized. 
              The actin fiber bundle structure will be examined in wild type and mutant pupae
              by confocal microscopy.  Homologues of forked will be identified in vertebrate
              tissues which have actin bundles similar to those in Drosophila bristles.      
               (Lay Abstract): Actin microfilaments are a major class of cytoskeletal
              elements ubiquitous to all eukaryotic organisms.  Regulation of the assembly of
              actin microfilaments into bundles or fibers is required for many cellular
              functions, including cell movement, changing and maintaining cell shape, and
              cell division.  Actin binding proteins are essential in regulating these
              processes.  The common fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, is a well
              established model system for studies of genetics and development, and is
              becoming an increasingly important model system for cell biology.  It is
              possible to use appropriate mutants of Drosophila to study the actin fiber
              bundles involved in bristle development during the pupal stage.  These fiber
              bundles are morphologically very similar to actin fiber bundles present in
              vertebrate intestinal brush border and in stereocilia in the ear and kidney,
              and the information obtained in these studies about actin-binding proteins will
              likely be relevant not only to the biology of Drosophila but eukaryotic
              organisms in general.    ***
