Title       : Genetic Analysis of the Drosophila Immune Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9604323

Award Number: 9604323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn V. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604323  Anderson  Technical  The long-term goal of the project is to
              characterize the signaling pathways that are activated in Drosophila in
              response to infection by pathogens and to learn how the signaling pathways are
              coordinated between different tissues.  In this proposal, a set of third
              chromosomal mutants that block specific aspects of the immune response will be
              characterized and one gene that affects multiple aspects of the immune
              response, ird1, will be characterized molecularly.  1. The ird1 gene will be
              cloned and its expression in hemocytes, fat body and other larval cell types
              assayed.  Genetic mosaics will be constructed to determine whether ird1 affects
              multiple branches of the immune response because it coordinates these responses
              or whether it is required in each of the cell types.  To determine what signals
              activate ird1 and how ird1 implements the immune response, genetic interactions
              of ird1 with other mutants response will be tested.  2. The genetic pathways
              that control specific branches of the immune response and coordinate the immune
              responses of different cell types will be defined.  Complementation and mapping
              experiments will define the number and location of third chromosomal genes that
              control the immune response.  The phenotypes of the novel genes affecting
              immune response will be characterized and compared with the phenotypes of
              previously-identified genes that may affect the immune response.   
              Non-technical  In all animals, the first rapid response to infection by
              pathogens is mediated by the innate immune response.  Both the general
              strategies used in the innate immune response and a number of molecular
              mechanisms appear to be conserved between invertebrates and vertebrates.  This
              is a proposal to initiate a systematic genetic study of the innate immune
              response in Drosophila.  These experiments will identify genes required for the
              recognition of pathogen, for triggering the tissue-specific responses to
              pathogen and for coordinating the immune responses of diff erent tissues.
