Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Glassy Chalcogenides: A Joint Experimental and
               Theoretical Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9604921

Award Number: 9604921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Cappelletti   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Drabold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9604921  Capelletti    Technical Abstract  This is a new project in which a
              joint experimental and theoretical  program to study compound chalcogenide
              glasses is proposed using a  combination of thermal neutron scattering and ab
              initio molecular  dynamics.  In particular, we propose to study alloys in the
              family  Se-As-Ge.  A remarkably simple feature has emerged from our previous 
              studies of glasses in this family:  the dependence of some properties  only on
              network topology as characterized by one parameter, the  average atomic
              coordination number <r>.  Recently we have made the  first ab initio molecular
              dynamics calculations in a compound  chalcogenide glass, GeSe_2.  This work
              demonstrates the power of a  combined experimental and computational approach
              in gaining  understanding of amorphous systems.  In this proposal we address
              the  following issues:  atomic structure and dynamics and their relation to 
              network topology and chemical order/disorder; "floppy" modes and their 
              relation to network properties and to photo-induced phenomena; and the  "Bose
              peak."  We also theoretically investigate holeburning in glassy  As_2S_3 :H. 
              %%%  Non-Technical abstract  This a new project of study on chalcogenide
              glasses.  Unlike crystals,  glasses are difficult to study because the atoms
              are not arrayed in a  nice regular pattern.  For this reason, even obvious
              properties like  the excellent transmission of light through ordinary window
              glass are  not very well understood.  Nor is it understood why some materials 
              form glasses easily while others don't.  In this work we study a  family of
              glasses (chalcogenides) which display a strikingly simple  feature:  some
              properties apparently depend only on the average number  of atoms to which any
              given atom is linked up (bonded.)  Among these  properties, for example, is how
              the atoms vibrate in the glass.  We  make measurements which provide some
              information about this, but which  cannot reveal the atomic motions in detail.
              This is where computations  come in.   By making a reliable computer model of
              the same glass (which we can  tell by comparing its predictions with
              measurements) we can use it to  see just how the atoms vibrate.  But the model
              then provides much more  information about these glasses.  It gives details
              about atomic  structure which can be compared to experiment, and about how
              these  glasses will respond to light.  In this way we hope to come to a  better
              understanding of this glass family, and of glasses generally.  ***
