Title       : Upgrade of Confocal Microscope for Use in Developmental and Cell Biological
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9604803

Award Number: 9604803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Holmgren   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Bejsovec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa V. Orenic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angela Wandinger-Ness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                       The requested funds will be used to upgrade a Bio-Rad MRC-600  confocal
              microscope. The items to be purchased are: a Krypton/Argon  laser with fiber
              optic mount, improved photomultiplier tubes, a 60X  1.2 NA water immersion
              lens, and a computer for image processing.  The new laser will dramatically
              improve the color separation in  double label immunofluorescence experiments
              and allow triple label  experiments to be performed. The fiber optic mount will
              decrease  vibrations in the scan head and improve resolution at high 
              magnification. The new photomultiplier tubes will allow the imaging  of fainter
              objects and the water immersion lens will improve the  quality of images from
              thick specimens. By having a second computer  for off line processing, one
              researcher can be collecting data  while a second is processing data.       The
              equipment will be used in both cell biological and  developmental experiments.
              The cell biological experiments center  on the trafficking of molecules through
              the cell. Studies will be  performed to understand how the Drosophila Wingless
              secreted  protein is taken up by cells and the potential role of transcytosis 
              in the formation of a gradient of Wingless protein. These  experiments should
              lead to a better understanding of how pattern is  generated in developing
              organisms. In other work the role of the  Rab 7 protein in the endocytic
              pathway will be examined. The goal  of this work is to understand how molecules
              are targeted to various  organelles. The third main area of cell biological
              study is the use  of cationic lipids for delivering molecules into cells. This 
              technology will be used to study a variety of cellular processes.  All these
              studies require co-localization experiments in which it  is critical to
              maximize color separation. In addition, the ability  to follow the subcellular
              distribution of molecules requires the  best possible resolution and highest
              sensitivity.       The Developmental studies are focused on Drosophila. In 
              addition to the Wingle ss experiments described above, research is  being
              conducted on the transcriptional regulation of leg patterning  and the role of
              cell lineage in the patterning of the central  nervous system. Both of these
              studies require an ability to carry  out triple label experiments in which
              three molecules can be  followed simultaneously. The goal of the leg patterning
              experiments  is to understand how a gradient of positional information is 
              interpreted and leads to the specification of individual cell  fates. The
              neuronal lineage experiments will examine the relative  contribution of lineage
              and positional information to the final  phenotype of individual neurons. The
              Krypton/Argon laser is  essential for the triple label experiments and the
              water immersion  lens will allow neurons and their axonal projections to be
              followed  throughout the embryo.
