Title       : Molecular Mechanisms Involved in Plant Disease Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9604830

Award Number: 9604830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauricio M. Bustos bustos@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fumiaki Katagiri  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604830  Katagiri, F.     Technical section  The molecular mechanisms of signal
              recognition and signal transduction initiation by the nucleotide binding sites
              (NBS) and the leucine-rich repeats (LRR) encoded in a major class of resistance
              genes found in plants will be investigated. The model to be tested as a working
              hypothesis will be the ligand-receptor model. A rapid, quantitative transient
              expression assay for the resistance gene function has been developed and will
              be used as the assay for the biological activities of resistance and avirulence
              genes. Recent findings have suggested that several of the Pseudomomas syringae
              avirulence genes are sufficient for initiation of the specific resistance
              response when expressed in plants, suggesting that the avirulence gene products
              themselves are the specific molecular signals recognized by the resistance gene
              products. The first major goal is to elucidate the molecular mechanism of
              recognition of avirulence gene products. That will include the delineation of
              the polypeptide regions that determine the avirulence gene-specificity of the
              resistance genes, determination of the smallest domains of the resistance genes
              (avrRpt2, avrRpm1 and avrB) that are required for their function in plants and
              investigation of possible physical interactions between the products of
              resistance and avirulence genes using in vitro binding analysis and/or the
              yeast two hybrid system. The second major goal is to investigate the mechanism
              of signal transduction initiation. Mutants, including those which are mutated
              in the NBS will be generated, characterized and studied.    Non-technical
              section  The ultimate goal of this proposal is to elucidate the mechanisms by
              which plants recognize and respond to  avirulent pathogens. The knowledge to be
              obtained will contribute not only to a better understanding of plant disease
              resistance mechanisms but also to insight into molecular recognition and signal
              transduction in general.
