Title       : New Applications for Atomic Force Microscopy of Biomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9604566

Award Number: 9604566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen G. Hansma hhansma@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604566  Hansma  This research on atomic force microscopy (AFM) of biomaterials
              is being carried out on two classes of biomaterials: 1) DNA and DNA-protein
              complexes, and 2) Synaptic vesicles.  More specifically, 1) the research on DNA
              and DNA protein complexes includes: a) unzipping DNA--pulling apart the 2
              strands of the double helix in such a way that the base pairs have the
              possibility of separating one by one, and, b) imaging individual enzyme
              molecules in action on DNA.  The first enzyme to be imaged in action on DNA
              will be E. coli RNA polymerase (RNAP), because it is active even when bound to
              a hard surface.  The template for this enzyme will be a 42-base circular DNA
              molecule, because it replicates continuously, so that active enzyme molecules
              can be imaged for several minutes or more with the AFM. 2) For the research on
              synaptic vesicles, synaptic vesicles from the electric organ of Torpedo
              californica and from rat brain will be probed by imaging and force mapping in
              aqueous buffer and by phase mode imaging in air to investigate vesicle fusion,
              to measure the elasticities of the vesicles (Young's Moduli) and  to probe the
              adhesive properties of the inner and outer surfaces of the vesicle membranes.  
               The main objective of this research is to extend the capabilities of the
              atomic force microscopy (AFM) and probing biomaterials.  The research on
              imaging enzyme molecules in action on DNA will yield information about the
              motion of individual enzyme molecules in the presence and absence of a
              substrate.  The research on unzipping DNA will provide  valuable information
              about the forces between the two strands of DNA.  It is possible that
              sequence-specific information about DNA can be obtained in this way.  The
              ability to  visualize and probe individual synaptic vesicles in physiological
              solutions will complement the genetic and biochemical advances that have been
              made in this field.  The AFM is just beginning to realize its potential as a
              valuable tool for biological research.  This research  also educates students
              in the use of the AFM, a new microscope that is becoming increasingly useful.
