Title       : Characterization of Ribosomal Plaque Domains in Axons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9604841

Award Number: 9604841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Koenig ekoenig@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Hard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret J. Titmus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604841  Koenig    The proposed study centers on novel, specialized domains 
              located at  intermittent intervals in the outer boundary of axons,  called 
              "periaxoplasmic plaques." The plaques were discovered in  isolated axoplasm 
              from the Mauthner neuron located in the goldfish central  nervous system,  and
              their presence has now been confirmed in axons of rabbit  spinal nerve  roots;
              therefore, they are likely to be specializations  common to long  axons in
              general. Identification of ribosomes in plaque  domains suggests  that the
              latter are potential local centers of protein  synthesis concerned  with local
              turnover of axoplasmic proteins. This premise is  a significant  departure from
              prevailing views on how the axon's vitality  and mass are  maintained in a
              steady state. One major experimental aim is  to analyze the  principal
              structural components located within plaque  domains of goldfish  and rabbit
              axons at an electron microscopic level in order  to define the  spatial
              organization of the plaque domain, and to  characterize common  features and
              distinctive differences between older and more  recently  evolved vertebrate
              axons. Another major experimental aim is  to test the  hypothesis that plaque
              domains represent local centers of  protein  synthesis, and are targeted
              endstations for RNA trafficking  from the  neuronal cell body. For this
              purpose, immunostaining, and  molecular  biological techniques will be used to
              evaluate localization  in relationship  to plaque domains in goldfish and
              rabbit axons of elongation  factor 1a, an  essential cofactor of protein
              synthesis, and localization of  messenger RNA  that codes for specific gene
              products, respectively. Labeled  RNA constructs  will also be microinjectied
              into the Mauthner cell to  evaluate targeting  and transport of RNA to plaque
              domains from the cell body.  Finally, sites  of de novo protein synthesis,
              assayed by metabolic  radiolabeling in  goldfish and rabbit axons, will also be
              evaluated by  autoradiography in  order to determ ine the spatial relationship
              between the  localization of  nascent peptide chains to plaque domains.
              Information from  the proposed  study should contribute to a greatly improved
              understanding  of how  axoplasmic proteins, and vitality of long axons are 
              maintained on a long  term basis.
