Title       : Integration of Canopy and Hydraulic Architecture in Neotropical Shrubs Along
               Light and Moisture Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9604424

Award Number: 9604424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Pearcy rwpearcy@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin T. Tyree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Joseph Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604424  Pearcy  This research will investigate the interrelationships between
              the hydraulics of a plant crown, and the amount and arrangement of leaf area on
              that crown that functions for light capture using the in species of the genus
              Psychotria, a prominent genus of shrubs.  The basic hypothesis is that there is
              a tradeoff between maximizing light capture and providing sufficient stem
              conductivity to supply water to the leaves and that this tradeoff differs
              between species adapted to areas subject to drought and species adapted to
              areas more or less permanently wet.  The species to be utilized occur along
              habitat gradients of light and fry season severity so that the selective
              pressures for hydraulics versus light capture will differ among them.  A
              computer simulation model that can reconstruct the three-dimensional
              architecture of a plant will be used to estimate the light capture capacity and
              efficiency of the crown architectures of the different species.  The stem
              hydraulic conductances and the vulnerability to cavitation, which is the
              formation of air bubbles in the xylem that blocks water flow and can lead to
              death of the shoot, will be determined.  Finally, stem hydraulic conductances
              will be mapped onto the crown architectures and used in the simulations to
              explore the consequences of species differences in the vulnerability to
              cavitation under different drought scenarios.  This research will provide
              insight into how the functional morphology of the crowns, the most visible
              manifestation of species differences, relates to species distribution along
              light and moisture gradients.  Since light and moisture gradients are important
              determinants of biodiversity in tropical forests the research will ultimately
              provide insight into the functional controls on biodiversity in these forests.
