Title       : Genetic Studies on Eukaryotic Transcriptional Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9604208

Award Number: 9604208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley L. Berger berger@wistar.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604208  Berger  Chromosomal DNA is packed into higher ordered structures by
              spaced assembly of nucleosomes composed of histone proteins.  Gene activity is
              repressed by nucleosome binding and gene activation has been correlated with
              chemical modification of histones.  In particular histone acetylation and
              deacetylation may be associated with modulation of gene activity.  The recent
              discovery that the yeast transcription factor GCN5 has enzymatic histone
              acetyltransferase activity potentially links transcriptional activation and
              chromatin modification.  GCN5 is one component of an ADA complex that
              physically interacts with both DNA-associated transcriptional activator
              proteins and basal transcription factors.  The activity of the ADA complex
              suggests both a possible mechanism to target the HAT activity to chromatil
              through activator interaction, and a possible outcome of acetylation in the
              promotion of basal transcription factor binding to nucleosomal DNA.  This
              research will investigate the relationship between the HAT activity of GCN5 and
              transcriptional activation.  The HAT domain of yeast GCN5 will be mutagenized;
              growth deficient mutants will be selected and tested for coordinate reduction
              of enzymatic acetylation and transcription. Genetic suppression of GCN5
              substitution mutants that exhibit profound growth defects but maintain HAT
              activity in vitro will be used to identify novel yeast genes whose products may
              interact with and/or modulate the HAT activity of GCN5.  Exploration of the
              relationship between HAT activity and trascriptional activation will fill in a
              key gap in current understanding of eukaryotic gene regulation.     Chromosomal
              DNA is packed into higher ordered structures by spaced assembly of nucleosomes
              composed of histone proteins.  Gene activity is repressed by nucleosome binding
              and gene activation has been correlated with chemical modification of histones.
               In particular histone acetylation and deacetylation may be associated with
              modulation of gene activity.  The recent  discovery that the yeast
              transcription factor GCN5 has enzymatic histone acetyltransferase activity
              potentially links transcriptional activation and chromatin modification.  GCN5
              is one component of an ADA complex that physically interacts with both
              DNA-associated transcriptional activator proteins and basal transcription
              factors.  This research will investigate the relationship between the HAT
              activity of GCN5 and transcriptional activation, and will fill in a key gap in
              current understanding of eukaryotic gene regulation.
