Title       : Genetic Studies on Infection-Related Morphogenesis in Magnaporthe grisea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9604897

Award Number: 9604897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317069             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  NCR-9702024  McLaughlin, Steven      In conventional magnetic and optical
              recording, data is stored by  saturating the media in one of two states.  In
              M-ary recording, more than  two recorded signals are used, allowing for larger
              storage capacity and  higher data transfer rates.  A number of M-ary recording
              channels are being  developed for optical recording  and a good deal of work
              has been done by  the PI and others in this area.    The primary objective in
              the research  plan is to move to the next level in the understanding, modeling
              and  analysis of channels, codes and signal processing for M-ary recording 
              channels.  The research plan addresses fundamental limits of M-ary  constrained
              recording channels and new coding approaches which seek to  achieve them.  The
              teaching plan seeks to increase the number of trained  engineers in signal
              processing and communications for recording and  emphasizes close connection
              with and feedback from industry.     The specific research and educational
              objectives are:  1) To integrate  communications and optical models to better
              characterize the fundamental  limits (i.e. channel capacity) associated with
              optical (both binary and  nonbinary) recording channels.  2) To develop new
              methodologies for code  design for M-ary channels whose constraints are
              typically difficult to deal  with.  3) To develop new modulation codes for
              M-ary recording channels  which exploit their three dimensional nature.  4) To
              develop new  educational approaches that emphasize the interrelation of system 
              components and help develop a broader perspective. 5) To emphasize  interaction
              with industry and to take advantage of undergraduate and PhD  co-op programs.  
              6) To continue developing outreach programs for  encouraging research careers
              for undergraduates.     The proposed research and educational activities will: 
              1) Educate and  train a core group of researchers in the emerging area of M-ary
              recording  both in fundamental limits and practical systems implementations. 
              2)  Resu lt in modulation codes that are conceived and designed from a systems 
              and practical perspective and achieve the largest known information density.
