Title       : A Light Microscope Equipped with Epifluorescence and DIC Optics and an Imaging
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9604786

Award Number: 9604786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78797              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen R. Hanson mrh5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariana F. Wolfner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Kemphues  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We propose to obtain an Olympus BX-50 microscope equipped with  epifluorescence,
              phase, and DIC optics along with an imaging system  capable of acquiring and
              analyzing high-resolution black-and-white  images and lower resolution video
              rate color images. Specifically, we  propose to obtain a MetaMorph Imaging
              System with a Princeton  Instruments Pentamax CCD camera and a Dage MTI
              three-chip color CCD  camera. The MetaMorph system has Windows-based software
              operated on a  Pentium PC.    The configuration of the proposed Olympus
              microscope has been designed  to facilitate its operation in a multi-user
              facility and for the  projects of four major users. Two CCD cameras are
              proposed in order to  accommodate the needs of the user labs for both
              high-resolution,  high-sensitivity image acquisition as well as video-rate
              color imaging.  Applications range from imaging of static fixed sections with
              DIC or  immunofluorescence, to following mitochondrial movement within living 
              plant cells, to observing transfer of fluorescent proteins during  Drosophila
              mating. The computer interface is designed to allow rapid  image acquisition
              and sufficient memory to store a stack of sequential  images for further
              manipulation. Images can be superimposed to enhance  signals or to locate the
              position of fluorescent antibodies within  cells. The microscope will be
              equipped with a Z motor so that images of  sequential planes of focus can be
              acquired. The computer can also  control the illumination wavelength by
              selecting the appropriate filter  cubes. Shutters on the microscope will be
              controlled by the software so  that image acquisition can be synchronized with
              their opening. In  samples which may be photobleached or otherwise damaged,
              this feature  is important to observe the same specimen during development by 
              time-lapse.    The Metamorph software package allows analysis of numerous
              features of  objects. Among the applications of the users are measurement of
              cell,  nuclei, and organelle number, comparison of fluorescen t intensities of 
              different objects and areas, comparison of object shape and  distribution in
              different cells or regions of cells, etc. Some users  also wish to produce
              videotape movies of living cells of plants,  Drosophila, yeast, and nematodes.
              The software package will also be  used to process images derived from an
              existing confocal microscope,  particularly enhancing its capability in 3-D
              reconstruction and  morphometric analysis.    Four major users with diverse
              projects plan to use the equipment.  Shapes, numbers, size, interactions,
              fusion, splitting, volume, and  membrane potential of plant organelles labelled
              with green fluorescent  protein(GFP) and other probes will be examined in
              different tissues at  various times in development, with particular attention
              to male  reproductive organs. Mutants with defective pollen development will 
              optically sectioned to determine the stage of developmental arrest. The 
              destination of GFP-labelled accessory gland proteins will be observed  in the
              female fruit fly following transfer from the male during mating.  GFP fusions
              with a Drosophila nuclear envelope protein, YA, will be  used to image the
              presence and movement in nuclei during the rapid cell  cycles of living
              embryos. Partitioning defective mutants of C. elegans  will be used to
              understand how the polarity of the zygote is  established after fertilization
              and how the differences in spindle  orientations in the early blastomeres are
              controlled. Cytoplasmic flow  rates in these mutants will be analyzed by
              following the trajectories  of cytoplasmic particles. The localization and
              distribution of  Drosophila proteins involved in chromosome segregation during
              cell  division will be examined in vivo. Mutants with aberration in the 
              accurate segregation of chromosomes to daughter cells will be  characterized.
