Title       : Hormonal Mechanisms for Parental Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9604370

Award Number: 9604370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Mock dmock@uoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hubert Schwabl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      PI: Douglas W. Moc, CO-PI: Hubert G. Schwabl  IBN-9604370      In recent
              years, the general assumption that parents value  all of their offspring
              equally has come into question.  In  many animals and plant groups, parents
              produce greater  numbers of concurrent young than can ordinarily be supported 
              fully, forcing a subsequent adjustment downward in family  size.  The
              underlying reasons for parental overproduction  stem from multiple sources of
              environmental unpredictability  (including resource unpredictability,
              accidental losses of  progeny, partial-brood predation, cannibalism by family 
              members or others, ect.), but the fact of it simultaneously  generates sibling
              rivalry, which creates incentives for  parents to produce a hierarchical
              sibship to minimize the  costs of such rivalry.  Thus, parents confer special 
              advantages on some offspring and/or handicaps on other, so  called  marginal 
              brood members.  The best-studied  manifestation of biological parental
              favoritism is probably  asynchronous hatching in many predatory birds species. 
              There, early onset of incubation gives embryos in the first-  laid eggs a
              developmental head-start that facilitates their  success in any ensuing sibling
              competitions for limited  food.  Hubert Schwabl s recent discovery that female 
              laboratory canaries deposit increasing amounts of  testosterone into yolks as
              the laying process proceeds  suggested a new mechanism for parental
              manipulation of  offspring vigar and inspired the collection of fresh eggs 
              from cattle egrets (Bubulcus ibis), a species known to  practice fatal sibling
              aggression (or  siblicide ).  The   marginal  third egg of this species
              contained much less  yolk testosterone (plus two similar steroids) than those
              of  its two nestmates, which normally hatch 1-3 days earlier.  The fact that
              the egret pattern (decreasing steroid dose) is  exactly opposite that found in
              canaries, but congruent with  the effects of hatching asynchrony, suggests that
              hormone  depositions into yolks could be a  widespread and flexible  parental
              adaptation for rigging intra-brood competitive  dynamics and survival.  The
              proposed study aims to explore  this matter through two field studies.  First,
              the cattle  egret system will be experimentally manipulated by injecting 
              various levels of a 3-steroid cocktail into last-laid eggs,  then measuring the
              subsequent competitive behaviors (begging  and fighting) of the hatchlings
              under field conditions.  If  steroid-manipulation is part of an evolved
              parental strategy  for managing sibling competition, broods with boosted last- 
              eggs should show escalated fighting and begging, ultimately  to the detriment
              of parental interests.  Second, to test  whether the mother s cutback on
              steroids is a general  phenomenon and associated with families in which sib- 
              competition is especially keen, an exploratory survey will  be made of the
              other siblicidal species, each paired with a  closely-related but nonaggressive
              sister species.  As with  cattle egret pilot work, clutches of eggs will be
              collected  as soon as each is laid, their yolks frozen for later  laboratory
              assays of steroid content.  Through this work, we  expect to increase
              understanding of the reproductive  strategies of parents under natural
              conditions and to  determine whether maternal steroid dosing is a general 
              mechanism used to enhance parental fitness.
