Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Holliday Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9604568

Award Number: 9604568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Chazin   (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Millar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9604568  Chazin  The Holliday junction (HJ) is a four-arm, four-strand DNA
              crossover structure formed as a requisite intermediate for genetic
              recombination and  many repair processes in the cell.  The structure and
              flexibility of these DNA crossovers appears to be critical to their recognition
              and processing into parental or recombinant products.  The principle goals of
              this research program are to determine the three-dimensional structure and
              dynamics of Holliday junctions, to establish the influence of sequence, and
              ultimately, to understand how the cellular recombination machinery
              distinguishes HJs of different sequence.  The Time-resolved fluorescence
              resonance energy transfer (tr-FRET) and NMR spectroscopy will be used to the
              study of 32 base pair model HJs.  Computation and molecular graphics will be
              used to assist in interpretation and analysis of results.  The combination of
              NMR and fluorescence spectroscopies is particularly powerful because these
              techniques yield information on different distance and time regimes.  NMR
              establishes the details of local geometry while FRET is used to elucidate the
              overall spatial arrangement of the four helical arms.  The experimental
              methodologies and structural principles developed in the course of these
              studies will be generally applicable to other nucleic acid systems.    Genetic
              recombination is a fundamental process of biology leading to the variation and
              diversity that is essential to life.  Most mechanisms propose for recombination
              involve the four-arm branched DNA intermediate termed the Holliday junction
              (HJ), which is cleaved by enzymes to generate either parental or recombinant
              products.  A significant body of evidence has accumulated indicating that the
              structure of the HJ has a central role in determining the outcome of the
              recombination event.  The objective of this research is to understand the
              molecular basis of genetic recombination from detailed knowledge of the
              structure of the HJ, and ultimately, of the nature of the interactions wit h
              enzymes critical to HJ recognition and processing.
