Title       : Engineering the Function of Serine Proteases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9604379

Award Number: 9604379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Craik craik@cgl.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  96-04379   Craik  Part 1. Technical  The study is to provide insight into
              the substrate specificity, catalytic mechanism, and structure of the
              chymotrypsin family of serine proteases. Variant enzymes will be generated
              using current methods of protein engineering.  Two general approaches are used
              to alter the enzyme: (1) targeted substitutions followed by analysis of the
              variant enzyme; and (2) random substitutions coupled with an in vitro affinity
              selection.  In each case, variants of serine proteases are generated according
              to structural and/or functional principles to understand the specificity and
              catalytic power of the enzyme and use this understanding to alter the activity
              of the enzyme in a predictable fashion.  Variant enzymes are designed,
              isolated, and purified, and their kinetic parameters compared with the native
              enzyme. Selected variants are then chosen for more detailed kinetic,
              theoretical, and three-dimensional structure analysis.  Results form the inital
              modifications will provide a basis for introducing future amino acid changes
              into the enzyme.  Initial experiments have been successful in addressing the
              role of specific amino acids in substrate recognition and catalytic mechanism
              of the enzyme trypsin and in using that information to alter the enzyme
              activity using designed metal binding sites and substrate assisted catalysis. 
              Other experiments involve amino acid replacements for studies including
              substrate recognition and metalloregulation.  Variant proteases are designed by
              computer modeling based on our current understanding of proteases including
              fiddler crab collagenase, granzymes, and other related members of this family. 
              These studies will contribute to our understanding of structure/function
              relationships in serine proteases.  In addtion, these studies will help develop
              unique specificities for peptide and protein hydrolysis.    Part 2.
              non-technical  The relationship between the three dimensional structure and the
              function of an enzyme is still poorly understood.   This is particularly
              evident in the field of protein engineering where efforts are made to alter the
              activity of a protein in a predictable fashion.  Macromolecular recognition and
              the basis of catalytic power in an enzyme remain unexplained in terms of basic
              general principles that can be applied to a protein catalyst.  This study will
              address these two fundamental questions as a long term goal by studying the
              contributions of certain amino acids in the substrate specificity and catalytic
              mechanism of serine protease.  The aim is to be achieved by creating and
              analyzing altered protease which contribute to our understanding of mechanisms
              involved in ligand binding and bond making and bonding breaking. The altered
              enzyme will be generated using current methods of protein engineering as
              designed by computer modeling based on our current knowledge of proteases of
              this family.  These studies will contribute to our understanding of
              structure/function relationships in protein degradative enzymes.  ***
