Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Differentiation Mechanismsin Saccharomyces
               cerevisae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9604247

Award Number: 9604247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Myers ammyers@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Myers  9604247  This project seeks to characterize mechanisms that specifically
              regulate cellular form and function in response to environmental stimuli.  The
              ascomycete Saccharomyces cerevisiae can switch between the yeast form (YF) and
              the pseudohyphal form (PH) in response to defined culture conditions.  Cellular
              characteristics that are affected in this differentiation include cell shape,
              cell size, cell polarity, and cell division cycle mechanisms.  This project has
              identified two protein kinases, Elm1p and CDC28, in which mutations cause cells
              to adopt pseudohyphal form characteristics in all growth conditions. 
              Elimination of Elm1p function causes cells to adopt the pseudohyphal form
              constitutively, indicating that this protein inhibits development of
              pseudohyphal characteristics in inappropriate environments.  One or more forms
              of the cyclin-dependent kinase complex (CDK) in which CDC28 is the catalytic
              subunit also regulates yeast- pseudohyphal differentiation.  A specific amino
              acid substitution in CDC28 causes constitutive execution of most aspects of the
              pseudohyphal form.  These data are consistent with the hypothesis that various
              signaling processes impinge on CDC28, which in response, is functionally
              modified in a specific way.  Modified CDK activity then causes various aspects
              of the pseudohyphal growth form to occur.  In this way CDK may function to
              integrate various input signals from the environment and control the decision
              of whether or not to execute a certain differentiation process.  This project
              will address the following specific objectives:  1) Determination of whether
              CDK alteration is required for cells to attain the pseudohyphal form in
              response to either of two signaling regimes known to induce this
              differentiation process in wild type cells; 2) Characterization of the
              functional differences between CDK in yeast form- and pseudohyphal form cells;
              3) Characterization of the interaction between Elm1p and the evolutionarily
              conserved protein kinase cascade coded for by  SEL2, SWE1, and CDC28; 4)
              Characterization of additional proteins that function in this differentiation
              circuitry.  Completion of this research will advance our knowledge of the basic
              mechanisms by which genetically identical cells convert between different
              functional forms, and the mechanisms by which cell division is controlled. 
              Cells with identical genetic information can take a wide variety of shapes and
              execute many different functions.  Because multicellular animals and plants
              develop from a single cell, specific mechanisms must exist that cause the
              various descendants of the progenitor cell to adopt the specific forms and
              functions that arise reproducibly in mature organisms.  Fundamental
              understanding of how multicellular organisms arise requires an understanding of
              these mechanisms, however, little is understood currently about the ways in
              which cells are instructed to adopt a specific shape.  This project uses a
              tractable experimental system in which cell shape changes reproducibly in
              response to an external signal.  By discerning the molecular mechanism that
              control this programmed shape change, fundamental information regarding the
              processes by which multicellular organisms develop is likely to be obtained.
