Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Development of Turbulence Models for
               Non-equilibruim Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9604994

Award Number: 9604994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassan M. Nagib menagib@karl.itt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed Naguib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative research by Dr. Hassan
              Nagib, Professor and Director of the Fluid Dynamics Research Center, Dr. Ahmed
              Naguib, Assistant Professor, both in the Department of  Mechanical, Materials
              and Aerospace Engineering at Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, and
              Dr. Suhil M. Kiwan, Assistant Professor in the Mechanical Engineering
              Department at the  Jordan University of Science and Technology in Amman,
              Jordan.  The research aims at refining and extending an anisotropic turbulence
              model which has been recently developed at IIT.  Dr. Kiwan, who developed the
              initial model and demonstrated its efficient use, will work on the enhancement
              and refinement of the model and will calculate predictions from the model for
              experimental work being carried out by the IIT team.  The model is specifically
              targeted to the study of turbulence of non-equilibrium, complex flows, which
              are important in designing aerodynamic vehicles, gas turbines, and flows in
              pipes with complex geometry.  Scope:  This research project will be useful in
              promoting the development of modeling of turbulence in flows, for accurate
              design calculations in many engineering applications.  It involves US and
              Jordanian scientists with complementary expertise and laboratory facilities, in
              the field of aeronautical engineering,  at the two participating universities. 
              The project involves two junior scientists, Dr. Naguib of IIT and Dr. Kiwan of
              JUST, both of whom received their Ph.D.'s recently.  This proposal meets INT
              objective of increasing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both
              sides, and in enhancing junior scientists' international experience.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
