Title       : In Vitro Evolution of RNA Modifying Ribozymes from Random Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9604377

Award Number: 9604377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura F. Landweber lfl@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9604377  Landweber  In vitro selection (IVS) or directed molecular evolution,
              allows the isolation and amplification of rare sequences that pass a selection
              criterion.  It can be used both to modify existing ribozymes and to isolate
              novel ones from a large heterogeneous pool.  the objective of this research is
              to use the selection system to explore the possible link between RNA catalysis,
              RNA editing and modification.  Experiments are designed to test the role of RNA
              catalysis in prebiotic evolution and the antiquity of a variety of forms of RNA
              processing and modification, and to explore the evolution of ribozymes that
              have the  ability to modify RNA.  The scope of RNA catalysis and "catalytic
              task space" available to  prebiotic systems will be investigated by selecting
              and characterizing novel classes of ribozymes from different pools of 
              approximately 1016   random sequences.  One specific aim is to isolate novel
              2'-o-methylating  ribozymes from random RNA sequences  containing a core which
              binds the methyl donor as a cofactor.  The approach is  isolating a methylating
              ribozyme is based on  the resistance of an oligonucleotide containing a single
              2'-o-methyl ribose to alkali hydrolysis as a means of separating methylated
              from  unmethylated ribonucleotide substrates and their associated ribozymes. 
              As additional aim is to analyze a ribozyme, discovered by IVS (under prior NSF
              SGER support), that catalyzes a novel template-directed ligation involving
              non-canonical GU and G-G interactions at the ligation site.  The emergence of
              this unexpected RNA-catalyzed ligation suggests  that is could have been
              involved in the prebiotic synthesis of longer  RNA templates from
              oligoribonucleotide precursors.    ***  The recent demonstration of the ability
              to isolate new ribozymes (RNA catalysts) from a large pool  of random
              oligonucleotide sequences has fueled an excitement about the possibility of
              uncovering early pathways of RNA evolution, or even resuscitating ribozyme
              activities that may have been exti nct for over three billion years.  Molecules
              present in as few as one in 1015  copies, which have noval catalytic properties
              and could even serve as potential therapeutic agents, can now be retrieved by
              the new approach of in vitro genetics.  Thus a fantastic tool is available for
              the synthesis of novel catalysts through  combinatorial  chemistry or probing
              the stepwise prebiotic evolution of complex prebiotic pathways, such as the
              ability to self-replicate or to edit RNA.  This study takes advantage of this
              advent in concept and methodology, with experiments designed to explore RNA
              evolution, particularly the ribozymes that have the ability to modify RNA.  The
              role of RNA catalysis in prebiotic evolution and the antiquity of a variety of
              forms  of RNA processing and modification will also be studied.
