Title       : A Gel and Blot Analysis System for Cellular and Molecular Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1997      
File        : a9604761

Award Number: 9604761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50365              (Estimated)
Investigator: Myra Hurt mhurt@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Dryer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy Levenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     The  objective of this proposal is to fund the purchase of a gel  and
              blot analysis system  for investigators at FSU conducting cellular and
              molecular research.  Such a system which  produces rapid, quantitative analyses
              of data produced with molecular  probes (radioactive,  chemiluminescent,
              fluorescent, or chemifluorescent) is absolutely  essential to competitive 
              research in these areas. Four funded investigators comprise the major  users
              group, and an  additional group of seven minor users are included. The focus of
               research in these laboratories  include a broad variety of cell and molecular
              questions in the areas of  structural cell biology,  developmental
              neurobiology, gene regulation and molecular biology in  multicellular 
              organisms. These investigators are currently conducting research  requiring
              such an analysis  system and "making do" with much less accurate and much more 
              time-consuming techniques  (autoradiography with X-ray film and subsequent
              densitometry).  Additionally, this  equipment will be available to 3 new
              faculty who are in the initial  phase of their research  careers as independent
              investigators, as well as several faculty with  established (but in some  cases
              unfunded) programs. A large number of undergraduate and graduate  students will
              be the  primary beneficiaries of the use of this equipment.
