Title       : Structure-Function Studies on Phytochrome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9604511

Award Number: 9604511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259375             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Clark Lagarias   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604511  Lagarias  The overall goal of these studies is to define the 
              structural basis for photosensory and regulatory functions  of the phytochrome
              photoreceptor.  These investigations rely  on the ability to express, assemble
              and purify recombinant  phytochromes.  Previous biochemical and genetic studies
              have  delimited the phytochrome molecule into two major domains, a  highly
              conserved photosensory domain at the molecule's N  terminus and a C-terminal
              domain which plays a key role in  the regulatory function of phytochrome. 
              These two domains  are the focus of these studies.  Experiments outlined in 
              Part 1 seek to identify specific amino acid residues in the  photosensory
              domain of phytochrome that are important to  chromophore-protein interactions.
              These studies will exploit  the techniques of chemical cross-linking,
              site-directed and  random mutagenesis, and resonance Raman spectroscopy.  These
               studies also represent a prelude (and adjunct) to x-ray  crystallographic
              analysis of phytochrome.  Experiments  outlined in Part II address the
              hypothesis that phytochrome  functions as a light-regulated enzyme.  The
              exciting  discovery of phytochrome-related genes in cyanobacteria,  which share
              structural motifs with higher plant phytochromes  and the transmitter protein
              kinase family of prokaryotes  within the regulatory domain region, has provided
              renewed  impetus for testing this controversial theory.  Experiments  seek to
              establish whether phyto*-chrome is a light-regulated  transmitter kinase and if
              so, to define the structural basis  for its enzymatic activity.  Parallel
              studies to test for  biochemical and functional `cross-talk' between eukaryotic
               and prokaryotic phytochromes, also outlined in this section,  will provide
              insight into the evolution of phytochrome  structure and function.    The
              ability to adjust to changes in their external light  environment is essential
              to plant survival because, unlike  animals, plants must have sunlight for
              photosynthesis and  they lack the ability  to move to a more optimum light 
              environment.  Plants therefore possess light-sensing  molecules which enable
              them to adapt to suboptimal light  conditions in their environment, one of
              which is called  phytochrome.  Among the many phenomena mediated by 
              phytochrome include the induction of seed germination, rapid  stem elongation
              in response to the shade of neighboring  plants, regulation of the timing of
              flowering and growth  towards light.  Phytochrome is a protein that contains an
               attached pigment which is responsible for its ability to  absorb visible
              light.  Upon light absorption, phytochrome is  converted to an active form
              which regulates the course of  plant growth and development.  This work seeks
              to dissect  the anatomy of the phytochrome molecule and to characterize  the
              structural features that enable it to convert a light  signal into a chemical
              signal.  A better understanding of  the mechanism of phytochrome action should
              lead to novel  approaches to improve plant growth and development.
