Title       : Molecular Genetics of Gibberellin Signal Transduction in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9604126

Award Number: 9604126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Olszewski neil@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604126    Olszewski  Technical  The question of how signal transduction
              pathways for hormones and other signals function is central to our
              understanding of the processes of growth and development. The long term goal of
              this research is to understand the molecular genetic basis of the signal
              transduction occurring in Arabidopsis following the perception of gibberellins
              (GA), a class of phytohormones. Although much progress has been made in
              elucidating the anabolic and catabolic pathways for active GAs, relatively
              little is known about GA signal transduction. Arabidopsis is the best system in
              which to dissect this pathway because the genetic analysis of this species has
              identified more genes likely to be involved in GA signal transduction than in
              other plants and because the only cloned GA signal transduction genes, SPINDLY
              (SPY) and GAI, are from this species. The SPY gene is the focus of this
              proposal. Genetic analysis suggests that it is a suppressor of GA signal
              transduction and that a loss-of-function mutations lead to increased signal
              transduction. spy mutations completely suppress the inhibition of seed
              germination that results from GA-deficiency and partially suppress the dwarfism
              and sterility caused by GA-deficiency. In addition, a strong spy allele
              completely suppresses the effects of a semidominant mutation at the GAI locus,
              which causes GA responsiveness, suggesting that spy acts downstream of the step
              that is affected by the gai mutation. The SPY protein contains ten copies of an
              imperfect 34 amino acid motif known as a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) that is
              found in a number of diverse proteins including several that play roles in
              signal transduction. TPRs appear to be involved in protein-protein
              interactions. Thus SPY is likely to act by interacting with other components of
              the GA signal transduction pathway. Interestingly, homologous genes, encoding
              proteins of unknown functions(s), are present in humans and C. elegans
              suggesting that SPY is the first genetically characterized me mber of a
              previously unrecognized family of regulatory proteins that are present in
              eukaryotes. Preliminary results indicate that SPY expression is regulated by
              both developmental and environmental signals affecting plant growth. The goals
              of this proposal are to elucidate the role of SPY in GA signal transduction and
              to use it is to identify additional components of this pathway. Specifically,
              the developmental expression pattern of SPY mRNA and its possible regulation by
              signals that may control plant growth and development by affecting GA signal
              transduction will be characterized. The use of reporter genes in these studies
              will allow detailed analyses of the effects of many signals. In a complementary
              approach, the expression of SPY protein will similarly be characterized using
              polyclonal antisera against SPY protein and creating transgenic plants that
              express epitope-tagged SPY protein and localizing this recombinant protein
              using anti-epitope monoclonal antibodies. A range of molecular, biochemical and
              genetic approaches will be used to identify additional components of the GA
              signal transduction pathway. Data suggesting that Arabidopsis contains a second
              SPY gene has been recently obtained. This gene will be cloned and sequenced. If
              the sequence suggests that the gene is, indeed a SPY gene, its function in GA
              signal transduction will be determined by knocking out its expression. Because
              TPR repeats are believed tobe involved in protein-protein interactions,
              immunoprecipitation in conjunction with biochemical procedures will be used to
              determine if the SPY protein is a component of a stable multiprotein complex.
              If such a complex is detected, it will be purified and the protein members of
              the complex will be partially sequenced in preparation for cloning the
              corresponding genes. The two hybrid system of yeast will serve as a backup to
              this approach. To identify additional genes involved in GA signal transduction,
              genetic screens will be employed to isolate mutations that suppress or enhance 
              the action of spy alleles.  Non -Technical    The plant hormone gibberellin is
              central to signaling several essential processes involved in plant growth
              including seed germination, plant development and reproduction. Synthetic
              gibberellins have been used for many years to stimulate plant growth in
              laboratories and horticulture. The mode of action by which gibberellins control
              plant growth has remained unknown. Understanding how gibberellins exert its
              effect on plants is central to understanding the process of  plants growth. Dr.
              Olszewski has identified a protein called SPY that appears to be a central
              component of the biological system by which exogenous gibberellin signals are
              transmitted within plant cells to induce specific effects. In this award his
              group will conduct research to determine the function and interactions of the
              SPY protein. Diverse organisms including humans possess uncharacterized gene
              sequences that have homology to the gene encoding SPY indicating that SPY-like
              protein might be an essential part of signaling pathways in animals as well as
              plant cells. Dissection of the function of SPY in plants may result in a
              significant advance in understanding signaling systems by which plant hormones
              control the growth and morphology of plants.  ***
