Title       : Development of Sun Compass Orientation: An Invertebrate Model for the Study of
               Spatial Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9604525

Award Number: 9604525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred C. Dyer fcdyer@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                              Dyer  960452  5    One of the most exciting frontiers in science
              concerns the  problem of how the nervous systems of animals and use 
              information about the natural environments in which they  must survive and
              reproduce. Studying this problem in  insects offers the hope that given the
              relatively small  size of the nervous system, we might understand such 
              cognitive phenomena on the neural level sooner than later.  A first step,
              however, is to find evidence of interesting  cognitive processes in insects,
              and to characterize the  behavioral capacities that these processes support.
              This  project takes on this challenge by considering how honey  bees learn the
              daily pattern of movement of the sun. A wide  variety of animal species, both
              vertebrate and  invertebrate, use the sun as a true compass, which requires 
              compensating for its movement relative to earth-bound  features of the
              environment. To compensate at a rate that  is appropriate for the season and
              latitude at which they  are living, most animals learn the current local
              pattern of  solar movement. What little is known about this learning  process
              suggests that animals do not merely memorize a list  of solar positions
              experienced at different times of day.  Instead, in several vertebrate and
              invertebrate species,  including honey bees, animals have been shown to
              estimate  the sun's position at times of day (or night) when they  have never
              seen it. This phenomenon is extremely attractive  as a focus for behavioral
              analysis. The animals exhibit an  apparently "cognitive" form of learning,
              acquiring an  internal representation of an environmental pattern in  which at
              least part of the information contained in the  representation is derived
              through computation rather than  through direct experience. The experiments in
              this project  are designed to characterize more fully just what honey  bees
              learn about the sun's course and how they learn it. A  major focus will be to
              study the interaction between a  bee's inborn knowledge of gen eral features of
              solar  movement and information that she acquires through  experience. A
              long-term goal is to obtain insights that can  contribute to a general
              understanding of the cognitive  basis of spatial orientation in animals.
