Title       : Stimulus-Secretion Coupling in Mucosal Mast Cells: Studies at the Single-Cell
               Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9604432

Award Number: 9604432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare M. Fewtrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9604432  Fewtrell      The role of calcium in stimulus-response
              coupling in non-excitable cells is not well understood.   The calcium responses
              of individual cells within a population are extremely diverse, often displaying
              marked oscillations in calcium, however little is known about the specific
              features of the calcium signal that are important for the functional response
              of the cell.     In these studies the temporal relationship between changes in
              intracellular calcium and secretion will be studied at the single cell level in
              non-excitable cells, using a mucosal mast cell line as a model.  The calcium
              responses of these cells have been well characterized and the exocytosis of
              secretory granules containing histamine, serotonin and other mediators by
              indo-1 photometry, and the secretion of serotonin containing granules will be
              monitored simultaneously in the same cell by constant potential amperometry. 
              Thus the calcium response associated with a single exocytotic events or burst
              of secretion can be measured.  Fluorescence imagining will monitor the calcium
              responses of a large number of individual cells simultaneously.       The
              hypothesis that an increase in intracellular calcium is essential for
              exocytosis will be tested using a variety of stimuli to mast cell lines, cell
              clones and transfected cell lines.  The requirement for protein kinase C
              activation and its role in modulating the secretory response will be
              re-examined at the single cell level.        Information obtained about calcium
              signaling in mast cells will contribute to the overall understanding of the
              role and regulation of this important signaling molecule in many different cell
              types and systems.          ***
