Title       : Studies on Role and Regulation of the Ventral Nervous SystemDefective Homeobox
               Gene During Drosophila Neurogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9604413

Award Number: 9604413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dervla Mellerick-Dressler dervlam@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Mellerick-Dressler  IBN:  9604413      The central nervous system (CNS) of
              both vertebrates and flies is composed of thousands of nerve cells, or neurons,
              each uniquely positioned, that express a specific combination of
              neurotransmitters and ion channels, and make appropriate contact with other
              neurons and target cells.  The aim of this research is to understand how
              individual cell identities are specified during nervous system development. 
              Because of the complexity inherent in mammalian nervous system development
              defined by both cell numbers and cell types, CNS specification is being studied
              in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, in Dr. Mellerick-Dressler's
              laboratory.  Although relatively simple, Drosophila has proven to be an elegant
              and highly relevant model for analyzing gene function.   The primordium of the
              nervous system is patterned along both the dorsal-ventral axis and the
              anterior-posterior axis by a variety of genes that regulate gene expression. 
              One of these genes, called ventral nervous system defective (vnd) or NK-2, is
              expressed in a restricted dorsal-ventral population of cells that give rise to
              neurons in both fly and mammalian embryos suggesting that this gene family
              directs patterning.  Indeed, fly embryos die and the central nervous system
              develops abnormally when mutations are present in the vnd/NK-2 gene, indicating
              that this gene is critical for neural development.  To test the hypothesis that
              vnd/NK-2 functions in neuronal patterning, existing vnd/NK-2 mutants will be
              examined for altered expression of genes that are normally expressed within the
              vnd/NK-2 expression domain.  The functional significance of the temporal and
              spatially restricted pattern of vnd/NK-2 gene expression will be addressed by
              generating and analyzing two different types of genetically altered
              "transgenic" fly embryos -- one that expresses vnd/NK-2 in all cells, the
              second that over-expresses the gene within a restricted population of cells
              during CNS development.  Finally, with the even tual aim of addressing whether
              expression of vnd/NK-2 is functionally significant after embryogenesis, the
              temporal and spatial localization of the vnd/NK-2 gene product will be
              determined in wild-type flies after embryonic CNS development.  The working
              hypothesis underlying this research is that many aspects of vnd/NK-2 function
              and regulation are evolutionarily conserved.  Thus, the results from this work
              may also contribute to understanding how vertebrate vnd/NK-2 like genes
              function during neural development.
