Title       : Comparative Aspects of the Air-Breathing Transition in the Oxudercine Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a9604699

Award Number: 9604699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Graham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Graham  9604699      The mudskipper fish are in the subfamily Oxudercinae of the
              family  Goblidae. There are10 genera and  about 25 species of oxudercines,
              including the mudskippers. This  subfamily has a broad geographic  range, from
              West Africa to Samoa, and most species live in shallow,  warm, hypcxic tropical
              regions. The  mudskippers (Periophthalmus, Periophthalmodon, Boleophthalmus,
              and  Scartelaos) are distinguished  from other oxudercines by their ability to
              live at the water  surface, with their heads exposed to air, or to even  leave
              water and live in the air for extended periods. Mudskippers  accordingly have
              adaptations for air  breathing, for terrestrial locomotion, and for aerial
              vision, as  well as other specializations related to being out  of water. This
              study will examine some of these adaptations and  attempt to understand the 
              macroevolutionary sequence of their acquisition, - - - that is to  say, the
              point in the expansion of this group  when adaptations related to air exposure
              appeared. This sequence is  important to know because, while  the current
              theory about the evolution of vertebrate life on land is  replete with details,
              based on fossils,  about the structural changes that accompanied the land
              invasion,  much less detail is known about the  changes that occurred at the
              behavioral, sensory, physiological and  biochemical levels. Because the 
              oxudercines contains species that never leave water and others that  are highly
              terrestrial, this group  provide a special window to the "bows" and "whys" of
              terrestrial  invasion. This study will investigate the  nature of the
              functional elements related to the transition from  water to land, in
              particular, how access to  aerial oxygen affected breathing and metabolism. The
              mudskippers, in  an ecological sense, are exploiting  an open ecological niche
              between water and land, one that was not  filled by amphibians. The PI thus 
              provide clues as to how ancient ancestors of ail land animals may  have made
              the transition from living  in  shallow-water to living on land.
