Title       : Characterization of TETMYO-1, A Myosin Heavy Chain Gene in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9604137

Award Number: 9604137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray H. Gavin rhgavin@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604137  Gavin  Technical:  Basal body-associated actin and myosin could
              constitute a contractile system that might have a role in ciliary motion and
              theefore have significance beyond motility in ciliated protozoa. Ciliated 
              basal bodies with associated fibrillar complexes are present in many vertebrate
              tissues, such as, tracheal epithelium and ciliary motion, that are an integral
              part of the physiology of these tissues.  The head domain of an unconventional
              myosin heavy chain gene (TETMYO-1) was previously cloned and sequenced.
              Preliminary immunofluorescence microscopy results indicated that the myosin
              encoded by the TETMYO-1 gene is localized in the basal bodies of the
              Tetrahymena cytoskeleton. The objectives of this one-year project are to
              determine the ultrastructural localization of the myosin encoded by TETMYO-1
              and to prepare a construct for a genomic knockout of this gene in Tetramymena.
              Specific antibodies will be prepared from 156-nucleotide fragment of the gene
              that will be cloned intoa vector and expressed in E. Coli. The expressed
              protein will be ourified and used as an immunogen to elicit polyclonal
              antibodies. The antibodieq will be used for immunogold localization of the
              TETMYO-1 in Tetrahymena cells. The ultrastructural localization will focus on
              cortical structures, the macronucleus, and the cytoplasm for evidence of
              TETMYO-1 localization. Particular attention will be focused on basal
              body-associated microfilaments in order to determine whether the mysosin
              colocalizes with actin filaments that have been shown to form a cage-like
              structure around each cytoskeletal basal body in Tetrahymena. To prepare for a
              genomic knockout of TETMYO-1 function in Tetrahymena, a disruption construct
              will be devleoped. A cassette that contains an antibiotic resistance coding
              sequence flanked by promoter and a terminator sequence will be ligated to a
              cloned TETMYO-1 fragment.     Non Technical:  The beating of cilia provides the
              motive force for the movement of many unicellular organisms and to mo ve fluids
              over the surface of some animal organs. A remarkable feature of the motion of
              cilia in both unicellular organisms and in vertebrate tissues is that the
              beating and direction of the cilia is coordinated with that of both adjacent
              and distal cilia. How this coordination is achieved is an important question in
              cell biology that is essential to understand physiological processes of
              unicellular organisms and the function of some vertebrate organs. This project
              will investigate the function of a contractile protein that may have an
              essential role in coordinating the direction of cilia beating in the
              unicellular organism Tetrahymena. Elucidating the function of this protein will
              provide important insights into how coordinated movement occurs in some cells
              and tissues.
