Title       : Japan STA Program: Modeling and Analysis Support of PREASA Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9604634

Award Number: 9604634
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22200              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Crain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Crain  9604634    This award supports a 12 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. David James  Crain at the
              Communications Research Laboratory (CRL),  Tokyo, Japan.  Dr. Crain will work
              with Kiyoshi Igarashi,  Director of the Upper Atmosphere Section, Space Science
               Division, on a research project entitled "Electro-dynamic  Processes of the
              Equatorial and Mid-Latitude Ionosphere in  the Pacific Region."    The PREASA
              (Pacific Region Equatorial Anomaly Studies in  Asia) initiative is a
              multi-site, multi-instrumented, multi-  year campaign to observe the dynamics
              and the electro-  dynamics of the Equatorial regions of the ionosphere and 
              test established theories on the relevant processes involved  in determining
              motions and irregularity development.  The  research will allow observations
              that are unique in their  location and their methodology and, thus, will allow
              the  creation of databases of the ionosphere and upper atmosphere  that are
              especially useful.  The primary goal of the  research is to integrate the
              growing PREASA observational  database into a comprehensive model of the
              electrodynamics  (Ionospheric Motions) and Ionization Distribution throughout 
              the Pacific Longitude region.  It is anticipated that such a  model will aid in
              the development of a regional capability  to predict Ionosphere electrodynamics
              and Irregularities  which effect radio and HF propagation.  These models will 
              also aid in the analysis of future PREASA databases and help  understand the
              general mechanisms responsible for Low and  Mid-Latitude irregularities
              throughout the world.  ***
