Title       : The Origin of Phyllotactic Pattern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9604072

Award Number: 9604072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Hake maizesh@nature.berkely.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian M. Sussex  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sussex  9604072    During vegetative growth, the shoot apical meristems of a
              given plant species initiate leaves in a predictable pattern. This arrangement
              of leaves about the stem is called phyllotaxy. Although phyllotaxy has been the
              subject of a great deal of research by developmental biologists, physiologists
              and mathematicians, our understanding of this patterning process remains
              rudimentary. This project examines the emergence of phyllotactic pattern on
              newly formed, adventitious meristems of the commercially cultivated flax plant,
              Linum usitatissimum. This approach differs from previous studies which focused
              primarily on the maintenance of the established phyllotactic pattern on older
              shoots. The long term objective of this research is to better understand the
              processes involved in the establishment of phyllotactic pattern. Flax
              adventitious meristems are an excellent model system in which to study the
              emergence of phyllotactic pattern. When flax seedlings are decapitated just
              below the cotyledons, many new shoot meristems form on the stump of the
              hypocotyl which remains. Because these adventitious shoot meristems are derived
              from a small number of epidermal cells, meristem and leaf primordium formation
              are easily observed and experimentally manipulated. The first leaf formed by
              these adventitious meristems consistently emerges in a predictable position. In
              addition, the first leaf often displays a "multiple" leaf phenotype suggesting
              that two leaf primordia have fused together. Both the predictability of leaf
              position and the formation of multiple leaves provide opportunities to test
              many of the theoretical explanations of phyllotaxy which have been set forth in
              the literature.  Three specific aims will be addressed in this proposal. First,
              a variety of surgical and physiological manipulations will be used to
              investigate the influences involved in the predictable positioning of the first
              leaf formed by a flax adventitious meristem. These experiments will directly
              test the importance of p hysical and chemical properties of the meristem in
              phyllotactic patterning. Second, the formation of multiple leaves on flax
              adventitious meristems will be characterized using scanning electron microscopy
              of serial replicas of meristems. In other plant species, the presence of
              multiple leaves has often been reported on shoots which are undergoing a shift
              in phyllotactic pattern, but the ontogeny of these leaves has not been
              carefully studied. This project will focus on the process by which multiple
              leaves form, emphasizing the connections between the development of these
              leaves and theories of phyllotaxy. Finally, transgenic plants which express
              green fluorescent protein exclusively in meristematic tissue will be developed;
              confocal microscopy will be used to observe the earliest stages of adventitious
              meristem development in living tissue and, perhaps, to distinguish between
              meristematic tissue and incipient leaf primordia. The ability to visualize very
              young meristems and leaf primordia in living plants will provide insight into
              phyllotactic patterning events which has not been available previously.
