Title       : Mechanisms Involved in Exocytosis and Rapid Endocytosis in Chromaffin Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9604849

Award Number: 9604849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristina R. Artalejo cartalej@med.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604849  Artalejo      The major response of animals, including humans, to fear
              or  stressful situations is termed the "fight-or-flight"  response. Such
              situations trigger the sudden release of  hormones called catecholamines (e.g.
              adrenaline) into the  blood stream; these catecholamines then go on to activate
              a  characteristic set of events including accelerated heart-  rate,
              hair-elevation etc. One major source of adrenaline is  the chromaffin cells of
              the adrenal medulla (AC cells). This  project concerns the mechanism whereby AC
              cells are able to  secrete adrenaline into the blood stream so quickly in 
              stressful situations. The investigators will use cells from  bovine adrenal
              medulla as a model system, but believe  similar processes are operative in
              other mammals, including  humans. Secretion is initiated by movement of Ca ions
              from  the outside to the inside of the cell, these Ca ions cause  vesicles
              inside the cell to fuse with the surface membrane  and release their contents.
              The investigators have  hypothesized that there is a specific type of Ca
              channel  that allows passage of Ca into the cell and is tightly  coupled to the
              machinery that regulates the fusion reaction.  Such tight coupling would
              explain why the cells can secrete  "instantaneously" when stimulated.    The
              prime objectives of this proposal is to validate this  hypothesis and to
              determine how cells recover from the  secretory event and get ready for the
              arrival of the next  stimulus. In the first objective the investigators will 
              employ a new method for detecting adrenaline secretion from  the cells that has
              a very fast time-resolution enabling us  to measure secretory events on a
              millisecond time scale.  This will allow them to determine how Ca entering the
              cell  can trigger the rapid release of adrenaline. In the second  objective,
              they will employ a different method that allows  them to measure the surface
              area of the cell. Use of this  method enables them to detect the recovery
              process that  ensue immediately after se cretion of adrenaline has  occurred. 
              In combination, these experiments will give a  much more detailed appreciation
              of the mechanism of this  important physiological event.
