Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Study of Solar Oscillations, Phase III, Award
               in Indian and U.S. Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9604910

Award Number: 9604910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51129              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Leibacher leib@noao.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arvind Bhatnagar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AURA/Nat Optic Astron Obse
	      1200 New York Avenue NW, Suite 3
	      Washington, DC  200053929    202/483-2101

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9604910  Leibacher   Description:  This award supports the U.S.-India
              Cooperative  Research: Study of Solar Oscillations Phase III, which will
              examine  the Sun s interior utilizing the data set from the Global Oscillation 
              Network Group (GONG).  This recently completed network of six  identical
              oscillation observing stations that circle the globe will keep  the Sun under
              24 hour surveillance and will yield unique data  having importance not only for
              solar physics, but for astrophysics,  solar-terrestrial physics, geophysics,
              and nuclear physics.  The U.S.  team is headed by John Leibacher of the
              National Solar Observatory  (NSO), Tucson, and the Indian team by Arvind
              Bhatnagar, Udaipur  Solar Observatory (USO) Udaipur, and S.M. Chitre, Tata
              Institute  of Fundamental Research, Mumbai.  The new field of  helioseismology
              has evolved from the discovery of solar acoustic  waves that emanate from
              randomly-excited seismic vibrations from  within the Sun.  This powerful new
              tool for studying the Sun s  interior structure and dynamics can probe the
              interior of the Sun  with the same precision that terrestrial seismology can
              probe the  Earth s interior.  During Phase III of the study, the U.S. and
              Indian  teams will pursue collaborative research in numerous areas that have 
              been stimulated by GONG data.  These include inversions;  hydrostatic Sun
              structure; helium abundance in the solar envelope;  excitation mechanisms for
              solar oscillations; background solar  spectrum; global magnetic fields in the
              sun s deep interior; nearly  steady flows and magnetic fields; and
              deterministic detrending.      Scope:  The U.S.-India component of this large
              international project  is exceptionally well balanced.  For the United States,
              Udaipur has  physical attributes such as atmospheric clarity and a unique 
              geographic position on the globe diametrically opposite to Tucson,  as well as
              strong infrastructural resources.  Solar physics is a field  in which Indian
              scientists excel.  The project will involve USO staff  and w orld class
              researchers from India s premier Tata Institute.   For India, the project
              offers entry to the field of helioseismology,  state-of -the-art
              instrumentation, and involvement in an important  international effort.  This
              project has thus far yielded a large  number of publications under U.S.-Indian
              authorship.       ***
