Title       : Ethnography of Collaborative College Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9604981

Award Number: 9604981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy W. Wallace Dorothy.I.Wallace@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Korey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9604981  Wallace    This project will document the process by which
              interdisciplinary mathematics and science courses are collaboratively created
              and taught at the undergraduate level. Dartmouth College is now beginning the
              second year of a five-year, NSF-funded "Mathematics Across the Curriculum"
              project which involves fifty faculty in the creation of over twenty new and
              revised courses. In one way or another, all involve the application of
              mathematics to problems outside its traditional academic domain; almost all
              involve the collaboration of a team of faculty in the design and teaching of
              the course.  Although educational research suggests that integrating content
              across disciplines enhances retention and transfer of material and improves
              higher-order thinking skills, little information is available about how this is
              best accomplished at the college level. This study aims to give college faculty
              information that will help them do collaborative, interdisciplinary teaching
              and do it well. The investigation poses four questions:  _How do collaborating
              professors face two major challenges that make integrating mathematics seem
              especially problematic: coordinating mathematical sequences with those of other
              subjects and allaying students' apprehensions about mathematics?  _What does
              the process of collaboratively developing and teaching an interdisciplinary
              course look like as an intellectual and sociological experience, from beginning
              to end?  _ How are various collaborative strategies linked with student
              outcomes?  _ How do professors themselves characterize their experience?  The
              research "triangulates" data from faculty interviews, ethnographic observation.
              and student interviews and records to answer these questions. A semi-structured
              interview will be conducted with each professor individually before and after
              the planning and teaching of each interdisciplinary course. These recorded
              interviews will explore their experiences, motivations, and goals in teaching
              these courses and their assessme nts of the results for themselves and their
              students. The ethnographer will also observe and take notes on planning
              sessions and other group meetings. These data should yield practical
              information about special issues encountered in integrating mathematics
              content, in working with colleagues from other disciplines, in addressing
              student responses to novel pedagogy, and in working within the established
              institutional organization. The interviews will also illuminate the subjective
              experiences of initiating this kind of reform.  Data about student learning in
              these courses (available from pre- and post-tests, student interviews, and
              academic records collected in the already-funded evaluation of the MATC
              project) will be linked to information from faculty interviews and to results
              of weekly classroom observations of each MATC course. These linkages will be
              explored to draw conclusions about what pedagogical approaches seem most
              effective in improving mathematics and science learning.  Administrators and
              college faculty outside the MATC will also be interviewed to document the
              cultural milieu within which reform of mathematics teaching takes place. By
              probing attitudes about mathematics and science of those outside its precincts
              and analyzing institutional organization, this study will explore the
              implications of college culture for interdisciplinary, collaborative teaching,
              and vice versa.  This project thus will provide two kinds of information
              professors need: (1) practical information about problems encountered and
              solutions devised and (2) a "sense of the experience," a preview of what
              interdisciplinary teaching involves in personal as well as intellectual terms.
              The examination of university culture_focusing on the belief system about
              mathematics and on the institutional organization_addpesses reform issues on
              another level by placing mathematics reform in context and identifying factors
              that inhibit or promote reform efforts. The results of this research will be
              published widely in journal ar ticles in mathematics and education journals,
              through presentations at meetings, workshops and institutes, and in the form of
              a short, readable "how-to" manual to accompany the shelf of paperbacks produced
              from MATC courses.
