Title       : Malpighian Tubule Transport Physiology: Mechanisms and Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9604394

Award Number: 9604394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus W. Beyenbach kwb1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604394  Beyenbach    The function of insect kidneys is remarkable in that urine
              is produced entirely by secretory mechanisms and not by filtration as in human
              kidneys.  Secretion is regulated by hormones such that the insect is neither
              under- nor over-hydrated.  One recently discovered hormone, Culex-diuretic
              peptide, protects the insect against over-hydration, particularly important for
              blood-feeding insects.  Taking a blood-meal, the mosquito takes on a payload
              more than twice its own body weight threatening flight with disastrous
              consequences were it not for extremely fast processing of the meal. 
              Astonishingly, much of the ingested blood is digested, absorbed and excreted
              from the kidney while the meal is still in progress with the effect of
              urinating on the host from mne end while sucking blood from the other end,
              adding insult to injury.  Doing so, the mosquito gets rid of the unwanted salt,
              water and weight of the blood meal and then flies away keeping sugars, fats,
              and proteins for its own use.  High rates of salt and water transport in the
              kidney apparently are triggered by the hormone Culex-diuretic peptide which
              stimulates transport through the cells of the kidney and, surprisingly, also
              between the cells of the kidney!  Transport between the cells of kidney and its
              regulation by a hormone is a new phenomenon in biology with potentially
              important lessons for our understanding of tranpsort functions in all
              epithelia, from kidney to intestine, stomach, pancreas, and secretory glands. 
              Potential biomedical and clinical applications of understanding the mechanism
              and regulation of epithelial transport between cells cannot be denied.
