Title       : Functional Analysis of Even-skipped Stripe 2 Enhancer Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9604477

Award Number: 9604477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Kreitman mkre@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kreitman  9604477  Technical section  The phenotypic consequences of
              evolutionary changes in the DNA sequence of a regulatory region controlling
              expression of the pair-rule gene even-skipped (eve) will be examined. Eve is
              expressed in early Drosophila embryos as a series of seven transverse stripes
              which demarcate the boundaries of future alternating segments in the fly. A 671
              bp enhancer element located approximately 1.1 kb upstream of the eve
              transcription start site regulates strip 2 expression (s2e). Four regulatory
              proteins, the activators bicoid (bcd) and hunchback(hb), and repressors giant
              (gt) and Kruppel (Kr), each bind at multiple sites within the enhancer and
              interact to determine the expression of eve stripe 2 in developing embryos.
              Through extensive site-directed mutagenesis of binding sites and P-mediated
              transformation, a comprehensive understanding of s2e structure and function has
              recently emerged. Recently discovered extensive DNA sequence variation in the
              s2e within and among Drosophila species allows an exploration of the functional
              evolution of this regulatory sequence. The phenotypic consequences of this
              sequence variation on the timing, spatial localization and intensity of stripe
              2 expression will be investigated. The working hypothesis to be tested is that
              individual evolutionary changes in binding sites (or in spacing) will have
              measurable effects on expression, but that combinations of such changes will
              have occurred to assure a near-wildtype pattern of expression in each species.
              Naturally occurring s2e sequences from several Drosophila species will each be
              linked to a reporter gene (lacZ) and inserted into the D. melanogaster genome.
              The expression pattern of the reporter gene in developing embryos will be
              precisely quantified both spatially and temporally relative to the native eve
              expression by doubly staining embryos for both reporter transcript and for eve
              protein. Chimerical s2e sequences will be constructed to evaluate phenotypic
              consequences of specific evolut ionary substitutions, both for the regulatory
              protein binding sites and for the spacing of the sites. More complex chimerical
              sequences will also be constructed and tested to evaluate the possibility of
              compensatory changes within a s2e.    Non-technical section  The functional
              consequences of regulatory sequence evolution in the even-skipped stripe 2
              enhancer of Drosophila will be investigated. The work will provide a foundation
              for understanding microevolutionary forces governing regulatory sequence
              evolution and the role natural selection plays in this process. The studies
              should illuminate basic molecular  mechanisms of gene regulation and also
              evolutionary mechanisms of regulatory sequence variation and change.
