Title       : RUI: Central Projections of the Octavolateralis System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a9604466

Award Number: 9604466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. McCormick Catherine.McCormick@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Catherine A. McCormick  IBN-9604466  Lay Summary    This project investigates
              the organization of the central nervous system auditory circuits in various
              species in order to determine if primitive features of the auditory system are
              present in land vertebrates. The nervous system circuits underlying hearing are
              known to have a superficial similarity in all vertebrates. The classes of
              vertebrates differ, however, in the specific portions of the inner ear that are
              responsive to sound and, at least in part, in the specific cell populations of
              the brain that participate in auditory processing. The experiments in this
              project utilize modern neuroanatomical methods to map the auditory circuits in
              various species and to determine how other brain areas interface with them. The
              specific connections of the primitive vertebrate auditory receptors, the
              saccule and lagena, are being compared with the connections of the more
              recently developed auditory receptor, the basilar papilla. The results will
              broaden the understanding of the neural systems responsible for hearing as well
              as provide insights into primitive characteristics of the auditory circuits in
              early vertebrates. These results will contribute to the understanding of the
              changes that occurred as the auditory circuits evolved n land vertebrates and
              may reveal that primitive circuits persist along with more recent ones. Should
              such primitive circuits exist, they may subsequently be found to have a unique
              role in the hearing of land vertebrates, including humans. Such information
              could inform new approaches to understanding hearing deficits. This project is
              being performed at an institution oriented toward undergraduate education.
              Undergraduates participate in these studies, leering all of the surgical,
              laboratory, and analytical skills involved. The active involvement of
              undergraduates in original research enhances their science training and
              encourages them to pursue postgraduate training in science or science education
              at precollege as well as colleg e levels.
