Title       : RUI: DNA-Protein Interactions Regulating Transcription of the Skeletal Muscle
               Actin Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1999   
File        : a9604289

Award Number: 9604289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra B. Sharp ssharp@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9604289  Sharp  Two families muscle-specific transcription factors - the
              myogenesis regulatory factor (MRF) family which is expressed only in skeletal
              muscle, and the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family which is expressed in
              all muscle types - are required for skeletal myogenesis in mammals, and have
              been shown to act synergistically.  Members of each family bind to specific DNA
              sequences in the promoter regions of muscle-specific genes and activate
              transcription.  This research will determine how these two families of
              transcription factors act synergistically to activate the transcription of the
              skeletal muscle (skm) actin gene.  Unlike other muscle-specific genes which
              demonstrate MRF/MEF2 synergism, the MRF and MEF2 binding sites of the skm actin
              gene are physically separated from each other on the DNA.  Co-transfection and
              mutagenic analysis will be performed using an skm actin gene
              promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene construct. 
              Co-transfection into non-muscle cells of this reporter gene with DNA constructs
              expressing specific MRF and/or MEF2 transcription factors will be used to
              evaluate the effect on transcription of particular combinations of MRF and MEF2
              proteins.  The role of specific DNA binding sites within the skm actin gene
              promoter will be determined using the same reporter gene in which specific MRF
              or MEF2 binding sites have been mutated.  The results of this research will
              provide the basis for future analysis of the promoter-specific and
              transactivator-specific regions of the MRF and MEF2 proteins, and should lead
              both to broader regulatory models that can be tested in the context of other
              promoters and to a better understanding of the process of myogenesis.    The
              process by which skeletal muscle precursor cells develop into skeletal muscle
              is regulated by an intricate interplay of molecular mechanisms.  One approach
              to understanding these mechanisms is to study the DNA-protein interactions
              which regulate the expression of muscle-specific genes during  development. 
              This research will determine how two families of muscle-specific proteins which
              are required for skeletal muscle development act synergistically to activate
              the expression of the skeletal muscle actin gene. The results of this research
              should lead both to broader regulatory models that can be tested in the context
              of other genes and to a better understanding of the process of skeletal muscle
              development.
