Title       : Specification of the Zebrafish Ventral Neural Tube
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9604844

Award Number: 9604844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marnie E. Halpern halpern@mail1.ciwemb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Halpern  IBN:  9604844    Correct development of the brain and spinal cord
              of the vertebrate central nervous system requires cellular interactions between
              cells of different types, and a cascade of signals.  One well-studied
              interaction occurs between the notochord, which is located in the mesodermal,
              or middle, layer of the early embryo, and the overlying cells of the outside,
              ectodermal layer, which are destined to become the nervous system.  Notochord
              produces a signaling protein called Sonic hedgehog that induces the formation
              of specialized floor plate cells in the neurectoderm.  Floor plate cells in
              turn have patterning functions mediated by Sonic hedgehog:  they induce motor
              neurons to differentiate and guide axons within the nervous system.  Recent
              studies in mutant zebrafish by the PI and her collaborators indicated that
              zebrafish mutants without notochords nevertheless develop a floor plate.  This
              suggested that floor plate may be specified earlier than previously thought,
              before notochord formation.  Two genes related to hedgehog are expressed before
              there are any obvious morphological differences between cells.  Surprisingly,
              however, the two genes are expressed in discrete cell layers, one that will
              give rise to notochord and an overlying layer that is hypothesized to give rise
              to floor plate.  The investigators will use cell lineage studies to test this
              hypothesis.  They will also use the technique of transplanting single cells
              between layers to determine how distinct hedgehog-expressing cell layers form,
              and whether cells in these layers are committed to forming either notochord or
              floor plate.  Further insight will be obtained through the analysis of
              mutations that perturb formation of the discrete hedgehog-expressing cell
              layers, and as a consequence, alter the channeling of cells into notochord or
              floor plate pathways of differentiation.  Results from this research will
              increase our understanding of how cells become properly specified in the early
              embryo, which has importa nt consequences for the later organization of the
              nervous system.
