Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Transfer of Energy from High-Frequency to
               Low-Frequency Modes in Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9604966

Award Number: 9604966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali H. Nayfeh anayfeh@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Ali
              Nayfeh, Professor of Engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University, Blacksburg, VA, and  Dr. Gunay Anlas, Assistant Professor of
              Mechanical Engineering at Bogazici University in Istanbul, Turkey.  The main
              objective of this research is to understand the effect of the lamination scheme
              on the behavior of laminated composite plates under dynamic loads, and the
              mechanism responsible for the transfer of energy from high-to-low frequency
              modes.  Different composite systems have laminates that are laid on top of each
              other with different, prescribed, orientation.  That difference in orientation
              alters the properties of the laminate.  Energy exchanges in
              multi-degree-of-freedom systems, from high-to-low frequency modes can be the
              result of combinations of internal resonances and the interaction between
              widely-spaced modes.  In this project both theoretical and experimental studies
              are planned.  Composite plates with various thickness and lay-ups will be built
              and tested at VPI&SU.  Theoretical studies of the systems will be carried out
              at Bogazici U. in Istanbul.  Exchanges of visits will enable the researchers to
              better correlate the experimental data to the understanding of the behavior of
              these materials.  Scope:  This project will involve an established scientist,
              with extensive experience in both analytical and experimental mechanics at
              VPI&SU, with a young Turkish scientist who has demonstrated analytical
              capability in the same field, and who is particularly familiar with the
              behavior of that class of materials, namely laminated composites.  The
              combination of facilities and graduate students at VPI&SU with the analytical
              skills of Dr. Anlas and the support of students and computing facilities at
              Bogazici University is particularly useful in accomplishing the stated
              objectives of this project.  The American scientist is currently conducting
              extensive research in this area under a grant from NSF's Division of Civil and
              Mechanical Systems (CMS), and this international component should enhance the
              benefit to the US team as well as to the Turkish side.  The use of composite
              materials is growing rapidly in many industries, including the aerospace
              industry and other, less exotic, industries.  The results of this research
              should help designers select composites that will meet the required criteria
              for strengths and fatigue resistance.  Graduate students from the US and from
              Turkey are expected to participate in the project.  The project fits well with
              the objectives of the Division of International Programs.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
