Title       : Regulation of Middle Transcription of Phage Mu
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9604653

Award Number: 9604653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha M. Howe mhowe@utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      62 S. Dunlap
	      Memphis, TN  38163    901/448-5541

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604653  Howe   This investigator's model system for regulation of gene
              expression is the middle promoter Pm of the Mu virus which infects Escherichia
              coil K12.  The middle transcript is made by the host RNA polymerase, but only
              in the presence of the Mu activator protein Mor and DNA replication.  Studies
              during the previous grant period revealed that Mor activates Pm by binding as a
              dimer upstream of and overlapping the -35 region, interacting with both the
              alpha and sigma subunits of RNA polymerase, and thereby generating a DNA
              distortion which facilities open complex formation and transcription
              initiation.  In the absence of DNA replication, Mor does not bind and open
              complexes do not form.  The current project includes experiments (i) to define
              at a molecular level the specific roles of the sigma and alpha subunits of RNA
              polymerase, by using footprinting and in vitro transcription assays with
              wild-type and mutant forms of Pm, alpha, and sigma; (ii) to identify the amino
              acids in Mor which are required for Pm binding and interaction with alpha and
              sigma, by assaying the effect of targeted alanine substitutions in Mor on these
              processes; (iii) to determine the origin and role of the DNA distortion by
              mutational analysis of nearby sequences and identification and characterization
              of host proteins which may participate in distortion formation; and (iv) to
              determine whether there is a host "repressor" protein which binds to
              non-replicating Pm DNA, thereby preventing Mor binding, by identification of
              Pm-binding proteins and characterization of Pm and host mutations conferring
              replication independence.     This research will define the molecular mechanism
              by which the Mu middle genes are regulated---that is, how they are kept silent
              prior to the time in development when they are needed and how they are turned
              on at the appropriate time.  Not only will these results provide an
              understanding of these novel mechanisms for turning genes on and off, but those
              mechanisms can serve as models for studying  and understanding the regulatory
              mechanisms occurring at other important viral, bacterial, animal cell and human
              genes.  Since much of any organism's ability to maintain an appropriate
              internal milieu, respond to environment stimuli, and carry out the programmed
              changes we call  development depend on its ability to regulate expression of
              specific genes, this research is of great importance.  In addition the
              experiments will serve as an excellent, state-of-the-art, training experience
              in genetics, biochemistry, and molecular biology for the graduate students who
              participate in them.
