Title       : US-Japan Center-to-Center Cooperative Research on Advanced Technologies for
               Earthquake Disaster Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9604614

Award Number: 9604614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masanobu Shinozuka   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9604614  Shinozuka    This is a three-year continuing award supporting a 
              collaboration between engineering research centers in the  United States and
              Japan.  The U.S. principal investigator is  Professor M. Shinozuka, Chairman of
              the Southern California  Earthquake Center's (SCEC) Standing Committee on
              Advanced  Technologies for Earthquake Disaster Mitigation.  This  Center is
              located at the University of Southern California.  The Japanese collaborator is
              Professor K. Irikura who is  located at Kyoto University's Disaster Prevention
              Research  Institute (DPRI). The project is jointly funded by the Japan  Program
              of the Division of International Programs and the  Earthquake Hazard Mitigation
              Program, Division of Civil and  Mechanical Structures, Directorate for
              Engineering.  The  grant aims at developing new strategies for earthquake 
              disaster prevention and mitigation based on experiences  gained during the Kobe
              and Northridge earthquakes.  Research  will involve utilizing advanced and
              emerging technologies  including smart materials, micro-sensors, precision 
              actuators, micro-computers, GPS, wireless and telemetric  communication and
              advanced robotics technology.  The  objectives of the project are: 1) to
              establish a university-  based US-Japan center-to-center research entity that
              will  identify, develop, and promote advanced technologies for  earthquake
              disaster mitigation; 2) to develop a computer-  aided support system that
              provides prompt and effective  emergency response and crisis management
              decisions based on  the rapid assessment of many factors for coordination uses 
              by national, regional and local governments; 3) to develop a  prototype
              integrated real-time monitoring system to detect  post-earthquake fire, damage,
              and malfunction; and 4) to  develop prototype intelligent robots to be used for
              search  and rescue, fire-fighting, and emergency demolition and  repair.    The
              Principal Investigators will be supported by an  Executive Committee consisting
              of eight researchers, four  from  each country, with responsibility for major
              research  management, policy, and strategy development and a Technical 
              Committee consisting of twenty experts on various fields,  ten from each
              country, with responsibility for advice on  technical issues.  Three workshops
              will be held, one a year,  to disseminate research results and accelerate the 
              development and utilization of the advanced technologies in  both countries and
              then throughout the world.  This award  supports research visits within Japan
              by U.S. senior  investigators, postdoctoral researchers and graduate  students.
