Title       : Pollen-pistil Interactions in the Genus Nicotiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9604645

Award Number: 9604645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. McClure mcclureb@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        McClure  9604645    Pollen-pistil interactions provide an important
              avenue for controlling plant reproduction. The factors controlling
              intraspecific and interspecific pollen recognition in the genus Nicotiana
              provide an excellent system for exploring these interactions. A great deal is
              known about S-RNase mediated intraspecific pollen recognition in
              self-incompatible Nicotiana alata. Furthermore, the interspecific crossing
              relationships between N. alata and its self-compatible relatives have been well
              described. Both types of pollen recognition clearly entail interactions between
              the pollen and the pistil. This research project uses biochemical and molecular
              biological tools to understand the molecular details of these interactions. In
              the previous funding period, cloned S-RNase genes from N. alata were expressed
              in transgenic plants to examine their role in controlling pollination. The key
              results were: 1) that S-RNases control the specificity of intraspecific
              pollination, 2) that recognition information is diffusely encoded in the
              S-RNase molecule, 3) that at least three genetically distinct mechanisms
              contribute to controlling interspecific pollination between N. alata and its
              self-compatible relatives, and 4) that S-RNase was implicated in interspecific
              pollen recognition and rejection. These results are important because they
              imply that S-RNase helps to define a window of genetic relatedness for
              compatible pollination. It has a role in rejecting self-pollen, and thus
              prevents inbreeding. It also has a role in rejecting interspecific pollen, and
              so acts to prevent very wide crosses. The major goals in this new proposal are:
              1) to identify and characterize non-SRNase factors that contribute to pollen
              recognition, and 2) to examine the specificity of RNase dependent interspecific
              pollen rejection. One putative factor has already been identified by
              differential cDNA cloning. This new sequence will be characterized using
              immunological and transgenic plant methods. The cDNA cloning appr oach will be
              extended to identify further non-S-RNase factors related to pollen recognition.
              The specificity of interspecific pollen recognition will be addressed by
              comparing the pollination behavior of transgenic plants expressing a bacterial
              RNase with plants expressing S-RNase or recognition defective S-RNase. By
              understanding the natural mechanisms that control intraspecific and
              interspecific pollen recognition in the genus Nicotiana, these studies may
              contribute to efforts to artificially manipulate the breeding behavior of
              economically important plants.
