Title       : Mechanism of Lmx-1 Dorsalization of the Vertebrate Limb
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9604358

Award Number: 9604358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Riddle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Riddle  9604358    Until recently, little was known about the molecular basis of
              dorsoventral (D/V) patterning in the vertebrate limb. The transcription factor
              Lmx-1 is expressed in the dorsal half of the vertebrate limb bud, and its
              expression confers dorsal pattern to tendons and muscles. As such, it offers a
              powerful tool to study this limb patterning. Lmx-l's ability to direct pattern
              formation is linked to its ability to regulate transcription: it contains zinc
              finger domains (called LIM domains) which are believed to facilitate
              protein-protein interactions, and a homeodomain (HD) which binds to specific
              DNA targets. As a first step in understanding how dorsal pattern formation is
              established, Dr. Riddle plans to identify the domains in the protein which are
              necessary for Lmx-1 activity. To accomplish this, he will generate mutant
              proteins lacking the HD domain, the LIM domains, or the carboxy teminus (a
              putative activation domain), and then misexpress them in the developing chick
              limb using a replication competent retroviral vector. The activity of these
              mutant proteins will be assayed in three ways: 1) their ability to dorsalize
              ventral cells (the normal ectopic Lmx-1 phenotype), 2) their ability to
              interfere with normal dorsal patterning (a dominant negative effect), and 3)
              their ability to form ectopic digits (also a normal ectopic Lmx-1 phenotype). 
              He will also determine which domains are sufficient for Lmx-1 function by
              generating chimeras with other LIM HD proteins and misexpressing them in the
              developing limb. Chimeras containing Lmx-1 DNA-binding domains will be used to
              determine whether proper DNA-binding is sufficient to activate Lmx-1 targets.
              Chimeras with Lmx-l LIM domains will be tested to determine whether the LIM
              domains are sufficient to confer Lmx-l-like patterning to another LIM HD
              protein.  While Lmx- 1 can confer a dramatic phenotype, the factors which it
              regulates are unknown. Therefore, a cDNA difference analysis protocol will be
              used to identify genes which are tar gets of Lmx-1 activity. cDNAs will be
              formed from mRNA isolated from Lmx-1- and mock-infected ventral limb buds and
              used in a PCR based-subtractive hybridization protocol. Potential downstream
              targets will be sequenced and their expression patterns defined as a first step
              in their characterization. Interesting cDNAs will be misexpressed in the limb
              to directly define their role in limb formation.  Finally, time permitting, Dr.
              Riddle will use the yeast two-hybrid system as a means of identifying cDNAs
              which encode potential Lmx-1 interactors. Wild-type Lmx- 1 as well as mutated
              forrns of Lmx-1 will be used as "baits" to identify factors which bind to the
              protein. All potential interactors will be tested for their ability to bind
              Lmx-1 specifically. The expression pattern and nucleotide sequence of these
              interactors will be determined as a first step in their characterization. The
              interactor will be misexpressed in ovo to define their affect on limb
              morphogenesis, These experiments will allow Dr. Riddle to further develop a
              model for understanding the molecular basis of D/V patterning in the vertebrate
              limb.
