Title       : Metabolic Regulation and Organelle Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9604225

Award Number: 9604225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. McCammon mccammon@biomed.uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604225  McCammon  The assembly of a functional mitochondrion requires
              coordinated input from both the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Of these
              systems, the nuclear genome controls mitochondrial structure and replication,
              and it contributes over ninety percent of the organellar proteins. It is
              therefore essential to understand the processes whereby nuclear-encoded
              proteins are synthesized in the cytosol, targeted to mitochondria, translocated
              across the membranes, and assembled into functional oligomeric complexes. These
              processes are best understood in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is
              the model of choice for the study of mitochondrial biogenesis. This project
              focuses on the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzyme, NAD+-dependent isocitrate
              dehydrogenase (NAD-IDH). NAD-IDH has several special features that reveal
              unique functions for this protein beyond its catalytic role in the TCA cycle.
              First, NAD - IDH binds to mitochondrially-encoded mRNAs in vitro and appears to
              regulate mitochondrial protein translation. Second, the loss of NAD-IDH can be
              partially overcome by genetic defects in TCA cycle and other oxidative
              functions. Finally, distinct alterations in TCA cycle proteins are observed in
              mutants lacking NAD-IDH, suggesting a role for this enzyme in regulating TCA
              cycle function or organization. This project will test the hypothesis that
              NAD-IDH plays a unique role in regulating TCA cycle function and assembly and
              that NAD-IDH exerts these extra-catalytic functions through physical
              interactions with other components of the TCA cycle metabolic complex. The
              experimental system will utilize yeast strains with defined alterations in TCA
              cycle genes to study the extra-catalytic functions of NAD-IDH. Modulation of
              NAD-IDH function, assembly and localization will be used to assay several
              critical features of TCA cycle function, such as gene expression, protein
              stability, and organization within the mitochondrion.    One of the main
              functions of mitochondria is to provide chemical energ y for the rest of the
              cell. The TCA cycle, which is a complex of eight interdependent enzymes, plays
              an essential role in this process. It is therefore important to understand how
              the TCA cycle functions and how it is regulated.  Because of insights gained
              through yeast genetic manipulations, it has been proposed that one of these
              enzymes, isocitrate dehydrogenase, plays a unique role in regulating the
              function, assembly and organization of the TCA cycle.  This project will
              utilize several approaches to define these new roles for isocitrate
              dehydrogenase within mitochondria.  These studies will yield new insight into
              how enzyme complexes are organized and how they function in living cells.
