Title       : Functional Analysis of Miniparamyosin in vivo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9604546

Award Number: 9604546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanford I. Bernstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604546  Bernstein     The goal of this project is to determine the function of 
              miniparamyosin, a thick filament protein that is likely to  be important in
              myofibril assembly and muscle contraction.  This protein was discovered a few
              years ago in Dr.  Bernstein's laboratory.  The N-terminal quarter of this 
              protein is unique, while the remainder is identical to the C-  terminal half of
              the  thick filament core protein  paramyosin.  From the work of others,
              miniparamyosin is now  known to be a component of many invertebrate muscles,
              and  its presence in a number of phyla suggests that it serves an  important
              role in myofibril assembly and/or function.  In  situ hybridization studies
              showed that miniparamyosin mRNA  is expressed in only a subset of adult
              Drosophila muscle  cell types.  Antibody studies from other laboratories have 
              shown that miniparamyosin is a component of the thick  filament and that it has
              a different localization pattern in  indirect flight muscles and tubular
              muscles of the adult.  The overall aim of this project is to directly test the
              role  of miniparamyosin in muscle structure and function and its  interplay
              with other elements of the thick filament in vivo.  The project will employ
              transgenic, ultrastructural, and  physiological approaches designed to directly
              test the  function of this protein in vivo in Drosophila melanogaster.  The
              specific objectives for the grant period are as follows:  1, to isolate and/or
              construct Drosophila strains which are  mutant for miniparamyosin and analyze
              their genetic,  ultrastructural and physiological defects; 2, produce 
              transgenic flies that express greatly increased levels of  miniparamyosin in
              their indirect flight muscles.  By  analyzing the ultrastructure of such
              muscles, it will be  determined whether thick filament length, diameter or 
              electron density are affected as a result of changing the  ratio of this
              protein to that of myosin heavy chain and  paramyosin.  Antibodies against
              miniparamyosin will be used  to define whethe r over-expression results in
              protein  relocalization within the thick filament.  It will also be  determined
              how over-expression of miniparamyosin in flight  muscles affects the
              biophysical properties of these muscles;  3, determine whether the amount of
              paramyosin influences the  accumulation and localization of miniparamyosin
              within thick  filaments.  This will be accomplished by over-expression of 
              paramyosin in the indirect flight muscles in lines producing  normal and
              elevated levels of miniparamyosin.  This goal is  based on observations that
              the amount of paramyosin  correlates with the level and pattern of
              miniparamyosin  accumulation.    The subcellular machinery of muscle cells that
              allows them  to carry out their contractile function consists of two sets  of
              complex filaments, termed thick and thin filaments, which  are arranged in
              parallel arrays within a larger structure  termed the myofibril.  In fully
              "relaxed" muscles, these  parallel arrays only partially overlap each other 
              Contraction occurs when the thick and thin filaments slide  over each other in
              a coordinated manner to increase the  extent of overlap, thereby shortening the
              myofibrils (and  thus shortening the cell), a process which requires 
              hydrolysis of ATP.  The "motor" which transduces the energy  of hydrolysis of
              ATP into movement is myosin, the major  component of the thick filaments.  In
              order to fully  understand how muscle cells function, it is necessary to 
              understand the fine molecular structure of the myofibril.  Recently, a new
              protein, termed miniparamyosin, has been  discovered as a component of thick
              filaments in a model  invertebrate, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.  
              This  project will explore the role that this newly-discovered  thick filament
              protein plays in the assembly and function of  myofibrils, and will undoubtedly
              lead to new insights into  those processes.  ***
