Title       : Integrated Muscle-system Design for Maximal Flux and Minimal Cost
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9604698

Award Number: 9604698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Conley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed experiments evaluate the mechanisms governing the balance of energy
              supply to the high demands of tailshaking by the rattlesnake.  Rattling is a
              model system for the coordination of this energy balance over a range of body
              temperatures during sustained muscle performance.  The working hypothesis is
              that O2 balance is sustained during rattling independent of temperature because
              of two distinct design properties.  First, high frequency rattling can be
              sustained because the per twitch cost is minimized.  This minimal cost per
              twitch results from tailshaker muscle being a "high frequency - low force"
              muscle which operates close to the contractile limit of striated muscle. 
              Second, sustained energy supply is maximized by coordinating cardiovascular and
              muscle O2 delivery at the maximal sustainable level to meet the demands of
              high-frequency sound production.  The specific objectives are to determine
              whether:  during rattling:  1) muscle force production is minimized, 2)
              cross-bridge cycling costs are minimized, 3) similar temperature effects (Q10)
              result in coordination of O2 supply and oxygen consumption, and 4) heart and
              tailshaker are operating at maximal sustained performance.    The rattlesnake
              tailshaker system has several unique attributes that make it a model system for
              muscle energetic studies.  The homogeneity of tailshaker muscle, the ability to
              sustain rattling for prolonged periods and the high oxygen consumption evoke
              from the snake make the tailshaker system ideal for discerning the design
              principles underlying muscle metabolism and energetics.
