Title       : Functional Analysis of the Eukaryotic Signal Peptidase Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9604669

Award Number: 9604669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $586735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Green Neil.Green@Mcmail.Vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Fang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604669  Green    Technical abstract:  Signal peptidase complex (SPC) from the
              endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multisubunit enzyme functioning in the cleavage
              of N-terminal signal peptides and the degradation of some abnormal membrane
              proteins.  As the bacterial counterpart to the SPC, leader peptidase, is a
              monomeric enzyme, the specific SPC subunits may have individual roles.  To
              identify these roles, the PI and co-PI, Drs. Green and Fang, will test existing
              models and a new hypothesis for the presence of a multisubunit signal
              peptidase.  They have cloned the genes encoding three subunits of the yeast SPC
              and have analyzed these subunits functionally, and they have evidence that two
              homologous subunits of the mammalian SPC are functionally distinct.  The
              following three objectives are proposed for the next five years of study:  1. 
              Genetically and biochemically examine the function of each subunit of the yeast
              SPC.  The SPC of yeast is comprised of at least four subunits.  The gene
              encoding one of these, Sec11p, has been cloned and sequenced.  Recently, the
              genes encoding the other three subunits have been identified.  Specific
              mutations will be constructed, and cell growth, signal peptidase activity, and
              protein degradation will be examined in mutant cells.  The analysis of
              mutations in these genes will help to test two existing models:  (i) that one
              or more subunits may be important for protein translocation across the ER
              membrane, and (ii) that different subunits may be required to cleave signal
              peptides from non-overlapping sets of precursors.  The hypothesis that two
              subunits of ER signal peptidase perform the role played by leader peptidase
              will also be tested.  2. Use newly constructed yeast mutants to examine the
              function of mammalian SPC subunits.  The canine SPC contains five subunits, two
              of which are homologous to Sec11p.  Methods will be developed to express genes
              encodes these proteins in yeast, in order to determine whether the canine
              proteins function in the heterologous system , and whether one, or both, of the
              Sec11p homologues functionally replaces Sec11p in yeast.  They will also
              determine whether the two mammalian Sec11p homologues are functionally
              equivalent, and whether yeast cells containing mammalian subunits of signal
              peptidase are better hosts for the expression and secretion of mammalian
              proteins than currently available systems.  3. Functionally characterize new
              suppressors of conditional defects in the yeast SPC.  Five distinct multicopy
              suppressors of a sec11 mutant have been identified, including SPC1 encoding the
              smallest subunit of the SPC and SPC3 which encodes the largest subunit of the
              SPC.  Other suppressors do not appear to encode characterized subunits.  One of
              these suppressors encodes a 13 kD membrane protein with a similar membrane
              topology as Spc1.  They will determine whether these suppressors are important
              for signal peptidase activity, and whether they physically and genetically
              interact with the SPC.  Recently, a spc3-ts mutant was constructed by in vitro
              random mutagenesis.  New suppressors of this conditional mutant will be
              isolated.  The goal of this objective is to identify new proteins interacting
              with or functionally equivalent to subunits of the SPC.    Lay language
              abstract:  The signal peptidase complex (SPC) is a very important piece of the
              cellular secretion machinery.  Proteins destined for secretion carry a "signal
              peptide" at their amino terminus, which is unrelated to the protein's ultimate
              function but which contains the targeting information for insertion of that
              amino terminus of the nascent protein through the membrane of the endoplasmic
              reticulum.  This insertion is the key first step in the secretion pathway. 
              After this insertion, as the protein continues to be synthesized, it continues
              to be threaded at the insertion site and thereby is translocated from the
              cytoplasmic side of the membrane (where it is being synthesized) to the
              interior, or lumenal, side, where further processing steps necessary for its
              secretion  subsequently take place.  The SPC is on the lumenal side of the ER
              membrane, and its role is to remove the signal sequence once it is inside the
              ER.  Drs. Green and Fang have identified the genes encoding the polypeptide
              subunits that comprise the SPC in yeast, and have begun to define the function
              of each subunit.  The proposed work will greatly expand our understanding of
              how the SPC functions in yeast and other cells.  One of the potential benefits
              of the results might be the development, by genetic engineering, of improved
              strains of yeast that are more efficient at overproducing and secreting
              mammalian proteins of commercial interest.  ***
