Title       : Androgen Receptors and Hippocampal Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9604723

Award Number: 9604723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Annabell Segarra                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Handa   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl G. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9604723  Handa         The hippocampus is a forebrain structure of the  temporal
              lobe, constituting an important part of the limbic  system and of the Papez's
              circuit.  Its general anatomy and  connections to other regions of the brain
              are well defined.  Functions that depend upon the hippocampus are recognition 
              of novelty, learning and memory.  Indeed it is believed that  this brain region
              serves as a spatial map that helps us  remember where we have been.   Recently,
              it has been shown  that the hippocampus contains a high concentration of 
              androgen receptors suggesting that testosterone may  influence this region of
              the brain.    Moreover, sex  differences in cognitive functions have been
              reported.  Despite recent data demonstrating that the hippocampus is a  major
              target for androgen and there are male-female  differences in spatial memory
              and in learning, few studies  have examined the neural mechanisms by which
              androgen can  alter hippocampal function or hippocampal cell parameters. 
              Recently, Dr. Handa showed that androgens influence  hippocampal function by
              altering the n-methyl-d-aspartate  (NMDA) receptors, which are important for
              glutamate  neurotransmission and the underlying sensitivity to  neurotoxic
              insults such as anoxia and chronic stress.  He  will now combine his expertise
              in molecular and cellular  neuroendocrinology with Dr. Beck's talents in 
              neurophysiology to carry out an integrative series of  studies to examine the
              effects of androgen on hippocampal  synaptic plasticity. They will examine the
              effects of  androgen on hippocampal cell morphology, NMDA receptor  composition
              and function, and enzyme activity.  The results  from these studies will
              provide new knowledge on the role  that steroid hormones play in modulating a
              brain region that  occupies a central role in regulating multiple non- 
              reproductive behaviors.
