Title       : Signal Integration in Individual Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9604356

Award Number: 9604356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dejan Zecevic zec@biomed.med.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Understanding  the biophysical properties of single  neurons  and   how   they 
              process  information  is  fundamental   to  understanding  how  the  brain
              works.  Previous  studies  of  signaling  in  neuronal processes were limited
              to  electrode  recordings from a single site and to high-resolution imaging 
              experiments  using  intracellular  ion-indicators.  However,  regional   
              electrical    properties    of    neurons    are  extraordinarily complex and
              impossible to understand in  the  absence of detailed, spatially well resolved
              measurements of  electrical  signals. Recent developments in this  laboratory 
              now  permit monitoring membrane potential transients at many  sites   by   an 
              optical  imaging  technique  that   employs  intracellular voltage-sensitive
              dyes.     The long-term goal  is  to  use the information about individual
              nerve cells  as  the  basis for understanding of the fundamental question  of 
              how  networks of  interconnected neurons operate to  control  behavior.  The 
              main  objective  of  this  proposal  is   to  investigate by direct measurement
              how one particular  neuron  is   functionally   organized  and  to  build   a  
              complete  biophysical compartmental model.  The model would  represent  a  full
               description of the computational  properties  of  a  nerve cell. For instance,
              the obtained information  will  be  used  to  test  directly  the   hypothesis 
              that  individual  neurons  can  be functionally subdivided, with some  of  the 
              processes   functioning as independent units. If true,  this  postulate   would
               have  important  implications   for   the  functional complexity of individual
              neurons.      Individual  nerve   cells  will  be  selectively  stained  in 
              situ   by  intracellular application of  a membrane impermeant  voltage- 
              sensitive  fluorescent dye. Propagation of and  interactions  between 
              electrical signals evoked by stimulating  the  cell  will be  analyzed by
              optically monitoring voltage transients  at  multiple  sites  in  the soma  and
               neuro nal  processes.  Standard  electrophysiological techniques for recording
               and  stimulation  and  advanced modeling software  will  also  be  used.  One
              exemplar neuron, the giant metacerebral  cell  of  the  land snail Helix, will
              be characterized in detail.  The  complete description will include: (1)
              determination of  the  number,  size,  and  position of spike  trigger  zones; 
              (2)  determination  of  the propagation properties  of  different  axonal  
              branches;   (3)  determination   of   the   spatial  distribution  of  synaptic
               inputs;  (4)   determination  of  spatial  and electrical distances between
              trigger zones  and  functionally  important  parts  of  the  neuron  (sites  
              of  synaptic  contacts and axonal branch  points).  The  results  of  this 
              analysis  will bear on the basic  neuroscience  of  signaling.
