Title       : Studies of Elongation Arrest and Transcript Hydrolysis by RNA Polymerase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1998  
File        : a9604016

Award Number: 9604016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane K. Hawley dhawley@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604016  Hawley  In recent years it has become increasingly clear that
              eukaryotic transcription is regulated not only before synthesis of the
              transcript is initiated, but also at the level of elongation of the RNA chains.
               Little is know about how this regulation is implemented or about the structure
              and function of RNA polymerase when it is in the process of elongating along
              the DNA template.  This research is a biochemical analysis of the proteins and
              nucleic acid sequences that determine the transcription elongation behavior of
              human RNA polymerase II in vitro.  Two proteins that alter the elongation
              properties of RNA polymerase II will be studied: TFIIF which increases the rate
              of elongation and SII which enables RNA polymerase II to read through DNA
              arrest sites that would otherwise block it progression.  The structure and
              function of arrested and productive elongation complexes will be investigated
              with the goal of obtaining mechanistic information about how arrest occurs at
              arrest sites (which share some features with better understood termination
              sites), and how TFIIF and SII interact with those complexes to prevent or
              relieve elongation arrest.  Transcription complexes will be isolated and
              studied in vitro by attaching a DNA template consisting of a promoter and the
              adenovirus major late arrest site to agarose beads and assembling initiation,
              elongation or arrested complexes in an extract of nuclear proteins from human
              cultured cells.  Such complexes were used previously to show that the base
              pairing of an oligonucleotide to the RNA in transcription complex has a
              profound effect on the behavior of the complex depending on where the
              base-pairing occurs.  This work led to the hypothesis that arrest results in a
              region of the nascent RNA being pulled back into the polymerase, and will be
              further examined by analyzing the relationship between oligonucleotide
              hybridization position and the conformation of the RNA polymerase at the arrest
              site.   Other experiments will map the upstream and do wnstream boundaries of
              the polymerase on the DNA template in arrested and productive elongation
              complexes, and will investigate the contribution of the surrounding DNA
              sequence and the mechanism of TFIIF stimulation by measuring the rate of single
              nucleotide incorporation into the RNA chain at defined positions on the DNA
              template.  This research will provide a detailed view of the structure of RNA
              polymerase II elongation complexes and will suggest possible mechanisms by
              which these complexes can be regulated.    In recent years it has become
              increasingly clear that eukaryotic transcription is regulated not only before
              synthesis of the transcript is initiated, but also at the level of elongation
              of the RNA chains.  Little is known about how this regulation is implemented or
              about the structure and function of RNA polymerase when it is in the process of
              elongating along the DNA template.  This research is a biochemical analysis of
              the proteins and nucleic acid sequences that determine the transcription
              elongation behavior of human RNA polymerase II. This research will provide a
              detailed view of the structure of RNA polymerase II elongation complexes and
              will suggest possible mechanisms by which these complexes can be regulated.
