Title       : Role of DNA Topology and Chromatin Structure in Phaseolin Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9604617

Award Number: 9604617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Sinden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604617  Hall  Phaseolin, the major seed protein of the bean Phaseolus vulgaris,
              is highly expressed and accumulated during embryogenesis but is absent from
              vegetative tissues of bean plants.  A similar pattern of gene expression is
              observed in stable transformants of tobacco with the beta-phaseolin (phas)
              gene.  As for many plant genes, cis-elements essential for spatial regulation
              of the phas gene promoter lie close to the transcription start site.  Although
              many DNA sequence motifs known to interact with transcription factors are
              present in this promoter region, none of these transactivators has yet been
              shown to be tissue specific.  Indeed, the substantial activity seen in
              transient assays of phas/gus constructs introduced into leaf cells by
              bombardment or electroporation indicates that nuclear factors present in
              vegetative tissues can interact productively with phas promoter elements.  In
              contrast, stable transformed plants using identical constructs show no
              expression in vegetative tissues or in calli from such plants even when treated
              with a range of growth regulators.  As for several animal and yeast genes,
              these observations suggest the integration into plant chromatin plays a role in
              regulating phas gene expression.  This research will use tobacco transformed
              with a single copy of the phas gene to evaluate the role of chromatin in phas
              gene expression.  Cis-elements that regulate the phas promoter in vivo will be
              identified by footprinting methods that compare the interaction of cis-elements
              with cellular factors in vegetative (leaf) and seed tissues.  Mapping of
              nucleosome position in leaves and seeds will determine if nucleosomes are
              positioned over specific regions of the phas promoter, which could prevent
              access by transacting factors resulting in the inactivity seen in vegetative
              tissues. The goals of this research are generally to understand the cellular
              mechanisms that confer stringent developmental and spatial regulation on the
              phas gene promoter, and specifically to determine  how that promoter is
              converted from a totally inactive state in vegetative tissues to a highly
              active state during embryogenesis.    Phaseolin, the major seed protein of the
              bean Phaseolus vulgaris, is highly expressed and accumulated during
              embryogenesis but is absent from vegetative tissues of bean plants. The goals
              of this research are generally to understand the cellular mechanisms that
              confer stringent developmental and spatial regulation on the gene encoding
              phaseolin, and specifically to determine how that gene is converted from a
              totally inactive state in vegetative tissues to a highly active state during
              embryogenesis.
