Title       : Mechanism of Conjugation in Streptomyces lividans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9604879

Award Number: 9604879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg S. Pettis gpettis@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pettis  9604879  During their complex life cycle, bacteria of the Gram-positive
              genus, Streptomyces, are capable of the highly efficient transfer of both
              plasmid and chromosomal genes.  Conjugation in Streptomyces appears to be
              unique among microbes in that Streptomyces plasmids encode remarkably little
              transfer-related genetic information, a characteristic that further implies
              that host functions also play critical roles in the conjugation process.  The
              overall goal of this project is to define the potentially novel interactions
              that direct conjugation in Streptomyces using the S. lividans plasmid pIJ101 as
              part of the model system.  Transfer of pIJ101 requires the plasmid-encoded Tra
              protein and an additional plasmid locus, clt, which acts in cis by an
              undetermined mechanism to promote efficient plasmid transfer.  In contrast to
              its role in plasmid transfer, however, clt was found to be dispensible for
              tra-mediated mobilization of chromosomal genes, a result which implies that 
              the Streptomyces chromosome may encode its own clt-like locus (or loci) that is
              required for host gene transfer.  Interestingly, clt is also required in cis
              for expression of the plasmid-encoded Tra protein.  To further elucidate the
              molecular events during conjugation in Streptomyces, the specific objectives of
              this project are:  (1) To isolate transfer-related protein-DNA complexes
              involving clt+ plasmids formed in vivo and then examine these complexes for
              induction (by ethidium bromide treatment) of conjugation-associated DNA
              nicking, as well as characterize the proteins involved by SDS-PAGE and Western
              blotting; as an alternative approach, the pIJ101 Tra protein will be purified
              and tested in vitro for a variety of possible DNA processing functions
              including qpecific nicking of clt+ plasmids, helicase activity and specific
              binding to clt+ DNA; (2) to clone from the Streptomyces chromosome the putative
              functional equivalent of the pIJ101 clt locus based on the ability of such a
              locus (or loci) either to restore in ci s expression of the plasmid-encoded Tra
              protein (thereby producing a transfer-competent plasmid derivative), or to
              hybridize specifically to pIJ101 clt sequences.      This research will provide
              important insights about a potentially novel form of communication that certain
              bacteria use to transfer genetic information from one cell to another.  The
              ability of bacteria to transfer genes between cells ultimately promotes the
              survival of their populations under often hostile environmental conditions.
