Title       : Studies on GABA-rho Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1998  
File        : a9604499

Award Number: 9604499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Parker IPARKER@UCI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo Miledi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604499  Miledi    Understanding how the brain works is, undoubtedly, one of 
              the major scientific challenges of this century.  This task  is daunting not
              only by the sheer number of nerve cells that  compose the nervous system, but
              also by the complexity of  their interactions.  Such interactions are
              fundamental to  all functions of the brain.  Therefore, it is imperative to 
              understand fully how nerve cells communicate with one  another in order to
              comprehend how the brain functions.  Nerve cells (also called neurons)
              communicate by sending  chemical signals termed neurotransmitters.  The
              "sending"  cell releases neurotransmitter molecules, which act upon 
              neighboring "receiving" cells.  There, neurotransmitters  bind to specialized
              proteins called receptors.  Neurotransmitters and receptors act much like a key
              and a  lock: if there is a match, the receptors are activated, and  the neuron
              is excited or inhibited.  Neurons possess various  types of receptors, each
              specific for a given  neurotransmitter.  The major type of inhibitory receptor
              in  the brain is called GABAa, because these receptors recognize  the
              neurotransmitter GABA.  GABAa receptors are the target  for a great variety of
              pharmaceutical drugs, including  benzodiazepines and barbiturates.    Recently,
              a new type of GABA receptor was discovered in the  eye (which is an extension
              of the brain).  This new type of  receptors, called GABAc, features properties
              that make it  very distinct from the two other types of GABA receptors  that
              were known.  Although GABAc receptors recognize GABA,  they are not affected by
              benzodiazepines or barbiturates,  unlike GABAc receptors.  The aim of this
              project is to  understand how the GABAc receptor works, by studying how its 
              molecular structure influences its properties.  This project  will eventually
              lead to a better understanding of the role  of this receptor in the eye and in
              the brain.  In addition,  this knowledge could prove very useful to rationally
              design  new medicinal drugs that target  specifically given types of  GABA
              receptors.
