Title       : RUI: Nitric Oxide Inhibition of Molluscan Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9604516

Award Number: 9604516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther M. Leise Esther_Leise@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  IBN 9604516   LEISE   Neurotransmitters are typically small molecules
              that are released by an activated nerve cell, allowing it to communicate with
              other neurons.  Most neurotransmitters are stored within vesicles and released
              for short periods of time when a neuron is electrically excited.  Upon release,
              these molecules diffuse across a narrow synaptic cleft and interact with
              surface receptors on their target cells.  In the last 15 years, a new class of
              neurotransmitters has been identified that acts in a different fashion.  These
              gaseous neurotransmitters, including nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, are made
              enzymatically upon demand, and can diffuse through cells and tissues to
              interact with intracellular biochemical pathways.  Of these two gases, more is
              known about the functions of nitric oxide and how it acts in adult nervous
              systems.  For example, nitric oxide plays roles in systems as diverse as
              behavioral aggression, learning and memory, and the mediation of olfactory
              responses.  The functions of this molecule in developing nervous systems are,
              however, still being elucidated.  Preliminary data from Dr. Leise's research
              have indicated that nitric oxide may act within developing nervous systems as a
              natural inhibitor of metamorphosis.  Upon release, nitric oxide typically
              interacts with the enzyme guanylyl cyclase to enhance production of the
              intracellular messenger molecule cGMP, which in turn can affect a broad range
              of cellular biochemistry.  To determine if the typical nitric oxide-guanylyl
              cyclase pathway is part of the cellular systems that control metamorphosis, Dr.
              Leise and her coworkers will conduct a series of related experiments on a
              species of marine snails.  They will use pharmacological experiments to block
              the production of nitric oxide, which should allow metamorphosis to proceeed. 
              They will use biochemical assays to measure levels of cGMP before, during and
              after metamorphosis, and they will also use immunocytochemical procedures to
              determine which cells prod uce nitric oxide and which cells are the likely
              targets that contain the enzyme guanylyl cyclase.  These investigations will
              determine whether or not nitric oxide plays an important role in governing the
              onset of metamorphosis.  Even humans retain vestiges of metamorphosis in the
              hormonal changes that we undergo during puberty, and it may be that this new
              gaseous neurotransmitter plays a role in this important developmental process.
