Title       : Spectroscopic Insights into the Mechanism of Enoyl-CoA Hydratase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9604254

Award Number: 9604254
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Tonge peter.tonge@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604254  Tonge  Part 1-Technical  The enzyme enoyl-CoA hydratase catalyzes the
              addition of water across the C-C bond of (,(-unsaturated fatty acid thiol
              esters.  Binding of conjugated subtrate analogs to the enzyme is accompanied by
              substantial alterations in the electronic structure of the conjugated
              molecules.  The PI describes a series of experiments to investigate the direct
              relationship between the observed alteration in electronic structure of the
              substrate analogs and the enzyme's ability to catalyze the hydration of
              (,(-unsaturated ethylenic bond.  The recently described X-ray crystal structure
              of 4-chlorobenzoyl-CoA dehalogenase, an enzyme that is 28% identical and 50%
              similar to the hydratase, presents a unique opportunity to dissect the
              catalytic mechanism of the enzyme.  In order to investigate the direct
              relationship between substrate polarization and enzyme catalysis, residues
              around the substrate will be systematically modified by site-directed
              mutagenesis.  Combined spectroscopic-reactivity studies will then be performed
              on each mutant protein to assess the effects of  the mutations on catalysis and
              substrate polarization.  These experiments will facilitate the establishment of
              a direct structure-reactivity correlation for the enzyme-substrate complex and
              are expected to provide general insight into the role of electrostatics in
              enzyme catalysis.    Part 2- Non Technical  Enzymes are proteins that function
              as biological catalysts, accelerating the rates of chemical reactions by many
              orders of magnitude.  There is intense interest in understanding how enzymes
              work and in identifying the fundamental basis for enzyme activity.  The focus
              of this proposal is enoyl-CoA hydratase, an enzyme involved in the breakdown of
              fatty acids in the body.  Using site directed mutagenesis, the PI plans to
              identify and analyze the amino acid residues in the active site of the enzyme
              that are responsible for the chemical steps of the reaction.  A specific goal
              of this proposal is to quantitatively re late the structure of the substrate in
              the active site to the rate of the reaction.  The structural information will
              be provided using Raman and NMR spectroscopy.  In addition he intends to
              elucidate the role of the protein's  'electric field'  through mutagenesis and
              monitoring the effect on substrate structure and reactivity.  Not only will
              this information be of great value in understanding the mechanism of enoyl-CoA
              hydratase, but it will also provide direct insight into the role of
              electrostatic forces in enzyme catalysis.
