Title       : Molecular Analysis of RNA Polymerase I Transcription Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9604724

Award Number: 9604724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise Pape   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604724  Pape  The primary determinant in recognizing and activating the large
              rRNA gene promoter in eukaryotes is an essential transcription factor for RNA
              polymerase I (RNAP I), which maintains a species-specific and
              polymerase-specific complex with the promoter.  This factor is composed of TBP
              (TATA binding protein) and other RNAP I-associated subunits.  The yeast
              Schizosaccharomyces pombe is unusual in that the  rRNA gene promoter contains a
              canonical TATAAA element upstream from the transcription initiation site.  This
              TATA element, which normally binds the TBP subunit of RNA polymerase II
              initiation factor TFIID, plays an important role in directing the initiation of
              transcription of the S. pombe rRNA genes.  This research will genetically and
              biochemically test the ability of the TBP subunit of S. pombe RNAP I essential
              transcription factor SL1 to direct assembly of the transcription pre-initiation
              complex via the TATAAA element.  This analysis includes preparative
              purification of SL1, cloning and sequencing of at least one TBP-associated
              subunit, and identification of additional interacting factors by in vivo
              genetic analysis.  The interaction of purified SL1 with a second apparently
              inhibitory promoter domain will be characterized.  The vertebrate rDNA
              promoter/enhancer binding protein UBF (Upstream Binding Factor) also appears to
              play a pivotal role in stimulation and regulation of rRNA synthesis.  An S.
              pombe UBF-like activity that specifically interacts with anti-UBF antiserum,
              and with both the rDNA promoter and intergenic enhancer region will be further
              characterized by purification of the UBF complex, cloning and sequencing of
              component subunits, and genetic and biochemical analysis of function.  In
              addition, the DNA binding properties of another S. pombe intergenic rDNA
              binding protein, the RNAP I transcription termination factor Reb1p, will be
              defined with respect to binding affinities and sequence specificity.  The  S.
              pombe model system has potential application to a wide vari ety of eukaryotic
              organisms and general relevance to understanding the evolution of
              transcription.    This research will analyze the molecular interactions
              governing activation and regulation of the large ribosomal RNA genes in
              eukaryotes.  The yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe has transcriptional
              mechanistic and regulatory features with potential application to a wide
              variety of eukaryotic organisms, and has general relevance to understanding the
              evolution of transcription in animals, plants and the more widely investigated
              yeast model system S. cerevisiae.
