Title       : The Drosophila Centromere Protein MEI-S332 and Sister- Chromatid Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9604135

Award Number: 9604135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Orr-Weaver weaver@wi.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604135  Orr-Weaver  The Drosophila MEI-S332 protein is essential for
              sister-chromatid cohesion in meiosis. During meiosis the sister chromatids must
              remain attached as the homologs segregate in meiosis I, retaining cohesion
              until their separation in meiosis II. The phenotype of mutations in mei-S322
              predicted that the protein was required to hold the sister chromatids together
              at their centromeres. MEI-S322 indeed localizes onto the meiotic centromeres
              and persists there until the sister chromatids separate in meiosis II. The
              mutations in MEI_S322 reveal domains of the protein crucial in male and female
              meiosis, as well as regions necessary for centromere localization. Unraveling
              the mechanism by which MEI_S322 maintains sister-chromatid cohesion and
              isolating other proteins that participate in the process will provide a crucial
              link in understanding chromosome segregation. With the isolated protein, it is
              possible to determine how it localizes onto centromeres and how once localized
              it maintains cohesion. The domains of the protein needed for localization will
              be further delineated and modifications of the protein accompanying
              localization will be investigated. Experiments are designed to distinguish
              whether MEI_S322 acts on the centric heterochromatin or controls the
              kinetochore. Several approaches will be used to recover proteins that interact
              with MEI_S322 to maintain cohesion. Proper segregation also necessitates
              precise release of sister-chromatid cohesion and the domains needed for
              delocalization will be mapped and modifications of the protein associated with
              chromosomal dissociation will be analyzed. Genetic screens will identify genes
              that regulate MEI-S322. Genetic and cytological tests are designed to detect
              proteins with analogous functions in mitosis which may either interact or
              control MEI-S322.    Physical association between the sister chromatids,
              sister-chromatid cohesion, is essential for proper segregation during cell
              division. Sister-chromatid cohesion enables the sister chr omatids to attach to
              microtubules from opposite spindle poles and thus partition away from each
              other. In addition, the release of sister-chromatid cohesion must also be
              precisely regulated. In order to understand the underlying molecular basis for
              this precise regulation, it is critical to define the proteins that mediate
              such attachments and release.
