Title       : Multi-Photon Excitation Fluorescence Imaging Microscopy Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9604709

Award Number: 9604709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ammasi Periasamy ap3t@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Modern research in molecular, cellular, and developmental  biology requires
              the precise measurement of cellular or  subcellular activity in two or three
              dimensions. The  development of probes for the noninvasive assay of activity 
              has contributed greatly to our understanding of the complex  hierarchies of
              pathways that regulate cellular functions.  Equally significant has been the
              development of microscope  imaging technologies that can directly follow the
              changes in  molecular content and distribution which underlie a wide  range of
              biological processes in living cells.  Many available fluorescence microscopic
              techniques are  yielding limited detail about the organization and dynamics  of
              complex cellular structures, primarily because of the  slow speed with which
              conventional image detectors capture  and process high-resolution images.
              Impaired by UV-excited  fluorophores, one-photon confocal laser scanning
              microscopy  (OCLSM) techniques are often incompatible with high-  resolution
              (aberration-free) 3-D imaging and greatly reduce  cell or tissue viability with
              repeated scanning. In  contrast, the new two- or three-photon excitation laser 
              scanning microscope (TELSM), which uses a red-wavelength  femtosecond laser,
              surmounts some of the problems of OCLSM  and provides both sensitivity and high
              resolution without a  confocal aperture.    The proposed Multi-photon
              Excitation Fluorescence Imaging  Microscopy (MEFIM) system will afford a
              unique, state-of-the-  art opportunity to integrate advances in optical
              microscopy,  low-light video detection, and two- or three-dimensional  image
              analysis in measuring the fluorescent signals from a  living cell. The system's
              modular nature will also provide  the flexibility to meet varying optical and
              detection  requirements of multiple users. This instrumentation will  play a
              vital role in current research programs at the  Advanced Cellular Imaging
              Facility (ACIF) of the University  of Virginia and will provide novel
              opportunities to meet  future research n eeds.
