Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of Carbon Utilization in the Hyperthermophilic
               Archaeon Sulfolobus Solfataricus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9604000

Award Number: 9604000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Blum pblum@biocomp.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604000  Blum  This research seeks to identify mechanisms which have evolved to
              overcome the inherent biophysical constraints imposed on the regulation of gene
              expression at extreme temperatures, as well as further clarify the evolutionary
              position of the Archaea.  Phylogenetic studies based on comparison of rDNA
              sequences have shown that the Archaea are distantly related to both Eubactria
              and Eukaryotes. Although Archaea are phylogentically distinct from Eukaryotes,
              their transcriptional components exhibit remarkable similarity.  However, it is
              not know whether this similarity extends to DNA sequences and factors that
              regulate transcription.  The recently discovered Catabolite Repression (CR)
              response in the aerobic, hyperthermophile Sulfulobus solfataricus will be used
              as a model system to study gene regulation in archaeons.  One component of this
              system termed CR-I consists of variations in levels of carbon utilization
              enzymes and their respective transcripts elicited by growth on a hierarchy of
              sole carbon and energy sources.  CR-I regulates expression of malA (maltase),
              malE (exogluconase) and the polycistronic malL cluster.  Since genomic analysis
              indicates that several of these target genes are physically unlinked, CR-I uses
              a global regulatory mechanism to control gene expression.  Moreover, CR-I
              appears to up regulate malA and malE while down regulating malL.  This research
              will determine if CR-I regulation occurs at the level of transcription
              initiation and will identify the cis and trans-acting factors necessary for
              CR-I control of mal gene expression.  The results of this research will clarify
              how aerobic hyperthermophilic Archaea regulate gene expression for the
              selective consumption of carbon.  While hyperthermophiles are are present in
              both archaeal sub-divisions, the Euryarchaeota and the Crenarchaeota, their
              rDNAs are unusually deeply rooted suggesting that they were among the first
              organisms to appear on earth.  This research therefore may provide additional
              insight into the ev olutionary origin of gene expression.    Phylogenetic
              studies based on comparison of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences have led to the
              discovery of a distinct group of organisms termed the Archaea which are
              distantly related to both Eubactria and Eukaryotes.  Although Archaea are
              phylogentically distinct from Eukaryotes, their transcriptional components
              exhibit remarkable similarity.  However, it is not know whether this similarity
              extends to DNA sequences and factors that regulate transcription. The
              hyperthermophile Sulfulobus solfataricus will be used as a model system to
              study gene regulation in archaeons. The anticipated results will clarify how
              aerobic hyperthermophilic Archaea regulate gene expression at extreme
              tempertures, and will provide insight into basic aspects of archaeal
              hyperthermophilic metabolism and the evolutionary origin of gene expression.
