Title       : Rough Eye: A Gene Involved in Morphogenesis of the Drosophila Retina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9604216

Award Number: 9604216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence F. Kromer                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulrike Heberlein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ernest Galo Clin and Re Ct
	      1001 Potrero Avenue, SFGH
	      San Francisco, CA  94110    415/648-7111

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Heberlein  IBN-9604216    It is becoming increasingly obvious that the
              molecules that carry out important steps during the development of animals as
              diverse as fruitflies and mammals are quite similar, both in their structure as
              well as their function.  This conservation has recently been extended to
              molecules that govern the development of the eye.  For example, a fly gene
              (called eyeless) that plays a crucial role in building the eye has a human
              homolog known to be mutated in patients with Aniridia.  Dr. Heberlein's group
              is studying the mechanisms and molecules that are required for the proper
              development of the eye in the fruitfly Drosophila.  Of particular interest are
              two molecules, called hedgehog and decapentaplegic, which are needed for cells
              in the eye to communicate with each other so that the process of
              differentiation and assembly of the eye occurs in an orderly fashion.  Dr.
              Heberlein's group has shown that, as the first photoreceptor cells
              differentiate in the retina, they begin expressing hedgehog.  This hedgehog
              induces undifferentiated neighboring cells to activate the decapentaplegic gene
              and to differentiate as photoreceptors.  These newly differentiated
              photoreceptors then begin to express hedgehog, which then induces their
              neighbors to undergo the same fate.  This process repeats itself multiple times
              as the eye gradually develops into an orderly structure that is crucial for
              proper vision.  Dr. Heberlein's group has also found that a fly mutant called
              Rough eye disrupts the normal development of the retina.  When this occurs, the
              photoreceptor cells are disorganized, leading to a rough appearance of the
              eye's normally smooth surface.  In this mutant, photoreceptors produce
              excessive amounts of hedgehog, and the process by which differentiation sweeps
              across the retina is disrupted.  Dr. Heberlein plans to clone the gene
              disrupted by the Rough eye mutation and analyze the role of this gene during
              normal eye development.  Results from this study will not only give us kn
              owledge about the intricate process of retinal development in Drosophila but
              probably reveal valuable information about eye development in a wide variety of
              organisms, including humans.
