Title       : A Preparative Ultracentrifuge and Rotors for Separation and Analysis of
               Biological Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9604797

Award Number: 9604797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Quinn mquinn@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Jutila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Pascual  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Burgess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        Funds are requested to purchase a new preparative ultracentrifuge and 
              three ultracentrifuge rotors which will be used by four laboratories in the 
              Department of Veterinary Molecular Biology at Montana State University. 
              Ultracentrifuges are essential equipment for all research in biochemistry  and
              molecular biology. Currently, there is only one ultracentrifuge in this 
              Department, a 22 year old Beckman L5-65, which is not capable of meeting  the
              Department's current and future needs. In addition, the L5 is rapidly  becoming
              obsolete, and new drives will no longer be available for repairing  this
              centrifuge. The increased demand for ultracentrifugation resulting  from the
              additional faculty added to this Department over the last year  (both Dr. Quinn
              and Dr. Pascual were hired in 1995) and in the coming year  (another faculty
              member will be added to the Department in the next year)  further emphasizes
              our need for the requested equipment. The Department  also lacks sufficient
              rotors to carry out the proposed research, and this  proposal includes 3 new
              rotors. Currently, this Department has an older  fixed-angle rotor (>10 years
              old), a swinging bucket rotor, and a derated  Type 50 rotor. None of these
              rotors are capable of running at speeds over  60,000 r.p.m. and probably should
              not be used over 45,000 r.p.m. The rotors  requested in this proposal are
              capable of much higher speeds and would  facilitate faster and more efficient
              separations.    The new equipment will be used primarily by the labs of Drs.
              Quinn,  Jutila, Pascual, and Burgess, so this proposal contains descriptions of
               their projects that utilize ultracentrifugation. These projects are all 
              funded by research grants from a number of agencies such as the N1H, NSF,  and
              USDA. Ultracentrifugation is required as part of these projects for  density
              gradient analysis of proteins and protein complexes, subcellular 
              fractionation, membrane purification, and DNA purification. In addition, a 
              small amount of centrifuge time (<5%)  will be available for use in 
              Departmental classes for training students in the use of modern biological 
              instrumentation.
