Title       : Flow Cytometry: Digital Processing of Cellular Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1999   
File        : a9604929

Award Number: 9604929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548046             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galbraith galbraith@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose Sasian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  This project involves the further design, construction, and  evaluation of
              data acquisition and analysis hardware to be interfaced  to a flow cytometer.
              This hardware employs digital pulse waveform  processing, and during the prior
              period of funding, we developed and  evaluated a first-generation design. In
              this proposal, we aim to  develop second-generation hardware, that will provide
              improved rates of  cellular analysis. We also propose a thorough practical and
              theoretical  examination of the types of biological information that can be
              obtained  using digital pulse processing in flow cytometry, and the algorithms 
              that are required to extract this information. We finally propose to  see
              whether we can improve the performance of the hardware through  increasing the
              spatial resolution of the optics of the flow cytometer.      The expected
              significance of the proposed research relies on the  observation that the
              instrumentation is novel in capability, and can  provide information about
              cells that is inaccessible using other  instruments. The development of a
              second-generation instrument will  allow full implementation of digital pulse
              processing in flow cytometry  and cell sorting. The ability to rapidly analyze
              and sort cells  according to novel optical parameters should greatly extend our
              ability  to probe the cellular and molecular factors that govern the operation 
              of living cells. This should facilitate a deeper understanding of  normal
              cellular growth and development, as well as of abnormal growth  and disease
              states. This might lead to instrumentation with improved  diagnostic and
              prognostic capabilities. We are convinced that the  interdisciplinary approach
              integral to this project, which combines  expertise in very different
              scientific fields (engineering, optics, and  biology), has considerable
              potential to produce instrumentation and  methods that will significantly
              extend our understanding of the  structure and function of living cells.
