Title       : Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Modified Phospholipid Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1997   
File        : a9604585

Award Number: 9604585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max L. Berkowitz maxb@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604585  Berkowitz  The objective is to study the influence of cholesterol on
              the dynamic properties of the lipid bilayer membranes.  Bilayer water
              permeability will be characterized in the absence and presence of cholesterol
              as will membrane order (order parameter, S).  These studies will resolve issues
              related to the hydrophobicity of the bilayer as a function of distance normal
              to the bilayer surface and will provide physical insights into the mechanism of
              solvent transport across bilayer membranes.  These computations will be carried
              out without truncation of electrostatic contributions to membrane structure and
              dynamics in a fully hydrated system.  It will be possible to carry out lengthy
              simulations through use of reversible multiple time step algorithms and the
              smooth particle mesh Ewald algorithm, which was developed by Dr. Berkowitz.  In
              addition to the cholesterol study, the effect of phospholipid hydrocarbon chain
              fluorination will be examined by simulation since fluorination also affects
              solvent transit across the bilayer.    Phospholipid membranes play a very
              important role in the functioning of biosystems.  Due to tremendous advances in
              computational methodology and computational facilities it is now possible to
              probe the properties of biomembranes using computer simulation techniques. 
              Molecular dynamics computer simulations technique will be used to study how the
              properties of biomembranes change when cholesterol is added to the membrane. 
              It is known that the interaction of some of the membranes with other
              biomolecules such as proteins is often determined by the electrical fields
              present in the system.  The objective is to study how these fields change when
              some of the hydrogen in membrane molecules are replaced by fluorine molecules. 
              Only those systems will be studied for which reliable experimental data are
              available and for which simulations will provide information complementary to
              experimental work.
