Title       : Plant Protein Farnesyltransferase: Role in the Cell Cycle Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9604681

Award Number: 9604681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenbiao Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604681  Yang    Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase)-mediated attachment of a
              lipid (i.e., farnesyl) moiety to proteins facilitates translocation to the
              plasma membrane and thus activation of signaling proteins such as p21ras.  As a
              result, FTase plays an important role in many signaling pathways.  Recent
              studies suggest that FTase plays a critical role in abscisic acid signaling and
              cell cycle control in plants.  However, farnesylated proteins involved in these
              plant signaling events have not been identified.  In our preliminary studies,
              an Arabidopsis Ras-like small GTP-binding protein (RLP1) was shown to be
              farnesylated in vitro, and its full-length cDNA was sequenced.  This represents
              the first plant signaling protein known to be farnesylated and provides a
              strong candidate for a farnesylated protein in ABA signaling or cell cycle
              control.  In this revised objective, we will investigate the function of this
              G-protein in plants.  Two specific experiments will be conducted.  1) RLP1 will
              be fused to the jellyfish green fluorescence protein and expressed in tobacco
              BY-2 cells to demonstrate in vivo farnesylation of RLP1 and to determine its
              subcellular localization.  2) Dominant negative and constitutively active
              mutant forms of RLP1 will be created by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed
              in BY-2 cells to directly assess its role in plant signaling pathways such as
              ABA or mitogenic signaling.  This work will provide significant new insight
              into the role of farnesylation and farnesylated proteins in signal
              transduction.    This project will examine the a signal processes that are
              involved in regulating cell division in plant cells. Understanding how plant
              cell division is regulated is an important fundamental process with
              implications in biotechnology and agriculture. Dr. Yang has discovered that one
              protein that may be involved in signaling during cell division is modified with
              the attachment of a lipid. The attachment and removal of the lipid may be one
              of the essential steps in the signali ng process. This project will provide
              detailed information on the correlation between lipid modification of the
              protein and the regulation of plant cell division.
