Title       : Lysosomal Proenzyme Sorting: A New Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9604139

Award Number: 9604139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann H. Erickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604139  Erickson    Technical:  We have identified a new intracellular receptor
              that binds the lysosomal cysteine protease procathepsin L, but not the mature
              enzyme, to microsomal membranes at an acid pH . Binding to this 43-kDa integral
              membrane protein is mediated by a 9-residue propeptide sequence that showq
              homology to yeast vacuolar sorting sequences.  The aspartic protease
              procathepsin D undergoes similar pH-dependent membrane association.  Our data
              suggest that lysosomal proenzyme receptors (LPRs) are alternate targeting
              receptors which mediate mannose 6-phosphate-independent transport of lysosomal
              proenzymes from the trans Golgi to endosomal vesicles.  Failure of the
              proteases to bind to LPRs in tumor cells and activated macrophages correlates
              with increased enzyme secretion. The goal of this project is to determine the
              physiological function(s)  of the procathepsin L lysosomal proenzyme receptor
              (LPR). In order to accomplish this objective the lysosomal proenzyme receptor
              for procathepsin L will be purified. Antiserum specific for the mouse
              procathepsin L LPR will be prepared by immunization of rabbits. The N-terminal
              sequence of the procathepsin L LPR will be obtained by Edman degradation.  If
              the N-terminus is blocked, peptides prepared by protease treatment of the
              receptor will be purified by HPLC and subjected to N-terminal sequence
              analysis. The intracellular localization of the LPR and its ligand will be
              determined by ultrastructural studies using antibodies raised against
              procathepsin L and the purified LPR. The physiological function of the LPR will
              be studied using eucaryotic expression systems Mouse procathepsin L will be
              expressed in mouse macrophages which do not produce endogenous protease and the
              membrane association and efficiency of lysosomal targeting of the protease will
              be determined. The mouse procathepsin L propeptide will be expressed in mouse 
              fibroblasts to determine if the propeptide has a dominant-negative effect,
              altering proprotease targeting by competing fo r the LPR in vivo. Regulation of
              LPR binding will be studied by determing why ATP added to the exterior of
              intact microsomes causes procathepsin L to be released from the membranes to
              the vesicle lumen.  Initial studies indicate the release is not blocked by
              bafilomycin, which inactivates the vacuolar ATPase, suggesting that the effect
              is not merely due to modulation of intravesicular pH.    Non Technical:  The
              protease cathepsin has a critical role in degrading cellular proteins during
              development and in response to injury. Cathepsin is localized in a discrete
              cellular compartment termed lysosomes that functions to degrade nonfunctional
              and nonessential cellular components. Degradative enzymes are targeted for
              inclusion into lysosome by a modification of the enzymes that attaches a sugar
              that provides addressing information. The preliminary results of thiq project
              indicate that the cathepsin protease is targeted to lysosomes by an entirely
              different mechanism that involves a specific receptor that recognizes part of
              the cathepsin protein. During the grant award period Dr. Erickson  will
              identify and characterize the cathepsin targeting receptor and demonstrate its
              function in lysosome assembly.
