Title       : Genetic and Molecular Approaches to Signaling by Intracellular Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9604938

Award Number: 9604938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $725000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith R. Yamamoto yamamoto@cno.uscf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604938  Yamamoto    Technical Section  There are five specific aims for this
              continuing investigation into the molecular mechanisms at several levels
              whereby signaling information is integrated by transcription regulators.     1.
              Extend the analysis of a specialized molecular chaperone complex, which
              includes Hsp90 and other components, to approach the mechanism by which it
              'poises' the largest known class of regulators, the intracellular receptors
              (IRs)to be sensitive to their hormonal ligands, and to test the possibility
              that the chaperone complex is itself a signaling component that conveys
              information to aporeceptors;  2. Pursue findings that response elements,
              genomic sites to which IRs bind, confer signaling information that influences
              the mode of transcriptional regulation, e.g., activation or repression, that is
              imposed from the element; analyze both the signals intrinsic to the response
              elements and the sensing and interpretation mechanism within the receptors;  3.
              Carry out extensive analysis of the hormone binding domains of the
              glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the thyroid receptor (TR), seeking common and
              unique features of their mechanisms;  4. Isolate and characterize a mammalian
              homolog of an ABC transporter first isolated in yeast that selectively exports
              certain steroids; seek other components that affect intracellular efficacy and
              potency of steroids, and ascertain whether such membrane components contribute
              to the cell specificity of hormone activity;  5. Investigate the functional
              consequences of GR phosphorylation, and test the possibility that recently
              detected interactions of GR and TR with cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
              termed INKs result in alterations of receptor and/or CDK activities and thereby
              comprise a signal integration circuit.    Non-technical Section  Genes in
              multicellular eukaryotes are subject to complex regulation, typically being
              regulated differentially in different cell types, developmental stages or
              physiological conditions. Understanding the mecha nisms of this complexity is
              an overarching problem in modern biology. It is apparent that many
              transcription regulators, factors that interact directly or indirectly with the
              RNA polymerization machinery, are at the distal end of signal transduction
              pathways that sense various biological signals and pass that information along
              a network.
