Title       : Regulation of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Expression in Nostoc Punctiforme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9604270

Award Number: 9604270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Meeks jcmeeks@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604270  Meeks  The overall goal of this project is to characterize
              transcriptional and posttranslational regulation of glucose-6-phosphate
              dehydrogenase (G6PD) expression in the nitrogen fixing, facultatively
              heterotrophic cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme.  G6PD is the initial enzyme of
              the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway.  Previous work in this laboratory
              established that G6PD is essential for nitrogen fixation and dark growth of N.
              punctiforme, that transcription of G6PD increases during growth in the absence
              of ammonium and presence of N2, and that G6PD catalytic activity is dependent
              on the product of a cotranscribed gene termed opcA.  The specific objectives
              are to:  1.  Identify the mechanisms of regulation of transcription of G6PD
              with the respect to the nitrogen responsive operator/promoter region P1 and P5.
               Promoter activity in the 5' regions of P1 and P5 will be verified by in vivo
              (reporter gene expression) and in vitro (footprinting and runoff transcription
              assay) experiments.  The regulatory 5' regions of P1 and P5 will be used in
              mobility shift assays to identify and isolate DNA binding proteins that
              function as activators or repressors.  2.  Determine the role of OpcA in G6PD
              catalytic activity.  Assays of specific activity, and activity stains and
              immunodetection in native protein gels will be used to examine the catalytic
              and aggregation states of G6PD, dependent on OpcA, in extracts from wild-type
              and  opcA- mutant strains.  This work will provide information about
              transcription in an ecologically significant organism.    The overall goal of
              this project is to identify the biochemical mechanisms involved in expression
              of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in the   cyanobacterium
              (blue-green alga) Nostoc punctiforme.  Previous work in the laboratory
              established that G6PD is essential for nitrogen fixation in this, and related,
              organisms.  Photosynthetic, nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria are the most
              nutritionally independent organisms on earth and have an es sentially
              ubiquitous distribution in habitats exposed to light; thus, they are important
              for maintaining stable environments might be used in bioremediation of certain
              polluted habitats.  DNA sequences that regulate the synthesis of enzymes such
              as G6PD could be used to construct biodegrading metabolic pathways in
              cyanobacteria.  There are two specific objectives in this project: 
              identification of DNA sequence important in regulation of enzyme synthesis, and
              of protein-protein interactions in enzyme activity.  Biochemical assays
              monitoring protein-DNA interactions will be used to identify the important DNA
              sequences and regulated steps in the synthesis of G6PD.  The role of an
              associated protein in the formation of more active highly aggregated states of
              G6PD will be determined by concurrently measuring enzyme  activity and
              molecular size (aggregated state).  This project will provide new information
              about an ecologically significant group of organisms.
