Title       : Juvenoid/Ecdysteroid Interaction on a Cell Line Derived from Moth Imaginal Wing
               Discs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9604865

Award Number: 9604865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith H. Willis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604865  Willis    Metamorphosis endows many animals with the ability to occupy
              diverse niches within the life span of a single individual.  Chemical
              disruption of metamorphosis has been a successful approach to pest control.  It
              is known that two classes of hormones, juvenoids and ecdysteroids, regulate
              insect metamorphosis.  Some limited information also exists about how gene
              expression changes during insect metamorphosis. Past work has focused on whole
              insects, isolated parts, and short term cultures of tissues derived from them.
              Despite elegant experiments by many workers, there is total ignorance of the
              mechanisms by which juvenoids control metamorphosis or even of the level at
              which gene expressions is regulated during metamorphosis. One of the most
              fascinating features of metamorphosis in advanced insects is that many pupal
              and adult structures arise from packets of seemingly undifferentiated cells,
              imaginal discs, that were set aside during embryonic or early larval life.
              Imaginal disc cells proliferate in larvae and evaginate and differentiate
              during an ecdysteroid-induced molt that is initiated in the absence of
              juvenoids    This project is designed to learn if an established cell line
              (PID2A), derived from the wing imaginal discs of the Indian Meal Moth, Plodia
              interpunctella can serve as a simple model to study metamorphosis. The PI has
              already learned that these cells are responsive to ecdysteroids and that their
              response is blocked by juvenoids.  Proposed work will focus on identifying
              proteins and gene transcripts that are differentially expressed following
              different hormone treatments.  The treatments will be those that in the intact
              animal would either initiate or block metamorphosis.  If the PI can show that
              some synthetic activities of these cells mimic those that occur n vivo,  then a
              simple model system can be used to test hypotheses, factors, and genes that are
              being implicated in metamorphic regulation.  ***
