Title       : Mechanism of Glutamate Release from Astroglia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9604862

Award Number: 9604862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srdija Jeftinija sjeftini@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ksenija Jeftinija  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604862  Jeftinija    Two of the most important excitatory neurotransmitters in 
              the brain are the  amino acids glutamate and aspartate. The effectiveness of 
              information  transfer within the brain depends on the release of these 
              excitatory amino  acids from neurons, the interaction of these amino acids 
              with specific  receptors on target cells, and the termination of these 
              interactions by the  uptake of glutamate and aspartate from the extracellular 
              milieu. This latter  function is accomplished by glial cells. However, recent
              in  vitro studies  have shown that glial cells can also release these 
              excitatory amino acids  when stimulated by specific neuroligands such as
              bradykinin,  and in turn  cause neurons to release their neurotransmitters. 
              Neuroligand-stimulated  glial release of glutamate and aspartate is receptor 
              mediated and calcium  dependent, resembling neurotransmitter release from
              neurons.  Glia may thus  be far more important for normal brain function than 
              previously imagined,  and may even serve to convey information in the nervous 
              system, a role  previously reserved for neurons.   The main objective of this
              proposal is to determine how  glial cells  actually release glutamate. There
              are three possible  mechanisms: (i)  neuroligand binding may cause reversal of
              the cross-membrane  glutamate  transporter which is know to be present in glial
              cells; (ii)  neuroligand  binding may cause glial swelling, which in turn might
               release glutamate  through pores formed in the stretched cell wall; (iii) 
              neuroligand binding  may cause glutamate release by an exocytotic mechanism 
              similar to that which  neurons use to release glutamate and other 
              neurotransmitters. It will be  determine which of these possible mechanisms is
              responsible  for  neuroligand-stimulated release of glutamate from glial 
              cells, studying  isolated cultured glial cells as well as brain slice 
              preparations in which  glial cells maintain their relationships with
              surrounding  cells.   Understanding the mechanism of rel ease of excitatory
              amino  acids from glial  cells will allow us to elucidate the crucial roles of
              these  cells in the  transmission of information within the brain.
