Title       : Characterization of the Role of the Par Proteins in Signaling Pathways that
               Regulate Cell Integrity in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9604108

Award Number: 9604108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roymarie Ballester ballester@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9604108  Ballester      Technical         This proposal is studying
              proteins which are important in  maintaining the integrity of the cell wall of
              the yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  The cell wall is responsible for  the
              morphology of the yeast, its mechanical strength and  selective uptake of
              molecules.  Its composition and structure  changes during the cell cycle and in
              response to environmental  signals.  The cell wall integrity pathway is
              required for cell  wall biosynthesis, and it is composed of Rho1p, protein
              kinase  C and a MAP kinase cascade of serine/threonine protein  kinases. This
              investigator has identified a family of plasma  membrane associated proteins -
              Par7p, Par 15p, and Par 18p  that function upstream of protein kinase C. 
              Association with  the plasma membrane and sequence characteristics of Par 
              suggest that these proteins act as receptor molecules required  for the
              activation of the cell integrity pathway.  This grant  aims to characterize the
              role of the Par proteins in the  regulation of the cell integrity pathway. 
              Other genes in  yeast with a functional relation to PAR will be identified, 
              and the component of the pathway that they regulate will be  determined.  This
              will be done by characterization of  extragenic mutations and high copy
              suppressors of the lysis  defect of a par mutant strain.  These studies will
              also  determine whether Par 8, a protein with homology to the Pars,  is a new
              member of the PAR family.  This will be established  by deletion analysis of
              the PAR8 gene and complementation of  the phenotypes of the par mutant to test
              its functional  relation to the cell integrity pathway.  These studies will be
              important in understanding how yeast is  able to maintain its cell wall during
              during normal cell  growth and in response to its environment.     
              Non-Technical       This proposal is studying the role of a new family of 
              plasma membrane associated proteins that are required for  maintaining the
              integrity of the yeast cell.  The regulatory  p athways affected by these
              proteins will be identified.  ***
