Title       : Telomere Structure and Function in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9604194

Award Number: 9604194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Lustig alustig@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lustig  9604194  In this project, a series of molecular biological, genetic and
              biochemical approaches will be used to develop a clearer understanding of the
              mechanism of telomeric silencing in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The
              current view is that the telomere binding protein Rap1 p recruits Sir3p to the
              telomere, after which silencing is nucleated, spreading unidirectionally from
              the telomere. Three interrelated approaches will be taken. First, a Sir3p
              tethered silencing assay will be used to address several fundamental questions
              concerning the mechanism of Sir3p in silencing. Two questions will initially be
              addressed: What is the role of Sir3p in the formation and inheritability of the
              silent state?; and Is the function of Sir3p regulated by the cell cycle? Two
              models that may explain the function of Sir3p will also be tested: a) the
              possibility that Sir3p nucleates silencing by acting as a bridge between
              telomeric and subtelomeric sequences and b) the hypothesis that Sir3p nucleates
              silencing by recruiting histone deacetylases. Second, the role of the Sir3p
              N-terminus in telomeric silencing will be investigated. This region has been
              implicated by our previous genetic assays as being critical for telomeric
              silencing. The tethering assay will first be used to dissect the N-terminus of
              Sir3p using both deletion analysis and the generation of N-terminal mutations.
              In addition, N-terminal fusions will be characterized functionally in terms of
              a) their role in formation and inheritability of the silent state, b) the link
              between nucleation of silencing and the distance silent chromatin is
              propagated, c) their role in subtelomeric/telomeric interactions and d) the
              dependence of N-terminal Sir3p tethered silencing on other gene products
              involved in telomeric silencing. Third, in vivo and in vitro techniques will be
              used to define the proteins that interact with N-terminal Sir3p domains. The in
              vivo techniques will rely on both immunological techniques for known proteins
              and two-hybrid analysis  for novel proteins. The in vitro techniques will be
              designed to test for direct interactions between protein candidates suggested
              by the in vivo studies.  Telomeres, the protein-DNA structures present at the
              termini of eukaryotic chromosomes, confer transcriptionally silent states onto
              adjacent subtelomeric sequences; a likely reflection of the role of the
              telomere in establishing the spatial arrangement of chromosomal domains. The
              goal of these studies is to understand the long-range position effects
              conferred by the telomere using the genetically-manipulatable yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model eukaryote. Findings in this yeast are
              likely to serve as a paradigm for the behavior of the telomeres of higher
              eukaryotes and are likely to be highly informative in elucidating the
              protein/protein and protein /DNA interactions taking place at the telomere.
