Title       : Collaborative Research: Spatially Distributed Computation in a Small Neural
               Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a9604505

Award Number: 9604505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel K. Hartline danh@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Petra H. Lenz  (Principal Investigator former)
              Katherine Graubard  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604505    Hartline  For a long time, neurobiologists have viewed the nerve cell
               as being the fundamental unit of function in the nervous  system.  In this
              view, a cell (or "neuron") receives inputs  from selected sources (sensory
              cells, other nerve cells,  hormones in the blood), processes the information
              contained  in the totality of  these inputs and sends out a signal to other
              neurons or to  muscles that represent a unified result of the processing. 
              However, it is becoming increasingly apparent that this  unity of  function of
              the single neuron may in some cases,  and perhaps in many, be incorrect. 
              Instead, different parts  of one cell may  each be sending out its own signal
              based on  processing of a selected "local" sampling of inputs received  by the
              whole cell.  This research will assess the  possibilities for such "local" 
              computation in cells from a  small neural network.  This network is
              particularly suited  to the research because it has few enough neurons that 
              activity from all cells having input onto a particular  target neuron can be
              monitored physiologically.  Experience  has shown repeatedly that principles
              learned more easily in  this simple model system (a ganglion from a crab termed
              the  "stomatogastric ganglion"), can be applied to more complex  systems,
              including the nervous system of mammals and man.  Single neurons will be
              injected with a fluorescent dye that  makes them visible in a "confocal"
              microscope.  The confocal  microscope will record the fluorescence coming from
              the  multitude of branching extensions possessed by each cell and  thus will
              allow accurate reconstruction of the complex shape  of the cell.  From this,
              and from some simple electrical  measurements that can be made at the same time
              the  fluorescent dye is injected, a computer model will be  constructed of the
              predicted spread of voltage signals  through the different parts of the cell. 
              If the signals  generated at any one point in the cell are changed  relatively
              little in traveling to other parts  of the cell,  this will be evidence that
              there is little likelihood of  "local" computation in  the cell, since all
              parts will  receive the same processed signal.  If, as preliminary data 
              suggest, signals can be significantly altered in passing  from one point in a
              cell to another, the likelihood of local  computation is much greater.     Much
              of the research  focuses on how sensitive the local computation capabilities 
              are to various physiological factors.  For example, as input from other nerve
              cells becomes  stronger, the electrical properties of the target cell  change
              so that it is more likely to break up into small  local computational regions. 
              On the other hand, if the  input from other cells is broadly distributed over
              the  surface of a target neuron, the target cell may act in a  more unified
              fashion.  The project is investigating how such  different parameters influence
              the computational style of  real neurons and how computational styles of a
              single neuron  may change as the state of activity of the nervous system 
              changes.
