Title       : Analysis of the Inheritance and Positioning of the Golgi Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9604342

Award Number: 9604342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin S. Glick bsglick@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604342  Glick    The Golgi apparatus has a distinctive structure and  protein
              composition, but the processes that give this  organelle its unique character
              are only beginning to be  elucidated.  For example, it is still unclear how
              Golgi  structures are inherited during cell division or how the  Golgi is
              localized to a particular region of the cytoplasm.  A key to understanding
              these phenomena comes from the  finding that Golgi stacks are often situated
              near  vesiculating "transitional" regions of the endoplasmic  reticulum (ER). 
              The working hypothesis for this project is  that Golgi stacks are located near
              transitional ER sites  because Golgi assembly occurs at these sites, with new
              Golgi  cisternae forming by the coalescence of ER-derived vesicles.  In this
              view, the Golgi can be considered a dynamic  outgrowth of the ER.  The ultimate
              goal of this work is to  determine how a cell creates and propagates the
              transitional  ER subdomains that give rise to Golgi stacks.   The  experimental
              approach is to analyze Golgi inheritance and  positioning in two budding
              yeasts, Saccharomyces cerevisiae  and Pichia pastoris.  In S. cerevisiae, the
              Golgi has a  fragmented structure and rarely displays a stacked cisternal 
              morphology.  Nevertheless, it is possible to study Golgi  inheritance in S.
              cerevisiae by monitoring the movement of  Golgi elements into the bud.  For
              studies of Golgi  positioning, P. pastoris is the organism of choice because 
              it contains a small number of discrete Golgi stacks that  resemble the
              organelles found in higher eukaryotes.  Golgi  stacks in P. pastoris are
              located next to vesiculating  membranes that evidently correspond to
              transitional ER.  Because P. pastoris is closely related to S. cerevisiae and 
              can be genetically manipulated in much the same way, it will  be valuable to
              perform a comparative study of the Golgi in  these two yeasts.  The project has
              two Specific Aims.   The  first is to analyze the mechanism by which proteins
              are  localized to the transitional ER in P . pastoris.  Antibodies  are being
              raised against P. pastoris components of the COPII-  coated vesicle system,
              which defines the transitional ER.  Immunolocalization experiments will be
              performed to confirm  that these proteins are restricted to discrete subdomains
              of  the ER.  Based on functional studies in S. cerevisiae, it  seems likely
              that the specific recruitment of COPII  components to the transitional ER
              depends upon a restricted  localization of Sec12p, the protein that initiates
              the COPII  assembly pathway.  This prediction will be tested by  modifying the
              P. pastoris SEC12 gene in an attempt to alter  its localization.  In addition,
              affinity methods will be  used to isolate partner proteins that may anchor
              Sec12p in  transitional ER zones.  The second aim is to carry out  genetic
              screens for identifying proteins that mediate Golgi  inheritance in S.
              cerevisiae.  A strain of yeast has been  created in which Golgi organelles are
              labeled with Green  Fluorescent Protein (GFP).  These cells will be mutagenized
               and screened visually to identify mutants that show defects  in Golgi
              inheritance.  The relationship between ER and Golgi  elements will be examined
              in the mutant cells, and the genes  responsible for the mutant phenotypes will
              be cloned and  characterized.    The Golgi apparatus is a complex organelle of
              eukaryotic  cells which consists of a highly specialized collection of 
              membrane-enclosed compartments in which newly synthesized  proteins and certain
              complex glycoconjugates are covalently  modified and other complex
              glycoconjugates are synthesized.  Most of the proteins and complex
              glycoconjugates within the  Golgi complex, whether soluble inside the
              compartments or  membrane-bound, are only transiently resident there; once  the
              syntheses and modifications are completed, these  macromolecules are sorted and
              transported to other sites  inside or outside the cell, where they carry out
              their  specific functions.  The Golgi complex may assume different 
              morphologies and subcellular  locations (and even specific  metabolic
              functions) depending on the specific cell type and  the stage of the life cycle
              of the cell.  Although the Golgi  complex has been studied intensively for
              decades, and much  is known about specific Golgi enzymes and the fate of 
              macromolecules that pass through the complex, there is still  much about it
              that remains poorly understood.  This project  addresses fundamental questions
              about the biogenesis of the  Golgi complex, utilizing cutting-edge technologies
              and  approaches.  If the results support Dr. Glick's hypothesis,  they will
              force a change in the way investigators think  about the Golgi complex, in
              terms of its function and its  origin within the cell.  ***
