Title       : Regulation of Phosphoinositide Metabolism and Early Responses to Osmotic Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9604285

Award Number: 9604285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy F. Boss wendy_boss@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9604285  Boss  Technical  The survival of plants depends on their ability to
              alter metabolism in response to changes in their environment. Although
              physiological changes in response to environmental stresses are well
              documented, the signal transduction pathways between the initial stimulus and
              the induction of gene expression are not well understood. We have evidence for
              rapid changes in the distribution of one isoform of  translational elongation
              factor 1 alpha (EF-1alpha) and in inositol phospholipid metabolism as a result
              of hyperosmotic stress and treatment with the wasp venom peptide, mastoparan.
              This proposal focuses on the interaction of inositol lipids and EF-1alpha in
              initiating early responses to stress. EF-1alpha is essential for protein
              synthesis and can regulate cytoskeletal structure and activate
              phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase. Phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase is the first
              committed enzyme in the synthesis of polyphosphorylated inositol phospholipids.
              The inositol phospholipids, phosphatidylinositol-4-monophosphate (PIP) and
              phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) in turn can affect cytoskeletal
              structure. Our working hypothesis is that EF-1alpha and PIP and PIP2 play
              integral roles in the signal transduction pathway as cells respond and
              acclimate to environmental stress.   To test our hypothesis, we will study the
              coordinated changes in the distribution of ethanolamine-EF-1alpha and PIP
              synthesis from the initiation of plasmolysis until the cells reach a new steady
              state. We propose to biochemically characterize the glycerylphosphoethanolamine
              posttranslational modification of EF-1alpha; to use site-directed mutagenesis
              to make recombinant EF-1alpha  lacking the ethanolamine attachment site and to
              determine the effects of this posttranslational modification on the function of
               EF-1alpha in vitro. Finally, we propose to obtain cDNAs encoding PI 4-kinase
              and make transgenic plants over producing this protein.  The response of the
              transgenics to hyperosmotic conditions will be stu died microscopically and
              biochemically to determine whether PIP is involved in the initial signaling
              event or the recovery to a new steady state. We anticipate observing a
              difference in the rate or magnitude of plasmolysis and recovery of  transgenics
              compared to wild type cells. The proposed work provides an exciting opportunity
              for studying the integration of signal transduction pathways during a rapid
              physiological response. At the same time, the work will contribute new
              information in two areas: 1) The functional significance of the
              glycerylphosphoethanolamine posttranslational modification of  EF-1alpha. 2)
              The role of PIP in hyperosmotic stress. Finally, this work will result in
              future applications by identifying key components of regulatory pathways that
              can be used to genetically alter cellular homeostasis and cellular responses to
              environmental stimuli.  Nontechnical  Plants respond rapidly to environmental
              changes and stress by changing the types and quantities of proteins synthesized
              that function to assist to adapt the plant to its new circumstances. How the
              altered environment is perceived and then transmitted within the plants cell to
              alter protein synthesis and cellular metabolism is a central problem in plant
              biology. The protein EF-1alpha (elongation factor-1alpha) is an abundant and
              highly conserved protein that is essential for protein synthesis. The EF-1alpha
              regulates the structure of the intracellular network of cytoskeleton. The
              cytoskeleton has a critical role in defining tand maintaining the shape and
              morphology of plant cells. This project will examine how plant stress induces
              the modification of EF-1alpha and its role in transmitting the environmental
              stress signal. This project is important because it addresses one of the
              fundamental aspects of plant life, how plants respond and adapt to
              environmental change.  ***
