Title       : Use of Engineered Ribozymes to Catalyze Chimeric Gene Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9604458

Award Number: 9604458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Jarrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-04458  Jarrell  Part 1. Technical  This study is aimed to develop and extend
              a technology by which self-splicing group II introns can be employed to
              engineer novel recombinant RNA and DNA molecules, and to dissect and define the
              sequences that contribute to the accuracy and efficiency of group II intron
              splicing. It will focus on Y-branched ribozyme insertion between exons of the
              human t-PA gene. By both random and directed shuffling, t-PA exons will be
              linked to one another one at a time, in a pre-selected order. Exons from
              proteins related to t-PA will also be shuffled together with t-PA exons. 
              Preliminary studies by the P. I. show that ribozymes based on the group II
              intron can be engineered to insert into specific sites in target RNAs. When
              Y-branched ribozymes are utilized, the insertion reaction creates two products:
              one in which target RNA from upstream of the insertion site is linked to the 5'
              end of the intron, and one in which target RNA from downstream of the insertion
              site is linked to the 3' end of the intron. These recombinant RNA products can
              be seamlessly rejoined by trans splicing.  Based on these initial findings,
              experiments are designed to dissect the sequence requirements for the splicing
              reactions. The possibility that recombinant RNA molecules capable of
              participating in more than one trans splicing reaction can be produced and
              linked to multiple other RNA molecules will be examined. Two different
              Y-branched ribozymes will be engineered to insert at different sites within the
              a given target RNA molecule, yielding a recombinant RNA flanked by intron
              sequences, which participates accordingly in two different trans splicing
              reactions, linking its 5' or 3' end. Thus the "exon shuffling" mechanism that
              has been proposed to have participated in the evolution of new proteins will be
              micmiced in vitro. Because the ribozymes can be engineered to insert precisely
              at any desired sequence, and the splicing reactions are unidirectional and link
              RNAs together seamlessly, in-frame fu sions of shuffled exons can be expected. 
                Part 2. Non-technical  Traditional methods used to generate recombinant DNA
              involve site-specific cutting and joining of DNA molecules. The Present study
              develops a new method by creating recombinant DNA from RNA via a simple
              enzymatic step.  The recombinant RNA is generated by the activity of
              "ribozymes". Ribozymes are enzymes that are made of RNA. Certain naturally
              occurring ribozymes are known to catalyze the cleavage and joining of RNA
              molecules. The P.I. has demonstrated that one of these ribozymes, referred to
              as group II intron aI5g, can be engineered to catalyze the precise assembly of
              particular recombinant genes.  This study is designed to provide additional
              information for optimization of this new ribozyme-based gene engineering
              system.
