Title       : Regulation of Cell Expansion in Arabidopsis Roots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9604489

Award Number: 9604489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Benfey philip.benfey@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604489  Benfey  The goal of this work is to understand the molecular mechanisms
              that regulate organogenesis in plants, here with a focus on root formation.  A
              number of mutants have been collected from Arabidopsis which show altered
              division, expansion and maturation of root cells.  The class of cell expansion
              mutants can itself be sub-divided into mutants that are affected by the
              environment and others that are autonomous of the environmental condition, but
              respond to internal (hormonal) cues.  Other mutants of expansion shift from
              longitudinal to radial expansion.    The work focuses on two mutants that are
              indicative of tow individual classes of modulated expansion growth, SABRE and
              COBRA.  SABRE has been cloned.  Experiments are designed to study hormonal and
              positional effects on the expression of the SABRE mutant phenotype, and
              functional studies of the gene products in transgenic assays. COBRA will be
              cloned by molecular complementation, a 56 kb region which contains the gene is
              in hand.  The amount of the COBRA product will then be modulated to gauge its
              effect on the phenotype and, finally, additional mutants and suppresser
              mutations will be screened for.    With this work, Dr. Benfey will initiate
              studies that integrate the developmental sequence of root cell expansion with a
              functional assay of the gene product and its positional and concentration
              effects.  Work on the growth of plant root cells will contribute to our
              understanding of plant cell growth characteristics.
