Title       : RUI: Regulation of the Pyrimidine Pathway in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9604282

Award Number: 9604282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Slocum bslocum@goucher.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Goucher College
	      1021 Dulaney Valley Road
	      Baltimore, MD  21204    301/337-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SLOCUM  Pyrimidine nucleotides are precursors of DNA and RNA biosynthesis and  
              are constituents of activated intermediates in many metabolic processes which
              are fundamental to growth and development in plants and all other living
              organisms.  The basic biochemical steps in de novo pyrimidine synthesis have
              been conserved in prokaryotes and eukaryotes but regulation of the pyrimidine
              pathway is accomplished by several different strategies involving subcellular
              compartmentation of enzymes and metabolites, gene duplication and gene fusion,
              and different metabolic control mechanisms.  In plants, little is known about
              the mechanisms which regulate pyrimidine biosynthesis, but most evidence
              suggests that the important sites of regulation are the first and/or second
              steps in the pathway, involving the enzymes carbamoylphosphate synthetase
              (CPSase) and aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase).    This research will focus
              on the elucidation of various molecular   mechanisms regulating the activity of
              ATCase and CPSase in plants.  As a first step toward this goal, cDNAs encoding
              three different ATCases in pea (pyrB1, pyrB2 and pyrB3) have been cloned.  The
              pyrB1 and pyrB2 genes have been shown to be differentially expressed in pea
              tissues.  These genes encode ATCase proteins whose primary sequences differ by
              25% and it is likely that they have very different kinetic properties. and may
              participate to different degrees in the regulation of pyrimidine pathway
              activities.  This possibility is being investigated, using a variety of
              approaches which includes the following:   1) kinetic characterization of the
              pyrB1 and pyrB2 products expressed in an ATCase-deficient strain of E. coli, 
              2) use of nucleic acid and antibody probes to investigate expression of the
              genes encoding ATCase in different plant tissues and in response to various
              treatments that would be expected to impact pyrimidine biosynthesis.   
              Recently, the first plant genes encoding CPSase in Arabidopsis were   cloned by
              the investigators.  Availabili ty of cDNAs encoding the small and large subunit
              proteins of this plant CPSase (carA and carB genes, respectively) will permit
              the characterization of this gene and its expression in plant tissues. 
              Expression of these CPSase proteins in appropriate E. coli CPSase mutants will
              facilitate biochemical and kinetic characterizations of the plant enzyme. 
              Overexpression of the Arabidopsis CPSase proteins in bacteria will also
              facilitate their purification for biochemical studies and the production of
              CPSase antisera.  These antisera, and the cDNAs encoding the plant CPSase
              proteins, will be invaluable tools in investigations of the regulation of
              CPSase and pyrimidine pathway activities.      The investigators have now
              established that the basic genetic   organization of the pyrimidine pathway in
              plants more closely resembles that of bacteria than other eukaryotes. 
              Nonetheless, plants remain the only major group of organisms in which the
              fundamental control mechanisms regulating de novo pyrimidine synthesis have not
              been elucidated.  Issues such as subcellular compartmentation of ATCase and
              CPSase activities, the kinetic and regulatory properties of the ATCases and
              CPSases themselves, metabolic interactions and regulation of pyrimidine and
              arginine pathway activities and many other questions will be addressed in this
              study.      Studies such as these contribute to a broader understanding of
              plant   primary and secondary metabolism and suggest strategies for the
              manipulation of plant biochemistry for many practical purposes, including the
              development of herbicides or other compounds that modify plant growth or
              development, and production of plant-derived pharmaceuticals and other useful
              metabolites.  Apart from any purely scientific advances resulting from these
              studies, several undergraduate students will participate in the research. 
              These students will gain valuable training in a modern research laboratory
              which will help to prepare them for post-baccalaureate careers in science.
