Title       : Identification and Characterization of Guanylyl Cyclase Isoforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9604536

Award Number: 9604536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Nighorn nighorn@manduca.neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Morton  (Principal Investigator former)
              John G. Hildebrand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Morton  9604536         The correct functioning of the brain of all animals, 
              including humans, is dependent on chemical messengers.  Neurotransmitters are
              examples of such chemical messengers  which carry information from one nerve
              cell to another  within the brain. Nerve cells often respond to the presence 
              of the neurotransmitter by altering the levels of additional  chemical
              messengers, known as second messengers, within the  nerve cell.  Many hundreds
              of different neurotransmitters  have been identified in a wide variety of
              species. Some of  these are conserved between species and others are found in 
              only a few species.  In contrast, there are only a handful  of second
              messengers and these are conserved across almost  every species which has been
              studied.  Dr. Morton and Dr.  Nighorn  have identified a simple animal model
              system that  is ideal to examine the function of two specific second 
              messengers, guanylyl cyclase and nitric oxide synthase,  in  regulating neural
              processing and behavior.  They will  concentrate on the olfactory system since
              its structure and  function are very well characterized and they can manipulate
               the chemical signals that the animals smell.  Using  sophisticated molecular
              and cellular techniques, Dr. Morton  and Dr. Nighorn will first clone the genes
              for both of these  enzymes.  They will then identify which cells in the 
              olfactory system contain these enzymes and hence utilize  these second
              messengers.  This enables them to examined how  chemical pheromonal cues will
              alter the system in the cells  which first perceive odors and the cells in the
              brain where  this information is first processed.  The results from these 
              studies are important to understanding the fundamental  properties of neural
              processing.  It will provide new  knowledge towards understanding the neural
              mechanisms  underlying the processing of vital information obtained from  the
              environment.
