Title       : The Role of Non-Bilayer Forming Lipids in Chloroplast Protein Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9604535

Award Number: 9604535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry D. Bruce bbruce@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604535  Bruce    Technical   This proposal addresses fundamental questions
              regarding the mechanism of protein translocation across membranes.  Although
              the protein transport system being investigated is the targeting and
              translocation of a nuclear encoded protein into higher plant chlormplasts, the
              underlying mechanisms are potentially relevant to all protein transport
              systems.  The primary focus is to investigate the role of the non-bilayer
              forming lipid, monogalactosyl-diacyglycerol (MGDG), in chloroplast protein
              transport.  We propose that chloroplast precursors have evolved specific
              domains in their transit peptide that interact specifically with MGDG to alter
              the bilayer organization.  Transit peptide-lipid interactions may be transient,
              temporally and spatially, yet may represent an essential first step in
              chloroplast protein transport, and perhaps in all transport processes.  Our
              preliminary data indicates that the precursor to the small subunit of Rubisco
              (prSSU) contains a lipid interacting domain that is located primarily at the
              C-terminus of the transit peptide (SS-tp).  Using liposomes whose composition
              can be controlled, we have shown by electron microscopy and fluorescence
              measurements that the ability of both purified prSSU and the full-length SS-tp
              to disrupt bilayers is totally dependent on the presence of the non-bilayer
              forming lipid, MGDG.  The experiments outlined in this proposal are a direct
              extension of our in vitro analysis of the SS-tp/membrane interaction. The first
              objective is to refine the mapping of prSSU sequences that are responsible for
              lipid interaction/membrane destabilization.  A complete set overlapping
              peptides will be synthesized that span SS-tp entirely and extend into the
              mature domain of SSU. In this way, the sequences of prSSU that are both
              necessary and sufficient for lipid interaction will be determined precisely and
              the potential involvement of sequences in the mature domain will be addressed. 
              The second objective is to examine the chemical proper ties of MGDG that
              account for its role in transit peptide-mediated membrane destabilization.  By
              utilizing liposomes containing alternative non-bilayer forming lipids such as
              phosphatidylethanolamine and cardiolipin, it will be possible to distinguish
              between the non-bilayer forming property of MGDG vs. other traits, such as
              hydrogen bonding activity of the qugar head group.  The third objective is to
              alter the non-bilayer forming tendency of MGDG in vivo by utilizing Arabidopsis
               mutants that are deficient in one or more of their fatty acid desaturases fad.
                These fad mutants are ideal for our purpose since earlier in viro research
              clearly indicates that MGDG prefers to form non-bilayer structures only when
              its fatty acids are highly unsaturated.  By utilizing various single, double,
              and triple  fad  mutants, we can produce chloroplasts that contain MGDG
              variants which are predicted to vary in their preferences to form non-bilayer
              structures.  These mutants will ppovide the most intact system to directly
              evaluate the role of non-bilayer structures in chloroplast protein
              translocation.    Non-technical  Biological membranes consist of a bilayer of
              lipids in which are embedded proteins. In order to assemble intracellular
              structures it is necessary for proteins to be translocated through the
              membrane. Much research has been directed at determining the protein components
              of membranes that facilitate the movement and processing of proteins as they
              transit through a membrane. Dr. Bruce will look at this process from a
              different perspective and he will conduct research to examine what lipid
              components are essential to facilitate trafficking of chloroplast proteins. The
              chloroplast is a useful model system to conduct these studies because
              chloroplasts possess unique lipids not found in other intracellular organelles.
              Dr. Bruce will use mutants of lipid synthesis in order to provide experimental
              models to probe the process of protein translocation into the chloroplast. This
              work is important because it  provides a basis of the fundamental process of
              the assembly of intracellular organelles.  ***
