Title       : The Structural and Energetic Bases of Extreme Thermal Stability in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9604213

Award Number: 9604213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Dahlquist fwd@nmr.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. James Remington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-04213  Dahlquist    This study is designed to elucidate the nature of 
              hyperthermostability in the CheY protein from Thermotoga  maritima (TMY), which
              undergoes reversible thermal unfolding  at 95oC. The CheY isolated from
              Bacillus subtilis is the  same length and is 75% identical in amino acid
              sequence to  TMY but denatures about 35oC lower in temperature. Each of  the 30
              residues that differ in the two proteins will be  substituted in order to
              monitor the contribution that each  makes to the overall stability of the
              protein. Selected  mutants will be examined by a variety of physical methods 
              including circular dichroism, solution nuclear magnetic  resonance methods,
              differential scanning calorimetry and X-  ray crystallography for possible
              relationships between the  thermal stability of a protein and its structural
              and  dynamic properties.    A thermally-induced structural change in TMY that
              occurs  about 50o below its thermal unfolding will also be  characterized. This
              transition, similar to those observed in  other proteins from hyperthermophilic
              sources, results in  extensive line broadening and chemical shift changes in
              the  15N-1H correlation spectra of TMY.      The information so gained in this
              study should provide a  rich experimental database for the understanding of the
               structural and energetic contribution to the exceptional  thermal stability
              seen in proteins from hyperthermophilic  sources.    Proteins from organisms
              that live at very high temperatures  (hyperthermophiles) are much more stable
              than similar  proteins from organisms that live near body temperature 
              (mesophiles). This study undertakes a systematic  investigation of the source
              of stability in a small, well  behaved protein, CheY, which is involved in
              sensory  signaling in both hyperthermophiles and mesophiles. About 20  amino
              acids of this protein, isolated from a  hyperthermophile has, are likely to
              account for a near 50oC  increase in its thermal stability, as compared to the 
              similar protein from a mesophilic  source. These residues  will be varied by
              sitedirected mutation so that the role of  these residues in the stability of
              the protein and its  structure, as determined by X-ray diffraction and nuclear 
              magnetic resonance methods, can be recognized. In addition,  there is a change
              in structure as temperature increases that  occurs near body temperature in the
              CheY protein from the  hyperthermophile. This structural change may reflect a 
              change from a catalytically inactive form at low temperature  to a functional
              form at high temperature. This change and  the reasons that it occurs will be
              characterized to yield a  general understanding of how proteins function under
              extreme  environmental conditions.
