Title       : Functions of Tubulin and Dynein Genes in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9604491

Award Number: 9604491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D.Peter Snustad pete-s@cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Wick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn D. Silflow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Snustad  9604491    Technical  The long-term goal of the proposed research is to
              understand the roles of microtubule-based components of the cytoskeleton in
              plant growth and development. Morphogenesis in plants is controlled primarily
              by cytoskeletal processes that establish the planes of cell divisions and the
              axes of cell elongations, and microtubule arrays that are unique to plant cells
              - preprophase bands and phragmoplasts. Little progress has been made towards
              understanding the molecular mechanisms by which these processes occur. 
              Moreover, we still know essentially nothing about the structure or function of
              microtubule-associated motor proteins in plants.   The specific objectives of
              the proposed investigations  are  to first, identify insertional mutations in
              some of the 17 characterized tubulin genes of Arabidopsis. These will be used
              to investigate their effects on the phenotypes of homozygous mutant plants, and
              to construct and study multiple mutants carrying insertions in two or more
              tubulin genes. The second objective is to begin to investigate the complexity
              of the dynein gene families in Arabidopsis and characterize them to the degree
              needed to screen for insertional mutations in these genes.  The third objective
              is to identify insertional mutations in some of the dynein heavy-,
              intermediate- and light-chain genes. The fourth objective is to characterize 
              the Arabidopsis gene(s) encoding proteins homologous to the 8 kD dynein
              light-chains of animals and protists.  RNA gel blot hybridization experiments
              will be used to determine the pattern(s) of transcript accumulation for the 8
              kD light-chain gene(s), and immunofluorescence microscopy will be used to
              localize the 8 kD protein(s) in plant cells, especially in  germinating pollen
              and elongating pollen tubes. The progress of individual objectives will depend
              on the results of the screens for insertional mutations. When an interesting
              mutation is identified, it will become the focus of future experiments.  The
              major goal will be to id entify the functions of individual gene products, not
              to accumulate mutations in all genes.      Non Technical  The shape and pattern
              of growth of plant cells is defined by intracellular filaments termed the
              cytoskeleton. The shape and orientation of individual plant cells is critical
              to forming the morphology of plants. The cytoskeleton is constructed from
              several different proteins including tubulin and dynein that are synthesized as
              products of a gene family. Whether different members of the tubulin and dynein
              gene families have different functional roles is unknown. In this research the
              investigators will isolate mutants in which individual genes of tubulin are
              disrupted to be nonfunctional and used to construct plants in which multiple
              tubulin genes are disrupted. These experiments will lead to a precise
              definition of which tubulin genes are used in specific aspects of plant
              development. Parallel studies will be conducted on dynein.  The size and
              diversity of the dynein gene family will be characterized and mutants with
              disrupted dynein genes will be constructed. This research is important because
              it will examine one of the basic processes that controls the shape, size and
              morphology of plants.  ***
