Title       : Embryo Defenses Against Toxins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9604354

Award Number: 9604354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Epel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Epel  96-04354        This one year grant will fund a pilot project aimed at
              understanding how embryos defend themselves against environmental toxins. Dr.
              Epel hypothesizes that the P-glycoprotein drug transporters  provide this
              protection, acting as a first line of defense to keep toxins out of the cell.
              It is present in embryos and adults of a mud-dwelling worm, Urechis caupo, and
              its activity protects its embryos against added test toxins. This protection
              might account for the ability of Urechis embryos to develop normally in pore
              water (the supernatant sea water from the mud flat sediments).    The embryos
              of starfish and sea urchins do not possess this transporter and their embryos
              cannot develop in pore water from the mud flats. If this drug transporter in
              fact protects embryos, then expression of the transporter in the embryos of the
              sea urchin or starfish should confer protection against environmental toxins.
              The major goal of this one year pilot study is to express this transporter,
              using the gene cloned from the mouse or nematode worm, in starfish or sea
              urchins oocytes and to determine if the resultant embryos will develop. If so,
              a large number of questions can then be asked and answered about the role of
              this transporter in protection of embryos and also about protection against
              toxins in the marine environment in general.     This transporter is not
              ubiquitous in the marine environment, and our limited survey indicates its
              presence in filter and suspension feeders but not in sea urchins or starfish. A
              second question we wish to address in this pilot study relates to the
              distribution of this transporter. It is present in an echiuroid worm which
              lives in sediments. Is having this transporter a general attribute of being an
              echiuroid? Or is it something restricted to animals whose lifestyle exposes
              them to toxins (such as sediment dwelling or filter feeding)? To provide an
              answer to this question, a minor component of this pilot study will determine
              whether the transport protein is ex pressed or over expressed in members of
              this group that live in clean habitats or have different lifestyles.   
              Providing answers to these two questions, especially information about the
              expression of the cloned transporter gene in echinoderm embryos, will indicate
              will indicate the feasibility of research approaches using expressed genes in
              embyros. These approaches, if feasible, would provide rigorous information on
              the biology of embryo defense mechanisms in general and the role of this drug
              transporter in particular
