Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Anaerobic Iron-Dependent Respiration in
               Shewanella Putrefaciens MR-1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9604298

Award Number: 9604298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daad A. Saffarini   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604298  Saffarini    Anaerobic metal reduction is a major respiratory process
              in aquatic environments and in some instances it can account for 80-90% of the
              total organic carbon that is oxidized.  Although this process is widespread in
              aquatic environments, very little is known about the mechanisms of iron
              reduction.  Iron oxides and oxyhydroxides are solids and highly insoluble. 
              Contact with the iron particles is required for reduction to occur.  This
              raises the question as to the mechanisms used for solid Fe(III) reduction.  Is
              the iron reduced outside the cell, on the outer membrane as has been suggested
              previously, or is it solubilized first and then transported to the inner
              membrane where it is reduced?  Shewanella putrefaciens is an iron reducer that
              can use amazingly large number of terminal electron acceptors, both soluble and
              solid.  The organization and localization of the electron transport chain
              components, and the mechanisms for dealing with soluble vs. solid terminal
              electron acceptors are intriguing problems. S. putrefaciens serves as an
              excellent model system to study iron reduction.  It is a facultative anaerobe,
              and therefore amenable to genetic manipulations.  Other metal reducers
              identified so far are strict anaerobes.  The goal of the project is to
              elucidate the mechanisms of iron transport and reduction and to identify the
              genes involved.  Transposon mutants deficient in iron reduction have been
              isolated.  These mutants will be complemented and the genes sequenced.  DNA
              sequences will be analyzed to determine similarities to other reductase
              systems.  The genes encoding the ferric reductase will be expressed in E. coli
              and antibodies will be generated for immunolocalization of the enzymes in the
              cell.  The factors involved in regulating the expression of the iron reductase
              will also be investigated.      Anaerobic metal reduction is a major
              respiratory process in aquatic environments and can account for 80-90% of the
              total organic carbon that is oxidized.  Furthermore, an  increasingly large
              number of bacteria are being identified that are capable or iron reduction. 
              One such organism is Shewanella putrefaciens which has been isolated from a
              variety of different environments.  Although iron reduction is widespread in
              aquatic environments, very little is known about the mechanisms by which
              bacteria use this metal for respiration.  This project will shed light on the
              mechanisms of iron reduction and its regulation using molecular biological 
              techniques.  In addition to providing a basis for understanding of a novel
              enzyme, a detailed study of the iron reductase will provide insights into the
              physiology and genetics of an environmentally significant organism.  Iron
              reducing bacteria are being considered as agents of bioremediation because of
              their ability to anaerobically oxidize aromatic compounds coupled to the
              reduction of iron.  These bacteria cannot be used or manipulated unless the
              processes by which iron is reduced and regulated are understood.
