Title       : Zero-Field NMR of Quadrupolar Nuclei in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9604521

Award Number: 9604521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard S. Harbison harbison@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604382  So  The development of single molecule imaging and spectroscopy
              technology has the potential to revolutionize the study of proteins.  One of
              the most promising approaches utilizes two-photon excitation.  By focusing a
              high peak power laser to a diffraction limited spot, chromophores can be
              effectively excited by the simultaneous absorption of two photons each having
              half the energy needed for the excitation transition.  Because of the high
              power density requirement, the two-photon effect is confined to a
              sub-femtoliter volume at the focal point.  For single molecule study, this
              localization ensures that the ubiquitous background fluorescence does not
              overwhelm the fluorescence from a single protein molecule.  Compared with other
              approaches, two-photon excitation has the added advantages that Raleigh and
              Raman scattering can be easily eliminated, and proteins outside the excitation
              volume will not be photobleached.  Further, the 3-D confinement of the
              two-photon excitation volume offers the opportunity to study these protein
              molecules in their natural aqueous, bulk environment.  Detection and imaging of
              a single protein molecule should be possible by incorporating two-photon
              excitation with high sensitivity microscopy.  Detection is only the first step
              in the study of single protein states.  Fluorescence spectroscopy is required
              to diagnose molecular conformation.  Wavelength and lifetime-resolved
              spectroscopy will be implemented in this project.  Wavelength resolved spectra
              will be collected by an intensified, low noise CCD camera.  Fluorescence
              lifetime data can be obtained by correlated single photon counting.    The
              impact of this new methodology will be felt in many biological applications. 
              If a single nucleotide can be detected by fluorescence, the efficiency of DNA
              and RNA sequencing techniques can be greatly enhanced.  Further, the
              combination of single molecular detection and fluorescence correlation
              spectroscopy will allow the protein aggregation and association reactions to b
              e studied at dilutions down to the pico-molar level.  Finally, the development
              of single molecule detection and spectroscopy may aid in the study of protein
              folding which involves a sequence of genetically programmed conformation
              changes.  In an ensemble, the asynchronous nature of individual protein motion
              prevents an examination of these individual steps and only the average protein
              activity can be measured.  However, studying one molecule at a time will
              resolve these individual folding steps.
