Title       : REU Site: Center on Polymer Interfaces and Macromolecular Assemblies (CPIMA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9531333

Award Number: 9531333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Frank curt@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9531333  Frank       This REU site award provides an opportunity for fifteen 
              undergraduates to undertake research in the area of  interfacial science of
              organic materials for a period of ten  weeks.  Students will participate in the
              formation and  characterization of thin organic films and interfaces of 
              materials that are important for subsequent generations of  liquid crystal
              display, sensors, and lubricants for magnetic  recording.        This program
              will capitalize on the resources and  personnel of the Center on Polymer
              Interfaces and  Macromolecular Assemblies (CPIMA).  CPIMA is a partnership  of
              research groups from Stanford University, IBM Almaden  Research Center, and the
              University of California, Davis.  Undergraduate participants in the program
              will have the  unique opportunity to work in a world-class university or 
              corporate research laboratory.  The participants for this  program will
              primarily be recruited from national non  research oriented universities and
              colleges and regional  community colleges.  Distinct efforts will be made to 
              recruit women and minority students.  %%%      To give the students a well
              rounded experience and to  equip them with the practical skills needed to enter
               graduate school or the corporate sector, several  professional enhancement
              programs, such as tours of global  R&D laboratories and seminars by scientists
              and graduate  students on their professional and personal experiences have 
              been incorporated into this program.  High-tech Silicon  Valley and the
              opportunities offered in the San Francisco  Bay Area are an added feature. 
              Social activities are also  planned to give the students a `flavor' for
              graduate student  life and to help them in forming a support network.  ***
