Title       : SBIR Phase II: An Intelligent Computer-Based Method for Health Monitoring of
               Engine and Transmission Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9531267

Award Number: 9531267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Polyshchuk poly@bcea.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B&C Engineering Associates
	      411 Wolf Ledges Parkway, Ste 104
	      Akron, OH  44311    330/375-1632

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1440,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9531267  Vladimir Polyshchuk    This Phase II Small Business Innovation
              Research project aims at the development and construction of a health
              monitoring system for high speed rotating machinery.  Phase II will be involved
              in the development of the overall procedure, experimental verification and
              certification of the developed system, and the construction of the prototype
              machine health monitoring system for field application.  The work will be
              carried out in three simultaneous tasks:    1.  The development of a
              comprehensive procedure for machine health monitoring which includes (i)
              identification- to identify damage and wear, (ii) quantification- to evaluate
              the level of damage, and (iii) prognostication- to predict remaining life of
              the damaged component.     2.  The development of experimental studies for
              verification and certification of the developed software package.  Three major
              experimental developments will be carried out consisting of (i) two fully
              instrumented rotating machinery teat rigs set up by B&C EA, Inc., (ii) a fully
              instrumented bearing test rig developed by the Timkin Bearing Company, and
              (iii) an industrial pump tested by the Duririon Pump Company.  3.  The
              development of hardware and software for the data acquisition, data storage,
              and signal processing for field data by the Quatech Company.  Three different
              systems will be developed:  (i) the Portable Monitoring System- instrumented
              only with 'dumb sensors' for data acquisition , (ii) the Continuous Storage
              System- continuous scheduled monitoring, and (iii) the SCAN (Smart Centralized
              Automated Networking) System- multi-channel wireless networking with a
              receiving station.    Two main commercial applications are: i) An on-board
              machine health monitoring system that will enable automatic control/shutdown of
              the machinery for event management (for safety measures and prolongation of
              machine life), and ii) a plug-in type machine health monitoring system for
              recording performance history during regular maintenance (for d etermining
              operational safety without shutdown or disassembly of the machine) e.g. in
              defense industries- jet engines, helicopters, and land vehicles and   in
              commercial industries- petrochemical, power generation.  ***
