Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Fast Hybrid Fourier/Real Space Algorithm for Coulomb Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9531459

Award Number: 9531459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Kong jkong@q-chem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benny G. Johnson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Q-Chem, Inc.
	      317 Whipple Street
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15218    412/268-1056

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1978,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  95-31459  Johnson       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will continue the development of an innovative alternate approach to
              the evaluation of the Coulomb interactions in large molecules.  Recently there
              has been a rapidly growing interest in Density Functional Theory (DFT) as a
              general procedure for predicting physical properties of molecules, which is
              relatively inexpensive compared to traditional correlated methods. For the
              largest molecular systems whose study is feasible by the current DFT programs
              (several hundred atoms), the treatment of the Coulomb interactions, with its
              quadratic cost in system size, is computationally dominant. In order to be able
              to perform calculations on truly large molecules, a reduction in the scaling of
              the Coulomb contribution is required.  The Phase I research established the
              feasibility of a breakthrough hybrid Fourier/real space method, the KWIK
              algorithm, which solves the Coulomb problem in only linear work in system size.
              The experience gained in Phase I with the one-dimensional version of KWIK will
              be used to develop the extensions that are required to handle two- and
              three-dimensional systems and to treat the continuous distributions in
              electronic structure calculations. The Phase I research effort has revealed not
              only that it is technically feasible to implement the KWIK algorithm, but also
              that the kernel of a KWIK program module is simple and tunable. It was also
              shown that the structure of KWIK is quite amenable to simultaneous
              vectorization and parallelization - ingredients that are both critical to
              achieving near-peak performance on many modern computing platforms. During
              Phase II, the Phase I results will be refined and attached to the Q-Chem
              quantum chemistry program, and the implementation will be extended to parallel
              platforms. It is therefore anticipated that a highly efficient parallel program
              for the study of molecules of unprecedented size will result from this work.  
              This research will allow highly accurate d ensity functional calculations to be
              carried out on much larger molecular systems than is possible with current
              techniques and programs. This will be of considerable value in computational
              quantum chemistry and physics  researchers at universities as well as
              industrial and govemment facilities.  ***
