Title       : Physics of Ultra Small Metal Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1997   
File        : a9531638

Award Number: 9531638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Giordano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9531638  Giordano    Advanced  lithographic  techniques  will  be  used  to 
              make   several  different   types  of  extremely  small  metallic  structures. 
               These  structures, which will have one or more dimensions in the 100 - 300  , 
              will  be  used  to  study  fundamental problems  in  condensed  matter 
              physics.  Issues  which  will be addressed  include  the  behavior  of 
              magnetic  impurities near surfaces and in the presence of a disordered 
              environment, quantum mechanical behavior off magnetic domain walls  in 
              ferromagnets,  and  fluctuations near critical points  in  ultra-small 
              systems.  In addition to providing new insights into these fundamental 
              problems,  this  work  should also be relevant  to  the  technological 
              problems associated with advanced micro-fabrication processes, and  to  high
              density information storage in magnetic media.  %%%  This continuing
              improvements in micro-fabrication techniques, such  as  those  used  to make
              hgth density integrated circuits, provide  unique  opportunities  for basic
              physics research. Many interesting  phenomena  occur  only  in extremely small
              structures. This work will  use  small  structures  as  tools  to  address
              several  fundamental  questions  in  condensed  matter physics. These questions
              include  the   behavior  of  magnetic impurities in metals, and the quantum
              mechanical behavior  of  domain   walls  in  magnets.  This  fundamental  work 
              is   also   for  technological interest, since the physics that will be
              elucidated will  be  relevant  to future generations electronic devices. In
              particular,  the  work on domain walls will be of direct relevance to high 
              density  magnetic storage devices. Moreover, the lithographic methods that will
               be used are prototypes of the methods that will be required to produce  future
               generations  of  electronic  devices.  Progress  made  now  in  developing 
              and refining new laboratory scale lithographic  techniques  may prove useful in
              the fabrication of the next generation of devices.  ***
