Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Embeddings and Decompositions of Graphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1996    
File        : a9531722

Award Number: 9531722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Rodger rodgec1@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rodger  9531722  This award is for a study of several problems that will be 
              considered over the next three years.  Two of the problems will  take a major
              effort to  solve.  The first problem is to find  necessary and sufficient
              conditions for a given edge-colored copy  of the complete graph on n vertices
              (Kn) to be embedded in an  edge-colored copy of Kv in such a way that the
              subgraph induced  by the edges of each color form a connected spanning
              k-regular   subgraph of Kv.  This would be a companion to existing results 
              with either drop the requirement that the subgraphs are connected  or replace
              it with the requirement that they be 2-edge connected.  The second problem is
              to show that any partial Mendelsohn triple  system of order n and index l can
              be embedded in a complete  Mendelsohn triple system of order v and index l for
              some v not  exceeding 2n+1.  This is a directed version of Lindner's  
              conjecture, a conjecture which has now been proved for triple  systems of even
              index using amalgamation techniques.  This  progress in the undirected case
              suggests that the directed  analogue is ready to be solved.  Amalgamation
              techniques are of  interest in their own right, and warrant further study.
              Other  problems will be studied.  The investigator will consider the  graph
              H(C) naturally arising from a Hamming code C and attempt to  show that H(C) has
              a hamilton decomposition and is pan-cyclic.  The investigator also plans to
              make contributions to the growing  literature on graph designs.  This research
              is in the general  area of Combinatorics.  One of the goals of Combinatorics is
              to  find efficient methods to study how discrete collections of  objects can be
              arranged.  The behavior of discrete systems is  extremely  important to modern
              communications.  For example, the  design of large  networks, such as those
              occurring in telephone  systems, and the design of  algorithms in computer
              science deal  with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of 
              combinatorial research.
