Title       : Metallic and Magnetic Quantum Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9531809

Award Number: 9531809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai C. Chiang chiang@mrl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9531809 
              Chiang    The structure, growth behaviors, and properties of selected metal 
              surfaces, interfaces, quantum wells, and superlattices are  being 
              investigated.   The   purpose  is   to   obtain   a   fundamental 
              understanding  of  the  scientific  principles  that  govern  the  crystalline
              form, chemical composition, and electronic properties  of   metal   epitaxial 
              systems  and  quantum   structures.   The  experimental   techniques   include 
              angle-resolved   synchrotron  photoemission,  Auger  spectroscopy,  electron 
              diffraction,  and  scanning   tunneling   microscopy.    The   work   will  
              include  investigations  of  (1)  the  bulk and  surface  band  structure, 
              coherence  and  scattering lengths, and spatial distributions  of  electronic
              states, (2) the physics and chemistry of film  growth,  (3)  the 
              structure-property relationships  for  various  quantum  configurations,  (4) 
              Kondo effects in  two  dimensional  surface  alloys,  and  (5)  spin  effects
              in systems  containing  magnetic  materials.  %%%    Artificial  structures
              made of stacks of thin layers can  exhibit  interesting and potentially useful
              electronic properties.   Using  state-of-the-art  techniques of materials
              synthesis,  it  is  now  possible  to  fabricate layer configurations  with 
              atomic  layer  precision.   Electrons  in  such  systems  can  become  
              trapped,  reflected,  or  refracted  by  the  boundaries  between   layers, 
              resulting  in  new  properties,  which  offer  opportunities  for  various 
              electronic  applications.  This  research  project  will  employ  a  variety of
              experimental techniques to investigate  the  basic  physics  and chemistry of
              atomic layer formation,  and  to  determine the relationships between the
              atomic structure and  the  electronic  properties. Part of the work will be
              carried  out  at  the  Synchrotron Radiation Center, a national facility funded
               by  the National Science Foundation.  ***
