Title       : Electrophilic Attack on Coordinated Ligands Involved in Catalysis by
               Organometallic Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9531751

Award Number: 9531751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Norton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research by Dr. Jack R. Norton of the Chemistry   Department,
              Colorado State University, on the reactivity of   organometallic transition
              metal complexes, with emphasis on the behavior   of hydride ligands in
              enantioselective reactions.  The first project is   to develop an NMR method to
              detect hydride ligands in the presence of   acid in order to test the
              thermodynamic driving force for proton tranfer   isotope effects, and to
              develop optically active hydride complexes that   can transfer hydride to
              opposite prochiral faces of a substate at   substantially different rates. 
              Proton addition to oxygen- and   nitrogen-containing ligands will be followed. 
              In a related project,   enantioselective synthesis of amino acids promoted by
              zirconocenes will   be investigated with particular attention on increasing the
              yield and   selectivity of the reaction.  Protic cleavage of Zr-C bonds
              catalyzed by   CO will be studied as will the use of  zirconium nitrene
              complexes to   prepare enantiomerically enriched amino alcohols.  This project
              has two main themes:  reactions of metal hydrides and   zirconium chemistry.  
              The metal hydride studies are designed to develop   new ways to transfer
              hydrogen from a metal hydride to an organic compound   while maintaining a
              desired stereospecific orientation.  The zirconium   compounds are potentially
              useful agents for reactions in which C-C and   C-N bonds are formed.  The
              results will be relevant to understanding the   fundamental behavior of
              hydrogen reactions with metal compounds and to   developing new reagents for
              organic synthesis.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
