Title       : Research Experiences in Marine Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1998  
File        : a9531348

Award Number: 9531348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Kent bkb@mdibl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Towle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         This award will support the participation of  ten  undergraduate
              biology students each year, the majority of whom  are expected to be
              African-American, in the Research Experiences  for Undergraduates program
              offered by the Mt. Desert Island  biologicalLaboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine.
               This program, will  allow each student to spend eight weeks working at the
              bench,  paired with a senior scientist leading a research team working on 
              timely questions involving marine physiology.  Using sharks,  skates, flounder
              and other sea animals, students will explore  questions at the mechanistic
              level concerning reproduction,  osmoregulation, acid base balance and ion
              transport.  Orientation  lectures on basic concepts of marine physiology and
              molecular  biology during the first week will be supplemented by weekly 
              evening lectures on these subjects designed to encourage  discussion by the
              students.  Undergraduates will attend three  weekly laboratory-wide science
              seminars on topics related to  marine physiology.  They will participate in a
              campus-wide ethics  course taught by expert lecturers and by group discussions
              of  cases illustrating the ethical issues with which scientists are 
              confronted.  Four noontime discussions led by knowledgeable  ethicists and
              involving REU students and their mentors will  address subjects such as the use
              of animals and humans as  research subjects, ethics of genetics research and
              environmental  ethics.  The research experience will be completed by each 
              student giving a talk to the laboratory community on his/her  results and
              writing a research paper for publication in the  laboratory Bulletin.      
              This award will foster the continued education and training  of individuals who
              will be part of the next generation of basic  researchers in marine physiology.
               It will also help to inform  young citizens about ethical questions in science
              and aspects of  management and decision making in environmental issues.
