Title       : REU: Training Undergraduates in Science and Technology (TRUST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9531521

Award Number: 9531521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven B. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank T. Bayliss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cristian R. Orrego  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         This award will support the participation of  ten talented 
              undergraduate students each year in the Training Undergraduates  in Science and
              Technology (TRUST) program at San Francisco State  University.  The goals of 
              TRUST are to: 1) prepare undergraduate  students with the skills and
              inspiration to enter careers in  science; 2) foster student development from
              relative dependence  to relative independence through emphasis on critical
              thinking  and student-driven discovery, and 3) prepare students for  applying,
              entering and attending graduate schools through  academic preparation, advising
              and identification of  opportunities for fellowships and grants.  The research
              theme of  TRUST is the importance and relevance of genetic diversity.  It 
              consists of a two week DNA technology workshop, evolved from  three years of
              prior NSF support, followed by eight week,  individual student-driven research
              internships.  Group activities  include critical thinking exercises, trips to
              Sierra Nevada and  Monterey Bay field sites, weekly informal round-table 
              discussions, graduate preparation workshops, and bioethics and  visiting
              scientists seminars.  Student faculty interactions will  be cultivated by a
              "mentor-in-residence" program in which  different mentors will live with the
              group of students each  weekend.  TRUST is expected to increase the
              participation of  women and under-represented groups in science because 60-70%
              of  our student recruitment pool is represented by these groups.  The 
              culminating experience for TRUST students will be seminar  presentations
              modeled after professional scientific meetings.  After a summer's
              participation, students will be tracked through  an E-mail network and annual
              contact by mail and phone.  In  addition, alumni of the program will
              participate as role models  in subsequent years.       This award will foster
              the continued education and training  of individuals who will be part of the
              next generation of basic  researchers in the various aspects of research i n
              environmental  sciences, including ecology, systematics and population
              genetics.  It will also help to inform young citizens about ethical  questions
              in science and aspects of management and decision  making in environmental
              issues.
