Title       : SBIR Phase II: Real-Time Magneto-Optic Nondestructive Inspection of Tagged
               Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9531461

Award Number: 9531461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald L. Fitzpatrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physical Research Inc
	      12517 131 Court NE
	      Kirkland, WA  98034    213/378-0056

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                          This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
              further develop a nondestructive inspection technique (NDI) for composites
              first explored in Phase 1. Composite materials are strong, lightweight
              substitutes for many traditional metallic structural components.  However,
              composites are often difficult to inspect for discontinuities due to their high
              electrical resistively and/or high ultrasonic attenuation.  In Phase I,
              Physical Research Inc. (PRi) demonstrated the basic feasibility of using real
              time magneto-optic/eddy current imaging (MOI) techniques (developed by PRi) to
              form images of defects in `tagged` composites.  Composites tagged during
              manufacturing with trace quantities of magnetic particles, or constructed with
              electrically conducting wire screens, were successfully inspected for voids,
              cracks, impact damage and discontinuities in fiber weave.  The principal
              objectives of the Phase II research are to 1) Develop an MOI system that is
              specially adapted to applications in composites (e.g., improved magneto-optic
              sensors, on-board magnetizing devices) 2) Work with manufacturers of composite
              materials to develop tagging techniques that are compatible with industry needs
              3) Complete studies designed to elucidate basic principles.  The Phase II
              research will consist of controlled experiments (and calculations) designed to
              determine the optimum kinds of tagging for a particular type of defect, the
              minimum amount of tagging required and the effect this tagging has on the
              physical properties of composites.  Pri anticipates that the Phase II research
              will be successful and that an MOI system capable of inspecting a wide range of
              composite materials will be the outcome.       Both the military and civilian
              aerospace sectors will benefit from this new NDI method.  Tagging composites
              with magnetic particles (or wire screens) during manufacturing will result in a
              simple, low cost, rapid method for MOI-based NDI of composites.  This new
              capability for NDI of composites during manufacture and later in-service or
              during repairs, will lead to enhanced sales of the MOI.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
