Title       : REU Site: Research Internships in the Neural and Behavioral Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1998   
File        : a9531715

Award Number: 9531715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Blankenship virginia.blankenship@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Markle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                           This award will support the participation of undergraduate 
              students in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program offered  by
              Northern Arizona University. Students chosen for this program will  be Native
              American, African American and Hispanic students primarily;  Caucasian students
              who are the first generation for their family in  college may be included as
              participants. Under the guidance of  scientists from the Department of
              Biological Sciences and the  Department of Psychology, students will conduct
              research in the neural  and behavioral sciences. The program is a year-long
              research internship  that integrates four major components. (1) Students
              receive formal  training in research design and statistics, reading complex
              scientific  literature, and an integrated lecture-discussion series that covers
              the  range of research topics in neural and behavioral sciences. (2) This 
              training phase is combined with research experience under the guidance  of
              faculty mentors during the summer and the academic year. (3) A  seminar on
              professional issues held during the Fall semester will  assist students in
              clarifying their career goals, instruct them in  applying to graduate schools,
              and prepare them to make research  presentations. (4) An ethics component will
              include presentations on  the ethical treatment of animals in research, the
              ethical treatment of  human subjects, the history of science, and cultural
              issues in ethics.  Both faculty and students will attend presentations on
              Native American  cultural restrictions around the handling of certain animals
              and  plants.       This award will foster the continued education and training
              of  individuals who will be part of the next generation of basic  researchers
              in neural and behavioral sciences. It will also help to  inform young citizens
              about ethical questions in science and aspects of  management and decision
              making for solving some societal/environmental  problems.                      
                                                   =~
