Title       : SBIR Phase II: A High Precision Ultrasonic Chilled Surface Dew Point Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9531504

Award Number: 9531504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell D. Mileham mctco@brookings.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick R. Story  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Microconversion Tech. Co.
	      1322 4th St
	      Brookings, SD  570062325    605/688-4618

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531504  Story        This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              is to design, develop, construct and evaluate a prototype surface acoustic wave
              (SAW) dew point hygrometer based on the Phase I research that will be lower in
              cost and have several advantages over existing optical dew point instruments.
              The advantages include a cost of about half that of existing optical dew point 
              hygrometers, higher resolution and accuracy, reduced sensitivity to
              contamination, frost point  transition detection, and stability through the
              frost point. Cost and performance improvements in  dew point instrumentation
              are important in the fields of atmospheric sciences, agriculture, and  numerous
              industries. Four main objectives are planned for the Phase II work. They
              include: dew  point measurement research which involves investigating the
              stability and robustness of the  control algorithm for frost point measurements
              during frost point transition, and the effects  of SAW substrate microroughness
              and surface coatings on dew point measurement accuracy;  The design and
              construction of the prototype instrument which involves RF oscillator design, 
              design of the microprocessor based control unit, and packaging of the prototype
              instrument;  Testing, evaluation, and calibration of the prototype instrument;
              Analysis of testing and  evaluation. Corresponding design improvements will be
              made to the prototype based on this  analysis. This work is expected to produce
              a prototype for manufacturing.   Low cost and accurate dew point hygrometers
              have many commercial applications. The need is especially strong in the areas
              of meteorology, climatology, agriculture and industries such as
              microelectronics, chemical, food, steel, and paper. For example, studies of
              atmospheric water vapor concentrations and humidity content of industrial
              process gases.
