Title       : SBIR Phase II: Efficient Electrical Impedance Tomography Using Boundary Element
               Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9531798

Award Number: 9531798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georges L. Chahine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramani Duraiswami  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Dynaflow Inc
	      7210 Pindell School Road
	      Fulton, MD  207599752    301/604-3688

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9531798  Duraiswami    This Small Business Innovation Phase II Research
              project will develop practical, efficient, fast and accurate algorithms and
              software for imaging using Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) for both two
              and three-dimensional applications in medicine and industry.  EIT images the
              inside of an object by determining the spatial distribution of impedance.  This
              is achieved by applying specified currents at their surface, and measuring the
              voltage induced.  Compared to other imaging methods promises significant
              advantages in economy, convenience, and safety for a wide variety of clinical
              and industrial applications.  The main obstacle to making EIT more widely
              applicable is the lack of an efficient algorithm that can perform accurate data
              inversion.  Inversion algorithms currently in use are based on either heuristic
              techniques of limited applicability, or on full numerical solution using finite
              elements.  In Phase I of this research the computationally efficient Boundary
              Element Method (BEM) was extended to EIT by using new algorithms that use dual
              reciprocity techniques.  Further improvements in efficiency and accuracy were
              obtained by developing a new methodology for parametrizing the inverse problem.
               Phase I results demonstrated the speed and accuracy advantages of EIT images
              obtained using the new algorithms.  Phase II research will further improve
              these algorithms.  They will be specialized to particular applications,
              incorporate more efficient ways to perform the multiple parameter minimization,
              and account for available a priori information.  The developed algorithms will
              be validated and refined by performing experiments.  The software developed
              will be integrated into a user-friendly package    BEM software for Electrical
              Impedance Tomography will have a very large commercial market in medical
              imaging, two-phase flow imaging, and industrial nondestructive evaluation and
              testing.  The developed software will be licensed to manufacturers of EIT
              systems, while we w ill develop EIT based multiphase flow instrumentation.     
              ***
