Title       : The California Academy of Sciences Summer Systematics Institute as a REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9531307

Award Number: 9531307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142350             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Kociolek pkociolek@cas.calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         This award will support the participation of  nine  undergraduate
              students each year in the Research Experiences for  Undergraduates program
              offered by the California Academy of  Sciences' Summer Systematics Institute. 
              The program is ten weeks  long and recruitment on a national level will give
              emphasis to  women and minority students in science.  Each prospective intern 
              would apply to work with an Academy curator on a research  project.  Successful
              applicants would take part in formal  lectures in Systematic Biology, tours of
              each of the Academy's  nine research departments and research seminars in
              systematic  biology by scientists from outside the Academy.  Students would 
              work on directed programs circumscribed so that an introduction  to the problem
              and organisms to be studied, as well as data  collection, interpretation and
              dissemination can be accomplished.  Each student will produce a manuscript of
              the project's results  in the form of a scientific paper and will make an oral 
              presentation of  his/her results to peers.  Evaluations of  interns and
              participating Academy staff will be conducted each  year to fine-tune/improve
              the program for subsequent years.       This award will foster the continued
              education and training  of individuals who will be part of the next generation
              of basic  researchers in systematic biology.  It will also help to inform 
              young citizens about issues related to biological diversity and  its
              preservation.
