Title       : Fundamental Studies of Polymerization Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9531207

Award Number: 9531207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254010             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Harmon Ray ray@chewi.che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Ray - 9531207    More than 70 billion lbs/year of synthetic polymers
              are currently produced in the U.S. in a wide variety of polymerization
              reactors.  The ultimate use of the products from these reactors ranges from
              synthetic clothing through automotive structural components and optical disks
              to latex paints.  It is estimated that the total sales of these materials in
              the U.S. amount to more than 100 billion dollars/year.  In addition, synthetic
              polymers provide a positive export/import balance of more than 6 billion
              dollars/year.      In this research, the PI plans to make use of detailed
              models for both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic polymerization reactors
              to analyze and explain observed experimental measurements of molecular weight
              distribution, copolymer composition, chain branching, tacticity, etc. as well
              as those results showing complex dynamic phenomena in continuous reactors. 
              Close comparison of experimental results and model predictions will be made in
              order to tune and validate existing models as well as those now under
              development.  From these models, the PI expects to predict the range of reactor
              design parameters for which undesirable polymer properties and unstable dynamic
              behavior arise and experimentally test these predictions in the laboratory. 
              From the results, he will derive suitable process operating conditions for the
              desired polymer properties, high productivity, and safe dynamic operation. 
              After experimentally testing the new reactor designs which appear to yield
              acceptable dynamic behavior and desirable polymer properties, feedback control
              strategies suitable for dealing with any remaining dynamic problems will be
              tested.  As part of this effort, the development and testing of several new
              on-line polymer characterization devices is under way.  Through these research
              efforts, the PI expects to be able to design and control reactors capable of
              producing a more uniform and higher quality polymer product.
