Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Oscillation Inequalities, Almost Everywhere Convergence,
               and Related Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9531526

Award Number: 9531526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Jones rjones@condor.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      1 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT  Jones    This proposal involves the continued study of square
              functions and other measures of the oscillation associated with a sequence of
              averaging operators in ergodic theory. Oscillation inequalities have already
              played a key role in the theory of a.e. convergence problems   arising in
              connection with the pointwise ergodic theorem. In particular, oscillation
              operators give new information about upcrossing and jump inequalities. We hope
              to obtain new results in the case of a single transformation, and to extend
              several results to the multi-parameter case. We also continue the search for
              conditions on subsequences, both   in the single and in the  multiparameter
              case, which will imply a.e. convergence of the associated averages.   The
              techniques used to study the questions in the proposal will often be  from
              harmonic analysis, including Calderon-Zygmund methods and Littlewood-Paley
              theory. In addition,  certain ideas from probability, especially martingale
              theory,   can be expected to play a key role.    Classical ergodic theory is
              the study of the long term behavior of dynamical systems. For example, we might
              be interested in the distribution of a pollutant in a water supply, and how the
              distribution of that pollutant changes over time. The ergodic theorem can be
              viewed as a generalization of the strong law of large numbers. A special case
              of the strong law of large numbers occurs if we consider the sequence of heads
              and tails observed if we toss a fair coin. In such a case we have independent
              trials, and we measure the oscillation of the sequence of averages by looking
              at the variance. A measure of oscillation is   important because it provides a
              way of estimating how close a particular average is to the true (and in
              experimental situations, unknown) mean. In public opinion polls this measure of
              how close we are is usually referred to as the margin of error. In the more
              general setting, considered in this proposal, the trials are not independent.
              For example, the distribution o f a pollutant  at one time will certainly play
              a role in determining the distribution a short time later. This is in contrast
              to the case of tossing a fair coin, where the fact that we saw heads on a
              certain toss gives us no information about whether or not   we will see a head
              on the next toss. This proposal involves the study of the oscillation of
              ergodic averages, and measures of such things as how often the average values
              rise above some critical threshold. In experimental situations, because of
              equipment failure, or human error, we often find that some of the expected data
              is missing. In earlier work it has been shown that in some cases this leads to
              very misleading results, and in other cases we can still recover the correct
              result. The work in this area is very incomplete. We hope to be able to further
              classify the cases in which an experiment can still be salvaged, despite  
              missing experimental data. In these cases, a measure of the oscillation, or
              margin of error, is especially critical.
