Title       : SBIR Phase II: Monte Carlo Simulation - A Design Tool for Investment Casting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1997    
File        : a9531304

Award Number: 9531304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Jaske jaskec@cctlabs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CC Tech Laboratories, Inc.
	      2704 Sawbury Blvd
	      Columbus, OH  432351821    614/761-1214

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9531304  Jaske    The proposed SBIR Phase II project will complete the
              development of a software design tool that will be used to predict the grain
              structure of metals and alloys in advanced materials processing. This software
              will be a very important tool with broad commercial and technical value. Grain
              structure is a primary factor in materials properties and must be carefully
              considered in almost all materials processing applications. The advent of easy
              access to advanced computing power has made it possible to use computer
              simulation in engineering design. Results of the Phase I project showed that it
              is feasible to simulate the solidification grain structure of cast materials
              using high-end desktop computers. Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS) with a process
              control parameter was successfully employed to model grain nucleation and
              growth in fine-grain castings that are typical of superalloy investment
              castings. It was found that heat flow can be incorporated directly into the
              model and that MCS can be used to model most of the important features of cast
              grain structures. The objective of the proposed Phase 11 research will be to
              develop a robust model for simulation of cast grain structure nucleation and
              growth during solidification. Six research tasks are planned to achieve this
              objective. In the first task, the physical components of the MCS process
              control parameter will defined. A numerical model for each of these components
              will be constructed and mathematically formatted for the MCS computer code in
              the second task. In the third task, thermophysical constants for these
              numerical models will be obtained from the literature. The relative merits of
              using finite-difference versus finite-element methods to model heat flow will
              be evaluated in the fourth task. In the fifth task, the simulation results will
              be validated by means of comparisons with experimental data on grain structures
              for representative castings. Finally, a prototype software package for the MCS
              model will be developed in the  sixth task. The prototype software will provide
              the base for commercializing the research results in Phase III. Successful
              commercialization of the software will make US industry more productive and
              competitive in the area of advanced materials processing. A representative of
              the advanced materials processing industry, Howmet Corporation, will continue
              participating in this project.   Modeling Advanced Materials Processing,
              Improving the Quality of Investment Castings, Controlling Grain Structure
              during Materials Processing, Providing New Software for Application to the
              Processing of Advanced Materials, Designing and Developing Materials
              Processing.
