Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Evolution Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9531834

Award Number: 9531834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Ponce ponce@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Ponce    The project is devoted to research into various aspect of
              nonlinear evolution equations. They are at the intersection of partial
              differential equations, classical harmonic analysis and mathematical physics.
              The principal areas include the study of several dispersive systems arising as
              approximate models in wave propagation problems.  The emphasis is on the
              development of arguments and techniques, mainly from Fourier analysis, which
              provide a better description of the behavior of the solutions of such
              models.The second part of the project is devoted to the study of problems
              related to viscous flows. They include the long time behavior of solutions to
              the 2-D density dependent Navier-Stokes equations. Also the system for
              compressible ideal fluids under minimal regularity of the data is studied.   
              In concrete problems the validity of these models as a good approximation of
              the  physical phenomenon depends on specific properties of their solutions,
              mainly those  describing their long time behavior. Thus, the qualitative
              features of solutions  obtained through this research provide a benchmark
              against which numerical approximation schemes can be tested. This applied
              analysis of nonlinear partial differential equations is an equal partner with
              their numerical study and the modelling of the   physical phenomena, all of
              which interact to give a full mathematical picture.
