Title       : Ice-Radar and Satellite Remote-Sensing Studies of Glaciers and Ice Sheets, II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9531501

Award Number: 9531501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Jacobel jacobel@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ice-Radar and Satellite Remote Sensing Studies of Glaciers and Ice Sheets II    
                This project is for continued funding of the Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates (REU) Site at St . Olaf  College and South Cascade Glacier, WA. 
              Since 1987, with support form NSF, the St. Olaf ice radar has been part of the
              effort to understand the dynamics of the West Antarctic ice Sheet.  The St.
              Olaf contribution to this prmject has been the development and deployment of a
              ground-based radar system used in studies of several of the fast ice streams
              which drain into the Ross Ice Shelf.  Through the current REU award, the group
              has more recently become involved in the use of satellite imagery for obtaining
              ice velocities - a complementary tool to the radar also used for understanding
              ice dynamics.       At the same time, St. Olaf has carried out an active
              research program on South Cascade Glacier, WA in collaboration with scientists
              in the U.S. Geological Survey.  In addition to serving as a testing  and
              development site for the Antarctic radar system, this glacier has been focus of
              an intensive effort to investigate the problem of englacial and subglacial
              drainage and hydrology.  Studies on South Cascade Glacier also provide and
              accessible site for students to experience glaciological science in the field,
              and to plan and carry out experiments of their own design similar to those done
              in the polar regions.        This proposal will enable undergraduate students
              to participate in the data reduction and analysis phase of radar and ice
              dynamical studies being carried out on Siple Dome, Antarctica.   It will also
              fund a complementary study of ice velocities in this area using satellite
              imagery to answer questions about the transitory nature of the ice streams
              surrounding the dome.  The proposal supports continued field work mn South
              Cascade Glacier to study problems of glacial hydrology and further developments
              of the  radar system.
