Title       : Symbolic Computing and Dimensionally Reduced Models of Fluid Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9531828

Award Number: 9531828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41778              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanly L. Steinberg stanly@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5930,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop new methods for numerically modelling  incompressible
              fluid flows of the type that appear in global  environmental modelling
              problems.  The proposed models are  hyperbolic and dispersive
              vertically-averaged models of  stratified incompressible flow which are derived
              from the  Navier-Stokes equations.  These models reduce three-dimensional 
              models to a system of complex two-dimensional models, which  promise greater
              numerical efficiency.  However, the averaged  models are not well posed for
              some interesting ranges of their  parameters.  Consequently, their instability
              and regularization  must be investigated.  This analysis, along with the 
              discretization of the continuum equations, the accuracy and  stability analysis
              of the discrete problems, and the coding of  the discrete equations are all
              algebraically complex, so the use  of computer algebra will play a critical
              role in this project.    The results of the project can be used for the global
              modelling  of the ocean, the atmosphere, and other complex environments.  The
              current codes implementing detailed models of such  environments require
              computational resources that tax even the  largest computers.  The goal of this
              project is to produce new  models and numerical methods for their solution
              which would  represent a significant improvement in efficiency and accuracy 
              over existing models for some important applications.  ***
