Title       : Conference: Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), January 3-6, 1996, in
               Hawaii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9531651

Award Number: 9531651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Toni Kazic                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teri E. Klein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The first Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB-1) will  be  held January
              3-6, 1996, in Hawaii. PSB-1 will bring together  top  researchers and
              educators, from the US,  Asian  Pacific  nations,  Europe and throughout the
              rest of  the  world,  to  exchange  research  results,  teaching  experiences 
              and  to  address open issues in all aspects of computational biology. 
              Replacing  and  extending  the  last  three  years  of   the  Biotechnology 
              Computing Track at the  Hawaii  International  Conference on System Sciences
              (HICSS), PSB-1 will provide  a  forum for presentation and discussion on
              virtually all areas  of  computational biology with special emphasis this year
              in  the   following  areas:  molecular  evolution,   interactive  molecular 
              visualization, genome informatics and  databases,  protein   structure 
              analysis  and  prediction,   population  modeling,   quantum/classical  hybrid 
              methods,   biological  control   systems,  protein  design,  internet   tools  
              and  biocomputing    education.    PSB-1    is    a     genuinely 
              interdisciplinary  meeting,  emphasizing  the  critical  and  difficult  areas
              in both computer science and biology,  with  in-depth  coverage of such areas
              as evolutionary  inference,  protein biophysics, advanced data representations,
              and  high  performance computing.    The Biotechnology Computing Track of HICSS
              in previous years  attracted  researchers from more than 20 countries.  Initial
               feedback  from PSB-1 conference announcements  suggest  that  participation at
              the new meeting will be just as diverse. No  other    computational   biology  
              meeting    has    greater  international participation.    To  our  knowledge,
              PSB's educational workshop is the  first  ever  organized  meeting  on the
              teaching  of  computational  biology.  Course  and curriculum development  are 
              at  their  formative  stages. Many faculty are facing similar  problems  in 
              this  emerging and crucial area, yet there is a lack  of  published  materials
              and no widely available  gu idelines.  A  forum  on educational issues at this
              time will significantly  advance instruction in this field.    The  organizing
              committee is requesting funding in order to:  (i)  attract  high  caliber
              educators and researchers;  (ii)  attract  educators and researchers who have
              recently  become  involved   in   course   and   curriculum   development   in 
              computational  biology;  and (iii) fund  graduate  students,  postdoctoral  
              fellows,   young  faculty,   and   women   or  minorities,  with  preference
              shown to  those  who  will  be  giving oral presentations or displaying
              posters.
