Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Common Framework for Curve Evolution and Image
               Segmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9531293

Award Number: 9531293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayant Shah shah@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531293  Shah       In recent years, curve evolution has developed into an 
              important tool in Computer Vision and has been applied to a wide  variety of
              problems such as smoothing of shapes, shape analysis  and shape recovery.  The
              underlying principle is the evolution of  a simple closed curve whose points
              move in the direction of the  normal with a prescribed velocity.  A fundamental
              limitation of  the method as it stands is that it cannot deal with important 
              image features such as triple points.  The method also requires a  choice of an
              "edge-strength" function, defined over the image  domain, indicating the
              likelihood of an object boundary being  present at any point in the image
              domain.  This implies a separate  preprocessing step that is in essence
              precomputing approximate  boundaries in the presence of noise.  The initial
              curve also has  to be preselected.  The investigator demonstrates that the 
              different versions of curve evolution used in Computer Vision  together with
              the preprocessing step and the choice of the  initial curve can be integrated
              in the form of a new segmentation  functional that unifies and extends curve
              evolution models.  Moreover, the numerical solutions obtained retain sharp 
              discontinuities or "shocks," thus providing sharp demarcation of  object
              boundaries.  The new functional described provides a  unified approach to the
              segmentation problem and shape analysis.  The principal objective of the
              proposed research is to carry out  a mathematical analysis of the new
              functional, apply it to real  images, and study its possible extensions.      
              This project is in the field of machine vision, with  applications especially
              in medical imaging.  The underlying  mathematical theory proposed here is
              potentially applicable also  to seemingly unrelated fields such as liquid
              crystal technology,  metallurgy, flame propagation and combustion.  A computer
              receives  visual information through a camera in the form of millions of 
              numbers per picture frame, each number describing th e intensity  and the color
              of light at a point in the scene.  The sheer volume  of the visual information
              makes the task of its interpretation by  the computer extremely difficult.  The
              first processing task for  the computer before it can begin to recognize an
              object in a  scene is to find the object's outline.  This is what is called the
               segmentation problem.  The fundamental difficulty here is how to  separate the
              object's outline from the rest of a cluttered scene.  Even when the computer
              has successfully located the object  outline, it is difficult to identify the
              object because its  appearance changes depending on its orientation as the
              object and  the camera move.  Worse, the object might be partially obscured. 
              Therefore, characteristic features that distinguish one object  from another
              and that remain unchanged as the appearance of the  object changes must be
              defined and calculated.  This is the  problem of shape analysis.  This project
              formulates a new unified  approach to the fundamental mathematical questions
              underlying the  two problems.  It develops new mathematical tools based upon
              this  approach and applies them to specific classes of practical  problems, in
              particular to analysis of biomedical images.
