Title       : Classification of C*-Algebras, Extensions and Homomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9531776

Award Number: 9531776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huaxin Lin hlin@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531776  Lin       This project consists of three closely related topics, 
              classification of homomorphisms from one given C*-algebra to  another,
              classification of extensions of one C*-algebra  by another, and classification
              of C*-algebras of real rank zero.  The investigator will use KK-theory plus
              tracial information to  determine homomorphisms from an abelian C*-algebra to a
               simple C*-algebra of real rank zero with stable rank one.  To classify
              extensions, he will classify monomorphisms  from an (abelian) C*-algebra to the
              corona algebra.  With  additional efforts, by classifying homomorphisms (and 
              automorphisms), one might also be able to classify certain  types of
              C*-algebras (of real rank zero).  One particular  class that he will consider
              is direct limits of some  extensions of certain algebras.       The first
              example of a C*-algebra is the complex numbers.    It is proved to be the only
              C*-algebra that is also a field.    In fact, any finite number of copies of the
              complex numbers is   a C*-algebra.  One can also have infinitely many copies. 
              If   one glues together continuously an infinite number of copies, one  may
              arrive at the complex-valued continuous functions on an interval,  or even
              complex-valued continuous functions defined on a circle.  In  fact, every
              commutative C*-algebra (one in which AB=BA) turns out to  be the set of
              continuous complex-valued functions on some space.  By  contrast, matrices over
              the complex field provide noncommutative  C*-algebras.  Every C*-algebra is
              technically a normed-closed and  conjugate-closed subalgebra of all bounded
              linear operators on a  Hilbert space.  What this means is that C*-algebras may
              be viewed   as some kind of generalized complex numbers, and, as in the case  
              of complex numbers, C*-algebras have many important applications,   ranging
              from dynamical systems and quantum mechanics to other fields   of mathematics
              such as operator theory, linear algebra, noncommutative   geometry, group
              representations, and so on.  For example, C*- algebras   together with their
              groups of symmetries are often related to problems   in dynamical systems. 
              Recent results in C*-algebra theory have been   used to answer questions such
              as when two matrices commute.  This   project is to study, in a way, how many
              types of such algebras exist,   how to distinguish them from one another, how
              to construct new   C*-algebras from old ones, and to study relationships
              between these   C*-algebras and possible applications to other fields.  The
              objective   is to gain a better understanding of these algebras and to develop 
               better theory and methods for applications.  ***
