Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9531511

Award Number: 9531511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Bamburg jbamburg@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Sneider  (Principal Investigator former)
              Norman P. Curthoys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                           This award will support the participation of  undergraduate 
              students in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program  offered by the
              Colorado State University in Biochemistry and  Molecular Biology. 
              Biochemistry/molecular biology employs the  methods of chemistry, physics,
              cellular biology, microbiology and  genetic manipulation to study the structure
              and function of  complex biomolecules, how these molecules generate the
              phenomenon  we call life, and how alterations in these molecules perturb the 
              living organism.  Because of its breadth, biochemistry/molecular  biology
              serves to integrate didactic and experimental material  learned in a multitude
              of basic science courses.  This REU site  program in Molecular Biosciences will
              enable qualified  undergraduates to do independent research projects in a range
              of  areas and using a variety of experimental approaches.  The  program is
              designed to (a) offer the participants a wide variety  of research areas from
              which to choose an independent studies  project; (b) offer project areas that
              are meaningful and exciting  to the student; (c) teach the student how to
              formulate and test  hypotheses; (d) help develop the ability to trouble-shoot
              and  problem solve when confronted with the unexpected; (e) instruct  the
              participant in state-of-the-art techniques and  instrumentation of
              biochemistry/molecular biology; (f) develop  the ability to communicate with
              one's peers concerning ongoing  research efforts as well as more formal
              presentations of  completed research projects; (g) provide, in our faculty and
              in  outside scientists invited to speak to the REU students,  appropriate role
              models that will reinforce the intellectual  excitement of a scientific career;
              (h) emphasize to all  participants gender and diversity issues that impact
              research  careers in science; and (I) render assistance to participants in 
              applying for graduate studies and fellowships.       This award will foster the
              continued education and training  of individuals  who will be part of the next
              generation of basic  researchers in the diverse aspects of biochemistry and
              molecular  biology.
