Title       : SBIR Phase II: Roentgen: An Intelligent Radiotherapy Planner
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9531395

Award Number: 9531395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Burke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago Information Tech
	      524 West Oakdale Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  60657    312/702-0112

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9531395  Burke      This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              is aimed at the creation of clinically-viable case based Radiation Therapy
              Planning Assistant, and a tool for constructing other case-based intelligent
              assistants for medical tasks. The key innovations are the ability of the tool
              to reason about medical images and to develop its initial case base from
              existing archives of medical data, both textual and multimedia. The direct
              benefits of this project would be to improve the quality and consistency of
              radiation therapy planning. Because previous cases can be used as a guide,
              less-experienced dosimetrists can profit from expert's experience directly.
              Further, the development of a generalized tool based on ROENTGEN has the
              potential to extend such benefits to other areas of medicine. There are other
              approaches to building intelligent medical advisory systems, most notably,
              those approaches based on expert-systems technology. However, these systems
              cannot take advantage of existing medical archives as ROENTGEN does and have a
              significantly higher development and maintenance cost. The project will proceed
              along two fronts. First is the further development and clinical evaluation of
              the existing ROENTGEN radiation therapy system. The second direction of
              development is to generalize the techniques of ROENTGEN into a case-based
              reasoning shell.  Such a tool will facilitate  creation of many other
              case-based assistants similar to ROENTGEN for other medical
              domains,particularly those that require visual reasoning.   The commercial
              potential of ROENTGEN and related tools lies in their ability to make
              intelligent use of data already being collected through hospital information
              systems and medical imagery. These systems turn inert data into a type of
              institutional memory that can contribute to new patient treatment.
