Title       : REU: Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9531558

Award Number: 9531558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Taghert taghertp@thalamus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarissa M. Cheney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                              This award will support the participation of  11      
              undergraduate students each year in the Research Experiences       for
              Undergraduates program offered by Washington University       School of
              Medicine in St. Louis, MO.  Each student       participant will spend ten weeks
              engaged in developmental       biology research under the direction a faculty
              mentor of       his/her choice, selected from among ca. 40 faculty members     
               who have active, well-funded research programs and who study      
              developmental mechanisms in a wide variety of experimental       systems.  To
              permit students to view their research projects       in a broader context,
              five types of supplemental activities       will be provided: (i) a
              beginning-of-the-summer retreat at a       state park, where participants will
              meet with each other,       explore the issue of research ethics, and become
              introduced       to the study of developmental biology; (ii) workshops      
              dealing with important model organisms, methods, and       paradigms in
              contemporary developmental biology research;       (iii) faculty seminars
              designed specifically for the       students; (iv) participation in a student
              developmental       biology journal club; and (v) and end-of-the-summer
              research       symposium at which students will make presentations      
              summarizing their research accomplishments.  Opportunities       for frequent,
              informal social interactions will also be       provided.            This award
              will foster the continued education and  training of individuals who   will be
              part of the next generation  of basic researchers in the developmental biology.
