Title       : CRB: Genetics of Ecological Restoration with Native Grasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9531945

Award Number: 9531945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Rice kjrice@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric E. Knapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               Two widely grown grass species native to the western U. S. (Elymus glaucus and
              Nassella pulchra) will be used as model systems to determine the extent of
              adaptation across environmental gradients from coastal to interior sites in
              California.   Adaptation to local environments will be determined in a series
              of reciprocal transplant experiments.  If grass populations are found to be
              adapted to the local environment, this would indicate that seed should not be
              transferred outside of these regions. We will also determine the capacity of
              non-local populations to evolve the attributes of the local populations. 
              Results of these studies will have broad implications for use of native grass
              germplasm.  If populations are able to evolve in this manner, strict
              maintenance of the integrity of existing populations may in some situations be
              a lower priority than seed collection methods that maximize the amount of
              genetic variation in the initial collection.    The proposed research will
              significantly increase the current understanding of the importance of different
              aspects of native grass adaptation to habitat restoration.  Knowledge of 1) the
              spatial scales of local adaptation, 2) the evolutionary potential for further
              adaptation, 3) the evolutionary consequences of genetic contamination, and 4)
              the potential for unwanted genetic shifts in seed production will enhance the
              chances of successful establishment of native grass species.  An increase in
              the use of these native species will promote the maintenance of biodiversity
              and facilitate the restoration of ecosystems with both healthy ecological
              function and evolutionary potential. Findings from these studies should assist
              with developing practical solutions that benefit both the native plant seed
              industry and ecosystem health.
