Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Pattern Formation Relevant to Turing and Morphological
               Instabilities: Comparison of Theory with Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9531797

Award Number: 9531797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Wollkind dwollkind@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9531797  Wollkind    The development of one- and two-dimensional Turing patterns
              characteristic of  the chlorite-iodide-malonic acid/indicator reaction
              occurring in an open gel  continuously fed unstirred reactor is to be
              investigated by means of various    weakly nonlinear stability analyses applied
              to the appropriately scaled govern-  ing chlorine dioxide-iodine-malonic
              acid/indicator model system. It is then   proposed that the resulting
              theoretical predictions deduced from these pattern  formation studies be
              compared both with the recent experimental evidence rele-  vant to the
              diffusive instabilities under examination which consist of stripes,  rhombic
              arrays of rectangles, and hexagonal arrays of spots or nets, and with  similar
              equilibrium structures characteristic of a diffusion system used to  model
              interfacial morphologies observed during alloy solidification. The ra-  tionale
              for these comparisons is to explain more fully the transition to such 
              stationary symmetry breaking spatial Turing structures when the malonic acid 
              reservoir concentration varies in the first case and to examine the unifying 
              as well as divergent aspects of the model systems in the second. Finally the  
              nonequilibrium Turing and morphological instabilities of chemical turbulence 
              and cellular dendrites, respectively, are to be investigated by application of 
               a numerical bifurcation code to the amplitude equations of nonlinear stability
               theory in the appropriate parameter ranges for these two phenomena. The
              antici-  pated results of this research have the potential to contribute to the
              under-  standing of pattern formation in a wide variety of application areas. 
              %%%    The long-term goal of this project is to develop the simplest reasonable
              natu-  ral science models which preserve the essential features of pattern
              formation  while still being consistent with observation. The candidates for
              such mathe-   matical modeling are those structures generated during chemical
              reactions in     gels and during the solidif ication of two-component mixtures,
              respectively.   Quantification of that sort would allow an experimentalist to
              obtain a desired     outcome without wasting the time and money caused by
              repeated unsuccessful       trials. The relevant application areas for this
              work range from combustion   theory and other energy related interactions to
              materials processing involving   semi-conductor production and steel
              manufacturing.   ***
