Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Summer Institute for the Mathematical Sciences (SIMS) at
               Berkeley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9531446

Award Number: 9531446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Nolan nolan@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ani Adhikari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Givant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The Summer Institute for the Mathematical Sciences at  Berkeley      The
              University of California at Berkeley proposes to develop and  operate the 
              Summer Institute for the Mathematical Sciences (SIMS), a 6-week  program for 
              mathematically talented undergraduate women. SIMS provides 24  women, selected 
              nationwide, with an intensive mathematics program that is  designed to motivate
               and prepare them to enter and complete successfully a Ph.D.  program in the 
              mathematical sciences.    SIMS aims to provide participants with a mathematical
              experience  that will give  them a taste of what it is to be a researcher in
              the mathematical  sciences,  and it aims to communicate to the students that
              women can and  should be doing  mathematics. At the heart of the program are
              four seminars, two  each in pure and  applied mathematics. Each seminar is led
              by a woman, selected  nationwide, who is  an active research mathematician and
              a talented teacher. She is  aided by a  teaching assistant who is a female
              graduate student in  mathematics. The students  take two seminars, one pure and
              one applied. The character of the  work is very  different from that which is
              encountered in typical undergraduate  mathematics  courses. Students immerse
              themselves in the seminar material to  discover and  prove results without the
              aid of textbooks, they are given many  hard problems  and projects, and they
              learn how to obtain and express  mathematical ideas in  conversation and in
              writing. In addition to the seminars,  mathematics colloquia  are held twice
              weekly. In these talks, well-known mathematicians  introduce the  students to a
              vast panorama of mathematical topics. There are  also panel  discussions on:
              applying to graduate school and fellowship  sources, the variety  of graduate
              programs available in the mathematical sciences,  non-academic  careers in
              mathematics, and the challenges women face as graduate  students and  as
              professionals in the mathematical sciences.
