Title       : ROW/RPG: Long-term Verbatim Memory for Complex Material when Retrieved by Verbal
               and Motoric Cues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9531739

Award Number: 9531739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael McCloskey                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helga Noice PSNoice@Augustana.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augustana College
	      639 38th Street
	      Rock Island, IL  612012210    309/794-7000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531739  NOICE    This research will investigate long-term retention of complex 
              verbal material and the contribution of accompanying movement to  that
              retention.  Research during the last fifteen years that has  determined some
              conditions under which knowledge acquired in  school endures for long periods
              of time has proved useful to  educators and curriculum designers.  However,
              that research has  concentrated on memory for discrete items such as foreign 
              language vocabulary, and relatively little attention has been  given to
              verbatim retention of complex material.  There has been  some work examining
              long-term recall of passages learned  verbatim; this research has found that
              such passages were  generally acquired by chaining and, due to the shallow
              processing  involved, when one link in the chain was broken, the rest of the 
              material became unavailable.  However, research into professional  acting
              expertise has shown that actors' retention of material is  based on extremely
              deep processing which probes the text at a  micro level to extract information
              about character and  motivation.   Also, actors necessarily "overlearn"
              material; this  overlearning has been found to be one of the important
              predictors  of long-term storage found in earlier research.  Therefore, when 
              material is learned in this manner, it should still be available  months after
              it has ceased being rehearsed or performed.  In  addition to looking at
              long-term retention itself, this project  will investigate the effects of
              movement on such retention.  A  rich body of evidence has shown enhanced recall
              of words and  phrases through enactment, and it has frequently been suggested 
              that this facilitation is due to the existence of motoric codes.    However,
              that research has almost invariably been confined to  short words or phrases
              rather than connected discourse, and the  movements involved were usually
              literal enactments of the verbal  material.  In contrast, this research will
              examine the influence  of movement on the retenti on of lengthy, complex,
              verbal material  when the movement is not a literal enactment of that material.
                The prediction is that, many months after the final performance  of a role,
              actors (who will have learned new roles in the  interim) will retain a large
              majority of their lines verbatim and  will be able to demonstrate enhanced
              recall when reenacting the  movement patterns.  Furthermore, the prediction is
              that the  remembered text will be in exact order, a type of recall that is 
              crucial to many technologically-oriented tasks, such as  remembering the
              various steps essential for proper software  operation.    ***
