Title       : Influence of Climate and Environmental Factors on the Thermal Regime of the
               Active Layer and Permafrost
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9531220

Award Number: 9531220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Osterkamp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri L. Shur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir E. Romanovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Permafrost is one of the primary components of the Arctic
              land-atmosphere-ice system.  Recent unexpected discoveries of a large-amplitude
              temperature cycle in the permafrost and of large and systematic changes in
              active layer thicknesses (since 1986) indicate that the current understanding
              of climate-active layer-permafrost interactions needs improvement.  These
              interactions are important because warmer air temperatures predicted in the
              Arctic from increases in greenhouse gases will cause permafrost to thaw as the
              active layer becomes thicker.  A better understanding of the linkages between
              the atmosphere, soil surface, active layer, and permafrost is required to
              answer questions regarding the rate and extent of permafrost degradation,
              modifications to its thermal regime, release of carbon and trace gases by
              thawing permafrost, changes in soil moisture, the biota, the hydrological
              cycle, how these changes will influence the use of polar lands, and the
              development, calibration, and validation of small-scale numerical models (<2 km
              grids) of land-atmosphere interactions that are to be nested in larger scale
              models.    A permafrost research program is propose that combines field
              measurements, laboratory measurements, and analyses and interpretation of data
              to be obtained at six long-term study sites along a transect from Prudhoe Bay
              across the coastal plain and foothills into the Brooks Range.  These sites are
              in undisturbed areas, span a wide range of permafrost, climatic, and
              environmental conditions, include drillholes in the permafrost (40 to 75 m in
              depth), and have a long time series of data (since 1983).  This research will
              extend the time series of measurements at the sites and will focus on
              investigating how the active layer and continuous permafrost, in a variety of
              climatic and environmental setting, has responded and continues to respond to
              climate change.  The primary thrust of the proposed research is to investigate
              the effects of climate (especially air temperatures, snow, wind  and
              precipitation) and environmental factors (especially vegetation and surface
              morphology) and their interactions on the thermal and moisture regimes of the
              active layer and permafrost in an effort to answer questions raised by current
              research.
