Title       : REU Program in Forest Ecology at Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9531329

Award Number: 9531329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149386             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     This award will support the participation of nine  undergraduate students
              in the 12 week REU Sites program at  Harvard Forest.  Since 1985 the Harvard
              Forest has conducted  an exciting Summer Research program in Ecology dedicated
              to  providing undergraduate students with independent research  experience and
              to promoting career development in ecology.  This very effective program
              consists of advertisement and  recruitment; selection of diverse and productive
              students;  advance preparation; individual mentorship within research  groups
              comprised of faculty, graduate students, and  postdoctoral fellows; weekly
              seminars and discussion groups  on science, careers, graduate studies, and
              ethics; field  trips and recreational opportunities; an annual student 
              symposium; program questionnaire and discussion; and follow-  up including
              publication, professional presentation, and  thesis development. The Harvard
              Forest is the base for an  NSF-Long term Ecological Research Program,
              DOE-National  Institutes of Global Change Program, and related studies 
              involving 75 researchers.  The central research theme is the  comparison of
              natural disturbance with recent direct (e.g.  land-use) and indirect (e.g.
              Chemical and climatic) human  impacts, in terms of forest structure and
              function.  The  Harvard Forest is exceptionally well-equipped with field, 
              laboratory, and housing facilities for an REU Sites program.  Students are
              supervised in their independent study by a  mentor and the program is
              coordinated by Harvard Forest  staff, including the Director, Administrator,
              Forest  Manager, Museum Coordinator, Computer Manager, and Data  Manager. 
              Participants are recruited with a strong emphasis  on geographic coverage and
              participation of women,  minorities, and small colleges.       This award will
              foster the continued education and  training of individuals who will be part of
              the next  generation of basic researchers in the forest ecology.  It  will also
              help to produce citizens informed about various  aspect s of environmental
              sciences and management and  decision making in environmental issues.
