Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research Group in Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9531967

Award Number: 9531967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Rochberg rr@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guido L. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Krantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell H. Taibleson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mladen V. Wickerhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Rochberg, Krantz, Wickerhauser, Weiss, Taibleson, McCarthy       
              The principal investigators propose to form a Research Group in Analysis. They
              propose to investigate a broad range of areas in harmonic analysis, operator
              theory, function theory, and differential equations.  Specific areas of
              research include analysis of Bergman and Hardy spaces and the operators which
              act on them, the relationship between the geometry of complex domains and the
              associated function theory and operator theory,   the theory of wavelets and
              related constructions and the applications of those tools and ideas in
              theoretical and computational problems, and harmonic analysis on trees and the
              exploration of the analogies between analysis on trees and continuous harmonic
              analysis.     The principal investigators propose research programs in harmonic
              analysis (in the broad sense).  One of the basic unifying viewpoints in
              harmonic analysis is the development of systematic techniques to decompose
              complicated objects into simple, well understood, pieces put together in a
              straightforward way.  In many cases these same techniques, which were first
              developed to understand theoretical mathematical constructs, can also be  
              adapted productively to the analysis and manipulation of data and images.  An
              important recent example of this is the development of new waveform
              technologies which have provided important new tools in signal processing.  The
              detailed research proposed includes both theoretical and applied components. 
              The latter center on expanding the range of applicability of the new adapted
              waveforms techniques such as wavelets. Those techniques, originally developed
              for use in theoretical mathematics, have already   provided important new tools
              in signal processing.  It appears that they these ideas have great potential
              for further development as tools for computation and for data analysis.  That
              development is one of the themes of the proposed research.
