Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytical and Combinatorial Aspects of Subfactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1997  
File        : a9531566

Award Number: 9531566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dietmar H. Bisch bisch@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531566  Bisch       This is a project for mathematical research in the theory
              of   operator algebras that deals, in particular, with analytical and 
              combinatorial aspects of the Jones theory of subfactors.  New  hierarchies of
              finite-dimensional algebras, generalizing the  Temperley-Lieb algebras in a
              natural way, will be used to study the  structure of subfactors.  These
              algebras capture, for instance, the  symmetry coming from an intermediate
              subfactor and can be viewed as a  certain minimal product of the standard
              invariant associated to two  subfactors.  A variety of new and interesting
              combinatorial structures  appears naturally in this process.  The technique of
              studying a  subfactor through its intermediate subfactors is very natural,
              since  it is on the classical level (i.e., the group level) just the analysis 
              of a given group through its subgroups.  It is planned to extend and  refine
              the available intermediate subfactors techniques by studying  the
              finite-dimensional algebras canonically associated to these  subfactors.  Popa
              systems, a certain natural system of inclusions of  finite-dimensional algebras
              of symmetries, will play a key role in  this analysis.  Computational aspects
              of these symmetries will be  examined, and it is planned to construct and
              analyze explicit examples  of subfactors and commuting squares.  Possible new
              interrelations of  the theory of subfactors with mathematical physics and
              low-dimensional  topology will be investigated.       John von Neumann
              introduced his algebras of operators on a Hilbert  space to study a variety of
              mathematical structures, some of which  arise naturally in theoretical physics.
               In the early 80's, Vaughan  Jones initiated a Galois theory for inclusions of
              certain von Neumann  algebras and discovered that these inclusions are
              extremely  rigid.  They turn out to have a surprising braid group symmetry,
              which  led Jones to the discovery of his famous knot invariant, the Jones 
              polynomial.  Besides these profound connections of the theory  of  subfactors
              to knot theory and low-dimensional topology, there are also  deep relations to
              statistical mechanics, conformal field theory, and  algebraic quantum field
              theory that have been beneficial to the  understanding of naturally occurring
              structures in these areas.  ***
