Title       : REU: Intelligent Structures Group Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1997      
File        : a9531543

Award Number: 9531543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Thomas Miller t miller@unhh.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psarris  9528330  In the past decade much progress has been made in developing 
              high  performance large scale parallel architectures.  The  development  of
              fast restructuring compilers for the automatic  parallelization  of sequential
              programs requires efficient data dependence  analysis techniques in order to
              obtain exact data dependence  information. The proposed techniques in data
              dependence  analysis  fall into two categories, either efficient and
              approximate  tests  or exact and exponential.  The proposed research will 
              attempt to  show, though, that exact data dependence information can be 
              computed efficiently in practice.  The GCD test and the  Banerjee  inequality
              are the two tests most widely used to detect data  dependencies between pairs
              of array references inside loop  nests.  These tests are approximate in the
              sense that they are  necessary  but not sufficient conditions for data
              dependence and,  therefore,  they may introduce artificial dependences which
              limit  parallelization.  Their major advantages is their low  computation 
              cost.    A recent study provided necessary and sufficient conditions  for  the
              accuracy of the GCD and Banerjee tests.  This study has  also  led to the
              development of the I (Interval) test, an improved  dependence analysis test. 
              The I Test is more accurate than  a  combination of the GCD and Banerjee tests
              and is able to  provide  exact data dependence information in practice, unlike
              the  classic  tests, at no additional computation cost.  The original work 
              considered only the case of loops with constant loop limits.  In  scientific
              applications though, inner loop limits may be  linear  functions of the outer
              loop iteration variables (these  iteration  spaces are termed trapezoidal
              regions).    This project develops an efficient and accurate dependence 
              analyzer.  The research has four objectives.  The first  objective  is to
              derive conditions for the accuracy of the GCD and  Banerjee  tests in general
              trapezoidal regions and perform and  empirical  stud y of how often these
              conditions occur in practice. The  second  objective is to extend the I test to
              the general trapezoidal  regions and to assess its performance benefits on a
              suite of  benchmark codes.  The third objective is an analytical and  empirical
              comparison of the I test with all the other tests,  such  as the Omega test,
              Power test, etc.  An analytical and  experimental evaluation of all the data
              dependence analysis  tests is essential to determining which tests should be 
              performed in practice.  The fourth and principal objective  is to  integrate
              the above research work and develop an improved  dependence analyzer as a part
              of the Paraphrase-2  parallelizing  compiler.    It is expected that the
              completion of the proposed research  will  improve the understanding of data
              dependence analysis,  demonstrate the effectiveness and practical importance of
               the  proposed techniques, and significantly improve the state of  the  art in
              parallelizing compilers.  By providing efdicient and  exact  dependence
              analysis techniques a number of compiler  optimizations  for high performance
              computer architectures can be performed  in  practice.  ***
