Title       : SBIR Phase II: Novel Chemical Methods for Labeling Small Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9531248

Award Number: 9531248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell C. Hart assaydes@pipeline.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assay Designs Inc
	      1327 Jones Drive
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481051820    313/668-6113

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1978,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9531248  Hart   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will further develop ways to replace radioactivity for small peptide
              immunoassays using chemiluminescence detection methods. The concentration of
              small peptides in biological samples are normally measured using bioassays or
              by radioimmunoassay methods. Bioassays tend to be inaccurate and cumbersome to
              perform, while radioimmunoassays use '251 labeled peptides as a detection
              method. The cost, handling, environmental, stability and sensitivity concerns
              of using i25I for these assays makes alternative detection systems attractive. 
               In Phase I we demonstrated that chemiluminescence can be applied to measure a
              small peptide, vasopressin, with speed and sensitivity. We managed to make
              stable conjugates of vasopressin that demonstrated increased speed and
              sensitivity. The chemical methods demonstrated in Phase I have to be further
              developed and refined. The use of peptide analogs for use in raising antisera
              and also for conjugation to chemiluminescent detection systems need to be
              further tested. We were able, using analogs of vasopressin, to synthesize
              conjugates that have better binding and sensitivity in the assay. We wish to
              explore the possibility of raising antisera to immunogens using these and
              similar peptide analogs. We believe that the use of these analogs, where the
              conjugation position has been chosen to be chemically isolated from the native
              peptide, may yield antisera with better specificity and reactivity.   Assay
              designs is a company with a proven, track record of developing, marketing and
              selling novel immunoassay test kits using chemiluminescence. We advertise in
              national scientific magazines on a regular basis and have distributors in Japan
              and in Austria, Germany and Switzerland.   The applications of
              chemiluminescence technology to the measurement of analyses where the only
              sensitive, reproducible methods are radioactive have tremendous potential. The
              concerns with the use and disposal of HI make chemilumi nescence the method
              that can replace this RIA system and improve the sensitivity and speed of these
              assays. One RLA manufacturer has 139 different kits selling for up to $450 per
              kit. The market for non-radioactive kits with the advantages of speed and
              sensitivity is substantial
