Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Sums of L-functions, the Metaplectic Group, and
               Non-Generic Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9531957

Award Number: 9531957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sidney W. Graham                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Friedberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Friedberg 9531957  This investigation will deal with four main directions of
              research. First,  the principal investigator proposes to continue his work,
              joint with D. Bump and J. Hoffstein, to obtain information about automorphic
              L-functions through the systematic study of certain naturally  occurring
              Dirichlet series in two complex variables. These L-functions are not themselves
              Euler  products, but their individual coefficients are Eulerian. These series
              arise  as integrals of Rankin-Selberg type, possessing meromorphic continuation
              and functional equation.  The integrals may be analyzed by local
              representation- theoretic methods, and the Dirichlet series coefficients
              related to  L-functions.  The properties of the integral are then used to
              obtain  properties of the L-functions. The principal investigator will 
              investigate integrals on certain orthogonal and symplectic groups and on  their
              metaplectic covers, which should give analytic information concerning  such
              objects as twists of GL(2) automorphic forms by cubic characters, mean  squares
              of twists by ideal class characters of quadratic extensions, and the 
              nonvanishing and mean size of quadratic twists of the standard L-function 
              associated to an automorphic representation on GL(3).The study of more  general
              sums of L-functions, involving more than two complex variables, is  also
              anticipated. Second, the principal investigator proposes to investigate  the
              Euler products associated with higher degree metaplectic automorphic  forms. 
              The existence of such Euler products is predicted by the hypothetical
              correspondence between metaplectic forms and non-metaplectic ones; however, 
              they have only been exhibited in a few cases.  There are two such Euler 
              products known on covers of GSp(4), one on the double cover due to the 
              principal investigator and Wong, and the second on the triple cover due to  the
              principal investigator's student T. Goetze.  The principal investigator 
              proposes to first give these works less computational foundations by  
              connecting them  to the theory of non-unique models presented by Rallis and 
              Piatetski-Shapiro, and then to use this new approach to generalize them to 
              covers of degree higher than 3, and to groups other than GSp(4). This work 
              will probably be joint with D. Bump. Third, the principal investigator will 
              continue to work on the relative trace formula. This formula, which combines 
              period considerations arising from integral expressions of $L$-functions with
              Langlands functoriality, should ultimately allow one to establish in many 
              cases that L-packets contain generic members.In a recently completed massive 
              project, the principal investigator and Jacquet have proved the fundamental 
              lemma for one such formula. Fourth, in recent work with D. Goldberg, the 
              principal investigator has begun to use certain models which are not  Whittaker
              models to deal directly with non-generic representations on  orthogonal and
              unitary groups.  It is proposed to use these models to  establish both local
              results (e.g. Langlands conjecture on Plancherel  measure) and the global
              continuation of many L-functions arising from  Eisenstein series a la
              Langlands-Shahidi, even for non-generic  representations of these groups.   
              This research falls into the general mathematical field of Number Theory. 
              Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, 
              addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one  whole
              number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and  was
              pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within  the
              last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse  applications
              in areas such as data transmission and processing, and  communication systems.
