Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlocal Models in the Mechanics of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9531925

Award Number: 9531925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Fosdick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9531925  Fosdick    This research program is concerned with fundamental issues
              of material  behavior that are produced from constitutive structures that sense
              the  nonlocal, long range particle-particle interactions within a body. It 
              represents an attempt to generalize and to place into perspective the  somewhat
              limited spatial gradient theories of local interaction. The  investigation is
              theoretical and is based on the idea of energy minimization.  While the generic
              problems contained in this work are nonconvex, and must  address this level of
              difficulty, to a large extent the interests and  objectives lie in
              understanding the "penalty" due to the global nonlocal  structure. The project
              involves an investigation of the regularity and  existence of minimizers.  It
              includes a proposal to describe their detailed  form, and a plan to understand
              how the number of transition boundaries that a  body can coincidentally support
              relates to the degree of nonlocal influence  and to the size of the body. The
              identification of length scales and the  application of scaling transformations
              are suggested as avenues for  understanding the way in which gradient theories
              may be considered as  approximations. The overall project is expected to lead
              to a model for  understanding the organization of material phase structures in
              bodies at  finite scales. The detailed investigations are expected to form a
              bridge in  the "regularity gap" that now exists between the purely local,
              strongly  irregular, theories commonly associated with the classical ideas of
              Gibbs,  and the relatively smooth gradient theories historically attributed to
              van  der Waals, Korteweg, Ginzburg and Landau, and Cahn and Hilliard.   %%% 
              Understanding the behavior of materials which can change their internal 
              structure when loaded, heated, or placed in chemical or electrical 
              environments, is important to the development of advanced applications in 
              materials science---applications which impact many diverse areas of society, 
              from energy conservati on to micromachines for medical devices.  The idea that 
              nondestructive, reversible phase changes can be used to obtain a desired 
              sensible material behavior is of great potential technological importance,  and
              understanding how to affect and control such processes is an essential  step in
              the transfer of this science into technology for the benefit of  society. 
              Electrorheological fluids sense a small scale structure and stiffen  and become
              solid-like in the presence of an electric field, and the design of 
              micro-switches in the area of thin film technologies also depends upon a 
              similar small scale phenomenon. There is a need to improve our understanding 
              and predictive capabilities of such materials through the development of 
              relevant mathematical models. The existence of microscopic domains in 
              ferromagnetic and ferroelastic materials, shear bands in ductile solids, 
              finely twinned microstructural laminates in martensite (shape memory alloys, 
              etc...), and recently discovered high transition temperature superconductors 
              all underscore the importance of internal, small scale structures. 
              Experimental observations have provided a wealth of evidence that relates the 
              gross response of a material body to its underlying microstructure. This 
              research program investigates the role that long range particle-particle 
              interactions play in the development of microstructure. It is based on the 
              global optimization of energy and the idea that the amount of energy that is 
              stored in each element of a body is influenced by not only the state of the 
              element, but also by the state of the other elements of the body, in a way 
              similar to what molecular theory might suggest. The theory is  phenomenological
              and, as such, is contained within the framework of nonlinear  continuum
              mechanics. The aim is to determine the significance of nonlocal  theory in
              describing the behavior of materials which support coexistent phase 
              structures---materials which depend upon the existence of these 
              microstructures for their  novel responses.   ***
