Title       : SBIR Phase II: Application of Induction Accelerators for Electron Beam
               Radiolysis of Contaminated Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1998  
File        : a9531275

Award Number: 9531275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299115             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Weidman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9531275  Moran         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project deals with toxic and infectious contaminants which are present in
              unacceptably high concentrations in groundwater and in wastewater in many
              locations.  While many toxic contaminants in wastewater must be reduced to
              concentrations on the order of parts per billion prior to disposal, a more
              modest reduction is appropriate for industrial in-process water recycling. 
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Science Research
              Laboratory will apply a compact, low cost, all-solid-state induction
              accelerator technology to the destruction of toxic organic contaminants in
              wastewater and to industrial process water so that it is made suitable for 
              in-process water recycling.  In the first phase of this research, Science
              Research Laboratory was able to demonstrate effective and efficient destruction
              of benzene, and toluene with and without addition of oxidizing enhancers,
              hydrogen peroxide and dissolved oxygen.  Science Research Laboratory is now in
              a position to lay the groundwork for rapid implementation of an
              induction-accelerator-based water decontamination system  based on electron
              beam radiolysis on a pilot scale.  Pilot scale is within the design parameters
              of the current SNOMAD-IV accelerator at Science Research Laboratory.  Cost
              studies show this technology is superior to all competing remediation
              treatments, especially at contaminant concentrations above 50 ppm.  Advantages
              of solid state circuitry, modularity, scalability, and compactness offer
              additional technical advantages over conventional electron beam systems. 
              Benzene destruction was effective to three or four orders of magnitude. 
              Efficiencies compare well to those of conventional electrostatic electron
              accelerators.  Peroxide addition improves destruction efficiency by
              approximately 37%. There are important cost reductions associated with these
              efficiency gains.       This project has the potential to provide a
              cost-effective treatmen t which will not only improve the quality of effluent
              water but may also greatly reduce or eliminate wastewater discharge to the
              environment by facilitating industrial in-process water recycling and thereby
              removing a major source of pollution.  EPA estimates 35 billion gallons of
              highly toxic wastewater was treated by U.S. industries in 1989 at a cost of $2
              Billion.  SRL's novel induction accelerator may capture 5% or more of this
              market to provide annual gross revenues of $100 million.  Since the water
              intensive pulp and paper industry discharge even much larger volumes of
              wastewater, 4.25 billion gallons daily, SRL will first target this industry on
              a pilot scale.  ***
