Title       : Processing of Oxide Superconducting Electronic Devices by the Inhibition
               Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9531208

Award Number: 9531208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiyuan Ma qyma@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward S. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9531208 Ma  This research project aims to advance materials processing of high
              temperature superconducting oxides.  The objectives are threefold: 1)To
              characterize the electrical and magnetic properties of high temperature
              superconductor (HTS) oxides which are systematically implanted with impurity
              ions of different reactivity.  These results are used to determine optimum
              implantation conditions for inhibition of superconductivity. 2)To study the
              structural properties of inhibited materials.  Fundamental effects of ion
              diffusion, gettering, and channeling on inhibition will be investigated.  3)To
              realize a reliable fabrication process for single layer and multilayer HTS
              devices and circuits based on the ion inhibition technique.  Three different
              approaches to planar multilayer fabrication will be pursued.  Important process
              related issues will be addressed including patterning resolution, process
              control, and reliability.  Additionally, several prototype devices including
              high performance RF coils and superconducting quantum interference devices are
              expected to be demonstrated during the course of the project. %%% The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of
              technological relevance to several aspects of advanced electronic and magnetic
              devices with relevance to magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) and
              magnetocardiology.  Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from
              this research project is expected to contribute in a general way to improving
              the performance of advanced devices and circuits utilizing high temperature
              superconducting materials by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis
              for designing and processing advanced materials and devices.  An important
              feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              ***
