Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Risk Sensitive Stochastic Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1998  
File        : a9531276

Award Number: 9531276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell H. Fleming whf@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531276  Fleming  Risk sensitive stochastic control is concerned with the
              optimization of expected  exponential cost criteria.  It provides a link
              between stochastic and deterministic  (robust  control) approaches.  Risk
              sensitive control is related to large deviations theory for  stochastic 
              processes.  Dynamic two player games also arise naturally in the analysis.  
              For continuous time models described by controlled stochastic differential
              equations,  these games (called differential games) are analyzed using
              viscosity  solution methods  for nonlinear partial differential  equations. 
              One part of this research concerns risk   sensitive control, with complete
              state information (state  feedback).  Extensions of  existing theory, and
              applications to engineering control and financial economics will be 
              considered.  A second part of this project concerns partial state information
              (output  feedback) risk sensitive control, where the theory  is less well
              developed.  A key idea  in the analysis is that  of information state.     The
              disturbance attenuation problem in control theory is to design feedback control
               laws which give system stability  and satisfactory performance in the presence
              of   unpredictable system inputs (or disturbances).  In risk  sensitive
              stochastic control,  disturbances are modeled as  random events and an
              exponential criterion of system   performance is used.  Feedback controls which
              optimize such risk sensitive criteria  provide better protection against rare
              disturbances which may cause very poor system  performance.  For example, in
              routing flows in data communication systems, the control  design seeks to avoid
               long delays and buffer overflows due to  rare bursts of heavy  traffic.  Risk
              sensitive control theory also provides a natural link between stochastic 
              control theory and another widely used approach (robust  control) in which
              disturbances  are modeled  in a deterministic (non-random) manner.  ***
