Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates: Experimental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9531544

Award Number: 9531544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Marsteller pmars@learnlink.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         This award will support the participation of undergraduate  biology
              students in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates  program offered by
              Emory University.  From extensive prior  experiences with undergraduate
              training, the faculty at Emory  have become convinced that meaningful research
              experiences are  the optimal way to encourage undergraduate students to enter 
              research careers in the biological sciences.  Recruitment efforts  for this
              program will continue to focus primarily on students  from regional
              undergraduate institutions, women and minority  students.  Although research
              interests of the Emory faculty cross  a number of specialties and use different
              approaches to  biological problems, they share a common interest in
              experimental  approaches to biological questions.  The goals of the program are
               : (1) to provide an intensive research experience in one  subdiscipline; (2)
              to provide formal and informal introductions  to the processes of science; (3)
              to provide perspective by  examining alternative approaches to biological
              research at  different hierarchical levels; and (4) to maximize participant 
              interaction with other undergraduate and graduate researchers,  the research
              mentor, and his/her research group.  The program  will include the following
              components: (1) independent student  research projects; (2) research methods
              workshops; (3) "On Being  a Scientist," a seminar series designed to assess
              different  approaches to biological questions; (4) departmental seminars and 
              journal clubs in research areas; and (5) a series of discussions  on scientific
              integrity.       This award will foster the continued education and training 
              of individuals who will be part of the next generation of basic  researchers in
              biology.
