Title       : REU: Undergraduate Research in Neurobiology at Ohio University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9531734

Award Number: 9531734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Hooper hooper@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                              This award will support the participation of  10      
              undergraduate students each year in the Undergraduate       Research in
              Neuroscience program offered by Ohio University.       The program is a
              self-contained ten week introduction to       research in neuroscience that is
              constructed around four       main ideas.  First, through lectures from
              scientific workers       including graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
              college       and university faculty, grant administrators, and      
              researchers in private industry, the participants acquire a       general
              knowledge of the rewards, requirements, and       structure of a research
              career.  Second, they achieve a       basic understanding of neuroscience
              through 42 hrs. of       structured classroom instruction.  Third, in order to 
                   directly experience the joys and frustrations of research,       they work
              with a faculty mentor of their choice to study a       particular research
              topic, analyze their results, and       present their findings in written form
              and orally at a       colloquium at the end of the program.  Fourth, in order
              to       gain a deeper understanding of what it means to be a       research
              scientist, each student is assigned a graduate       student mentor and is also
              exposed to a variety of       professional, academic, and social settings where
              the       students can interact with research scientists at all levels      
              from graduate students to professors.  Particular care has       been taken to
              structure the program so that the students       continually advance to greater
              independence as their       knowledge and skills develop; funds are provided
              for       particularly qualified students to attend scientific      
              conferences to present their results and  experience even       greater
              exposure to the culture of science.            This award will foster the
              continued education and  training of individuals who   will be part of the next
              generation  of basic researchers in the diverse aspects of     neuroscience.
