Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Nonlinear Dynamics: Graviatational
               Ionization, Coupled Oscillators, Dielectric Response of Water, Dynamos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9531811

Award Number: 9531811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Chicone carmen@chicone.math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9303767  Chicone  The principal investigator proposes to continue his recent 
              research on nonlinear differential equations. The primary  theoretical focus of
              this work is the analysis of bifurcations to  periodic solutions near resonance
              for multidimensional  multiparameter systems and the description of related
              phenomena,  especially the phenomenon of passage through resonance.  The 
              methods employed include several aspects of the geometric  analysis of
              nonlinear dynamics and classical perturbation theory:  ``Melnikov'' theory,
              Lyapunov-Schmidt reduction, elliptic  functions and expansion in a small
              parameter.  There is also an  important computational component; especially,
              integration of  differential equations, computer graphics and computer algebra.
                The theory will be applied to physical systems modeled by systems  of coupled
              nonlinear differential equations. The primary  application proposed for this
              project is to study the motions of  a DC motor driven  mechanical linkage.  It
              is proposed to  determine the existence and stability of periodic motions, the 
              stabilization of periodic motions by feedback control and the  effects of slow
              variation of control parameters near resonance.    When mechanical or
              electrical components are linked together (for  example when a motor is
              connected to a machine) it is important  to determine the subsequent
              operational capabilities of the  coupled system. In the design and operational
              control of coupled  systems the following phenomenon can occur: a small effect 
              produced by one of the components can have a large effect on the  operation of
              the coupled system.  This phenomenon can be used to  advantage in electrical
              devices, for example amplifiers, but  often it has dramatic undesirable
              consequences when present in  machinery. A motor attached to an elastic support
              may operate  smoothly until a small change in its rotational speed causes a 
              large vibration and subsequent failure of the motor or its  linkage.  This is
              analogous to the classic example of a n opera  singer breaking a wine glass
              with her voice.  The proposed  research seeks to find methods to determine the
              effects of  couplings among mechanical or electrical components by developing  
              techniques to analyze mathematical models for the operation of  such coupled
              systems.  These methods will be useful in the design  of machinery as well as
              the design of auxiliary systems needed to  control its operation.  ***
