Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Fourier Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9531806

Award Number: 9531806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan T. Greenleaf allan@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract  Greenleaf  9531806      Characteristic space-time estimates,
              previously obtained, for solutions  of wave equations will be extended and
              applied to yield results on the approximate determination of compactly
              supported, time-independent potentials in L^2 of 3-space from approximate
              knowledge of their backscattering (or other determined sets of scattering
              data.) Extensions of such results to potentials with noncompact support and of
              N-particle type will be pursued. Estimates, in terms of Sobolev and Lebesgue
              norms, for Fourier integral operators associated with canonical relations
              exhibiting cusp singularities, both simple and of higher order, will be
              investigated. Such estimates have applications to regularity properties of
              averaging operators associated with integrals over generic families of lines
              and curves in n-dimensional space. Finally, classes of Fourier integral
              operators arising from real analogues of Goncharov's complexes of hyperplane
              sections of algebraic arieties of minimal degree in n-dimensional projective
              space will be studied, with the goal of obtaining composition calculi for them.
                 The principal object of this project will be the study of several types of
              singular integral operators and Fourier integral operators. Such operators,
              which transform functions on one space into functions on another (possibly
              different) space, have become  central tools in the study of linear partial
              differential equations which govern diverse physical phenomena, such as
              electromagnetic  fields and sound propagation. The particular  operators to be
              studied in this project arise in the scattering of  waves by potential
              functions, and in  tomography, the mathematical basis for a variety of medical
              imaging systems, such as CAT and MRI scanners. Thus, progress on the problems
              considered in this project will contribute to the theoretical underpinnings of
              procedures for reconstructing unknown quantities of physical interest from
              noninvasive observations. Despite the fact that they arise in d ifferent
              problems, the operators to be studied share several common features, which 
              involve more complicated geometry than is present in the  original versions of
              singular integral and Fourier integral operators. It is hoped that, eventually,
              improved understanding of these operators will lead to improved reconstruction
              techniques.
