Title       : The Roles of Cameral Liquid Transport and Shell Strength in Ammonoid Suture
               Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1995 
File        : a9531892

Award Number: 9531892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28460              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Daniel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ward  9531892     Ammonoid and nautiloid cephalopods are externally shelled
              molluscs with an extensive and diverse fossil record.  The shell is subdivided
              into a number of chambers; the partitions dividing these chambers (the septa)
              have shown a remarkable evolutionary pattern of increasing complexity.  The
              intersection of these septa with the lateral walls of the shell form a complex
              and foliate suture.  These sutures, in turn, have long been recognized as one
              of the most complex and rapidly evolving structures in the fossil record.  But
              their function ("the ammonoid suture problem") remains one of the oldest
              unresolved questions in paleontology.  The prevailing interpretation, the
              ammonoid septa and their sutures were buttresses to prevent implosion, is now
              largely unchallenged.  In this proposal, however, we provide evidence that
              strongly challenges this view.  This evidence follows from a combination of
              approaches including finite element analysis of stress distributions in models
              of septa exposed to pressure loads, data from the fossil record that are
              inconsistent with the idea of buttressing, and a new modeling effort that
              suggest septal surface elaboration may be related to the transport of liquid
              from the chambers.  Since this cameral liquid transport is related to both the
              growth rate of the animals and to short term buoyancy regulation, we suggest
              that one selective process in the evolution of these complex characters is
              related to the physics and physiology of cameral liquid transport.   The
              proposed research revolves around two central hypotheses:  (1) that septal
              surface elaboration reduces the stress in the chambered portion of the shell
              (the phragmocone) and (2) septal surface elaboration augments cameral liquid
              transport rate.  These hypotheses with a combination of computational and
              mathematical approaches as well as physical modeling and morphometric
              approaches.  Limited set of clades for which there is an ample fossil record
              that contains well preserved specimens.  The fossils  will provide morphometric
              data with which we will examine the above hypotheses.  Then use a new
              mathematical method to quantify the shapes of septa and sutures from digitized
              data.  This method will also used to prescribe shapes for both stress and
              cameral liquid transport analyses.  Currently developed finite element analyses
              for stress distributions and will apply this method to both real and
              hypothetical ammonoids to examine the relationship between stress and surface
              elaboration.  Theoretical models that will describe relationships between
              cameral liquid transport and surface elaboration, we will develop models to
              test our transport ideas.   In sharp contrast to conventional views, our
              preliminary work suggests that surface elaboration leads to augmented stresses
              on portions of the phragmocone.  Moreover, our initial modeling efforts on
              cameral liquid transport indicate that septal surface elaboration is manifested
              as greater rates of chamber liquid flux.  Thus, an exciting consequence of this
              work is that we suggest that this surface elaboration involves two conflicting
              selective processes:  increased cameral liquid transport at a considerable
              mechanical risk.  The consequences of this trade-off, let alone its possible
              existence, have not been previously proposed.
