Title       : Dissertation Research: Bases of Social Hierarchy in a Central Village of the
               Northeastern Highlands of Columbia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9531536

Award Number: 9531536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, MS Ana Maria Boada will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation.She will conduct archaeological excavations at
              the site of El Venado which is located in the Valle de Samaca of Columbia. The
              site is important because it documents a crucial period between 300 and 1600 AD
              and thus can shed light on the development of complex hierarchically organized
              societies. She will conduct a systematic surface collection over the entire 16
              hectare settlement area, excavate approximately 100 test pits in residential
              areas of the site which, based on the surface indications, represent different
              periods of time. She will expand a number of pits which detect the presence of
              subsurface features. The five major categories of artifacts which will result -
              ceramics, lithics, faunal, floral and skeletal remains will be analyzed by
              appropriate experts.   The goal of the research is to test competing ideas
              about how complex hierarchically organized societies arise. In particular MS
              Boada wishes to understand the process which leads to the development of
              chiefdoms. One group of anthropologists have argued that early social
              differentiation is based primarily of factors which enhance prestige but do not
              involve control of important economic goods. They believe that social and
              ideological causes are primary. Others would point to economics and direct
              control of essential resources such as food. MS Boada's work should allow her
              to distinguish between these two causes. The site is well chosen for several
              reasons. It is rich in material remains and covers the appropriate period of
              time. Because there is a good ethnohistoric material, written early Spanish
              records provide an endpoint from which to work backwards.  This research will
              provide information of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light
              on the origins of social complexity and contribute to the training of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
