Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Absolute Continuity of Parabolic Measure and Regularity
               of PDE's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9531642

Award Number: 9531642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65837              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Lewis  9531642      This  research is concerned with mutual 
              absolute continuity of parabolic and Lebesgue measure as well as related
              Dirichlet-Neumann problems. In certain time varying domains Lewis and  Murray
              have shown that parabolic measure for  the heat equation is mutually absolutely
              continuous with respect to a certain projective Lebesgue measure.  This 
              investigation will begin with the study of a model pde whose prototype is the
              pullback pde obtained from the heat equation by way of a certain mapping onto
              the above time varying domain.  Since the  pullback pde has a parabolic measure
              that is mutually absolutely   continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure, the
              object of the investigation will be to determine what properties of the model
              pde are actually needed to guarantee mutual absolute continuity of the above
              measures. As for the Dirichlet and Neumann problems they are now well
              understood for square integrable functions defined on the boundary of the above
              time varying domains. The next step is to consider the Neumann problem for p th
              power integrable functions when  p is between 1 and 2. Again the above pullback
              pde   needs to be analyzed closely.     Many  phyical processes can be analyzed
              using partial differential equations. The most famous classical partial
              differential equations are  Laplace's equation, the heat equation, and the wave
              equation each of which originated in the 18 th and 19 th centuries and  found
              uses  in  the study of gravity, electricity, fluid flow,  electromagnetic
              waves,  to mention only a few topics.  My research  concerns problems of the
              following type : Given the   temperature on the walls of  a room, find the
              temperature at any place in the room at any later time ?  This problem is
              called the Dirichlet problem for the heat equation. The Neumann problem can be
              stated  similarly in terms of the rate at which heat is flowing out of the
              walls of the room.  Mathematically if the temperature on the walls of the room
              is fixed and nice enough (cont inuous), then the Dirichlet problem can be shown
              to have a unique solution.  Part of my research has been concerned with whether
              this problem  has a unique solution when the walls of the room and temperature
              on the walls is allowed to vary. This problem has now  been essentially
              completely solved and the corresponding   Neumann problem is being studied. 
              Possible applications of this research are to free boundary problems where the
              size and temperature of an object are constantly changing (ice melting, gases
              expanding, nuclear waste solidifying).
