Title       : SBIR Phase II: Predictions of Magnetic Activity Induced Hazards to Ground and
               Space Assets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9531306

Award Number: 9531306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson C. Maynard nmaynard@mrcnh.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mission Research Corp
	      735 State Street
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93101    805/963-8761

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9531306  Maynard     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II award will
              continue the development of an operational prototype system to forecast
              ionospheric currents and related effects,  such as enhancements in auroral oval
              heating, density irregularities and geomagnetically  induced  currents  at
              customer specific locations.  The Phase I effort designed and proved the
              feasibility of the Space Weather Ionospheric Forecast  Technologies  (SWIFT)
              system which  provides  the first  predictive  temporally- and spatially-
              variable capability for determining ionospheric currents and resulting ground
              magnetic variations.  These forecasts will depend directly on real-time
              measurements of the solar wind velocity, density, and interplanetary  magnetic 
              field. Application of this method to space weather forecasting will provide,
              for the first time, one-hour forecasts of impending geomagnetic storm and
              substorm activity which can be used to improve ground-based operations such as
              power distribution, pipeline management, and six-sigma manufacturing,  and will
              positively  impact the functionality and reliability of communications,
              navigation, and space operations. The product will provide customer specific
              forecasts for both commercial and government space and ground-based
              applications. In Phase II, the investigators will (1) add refinements to the
              code to improve accuracy, (2) design a robust operational prototype that will
              operate efficiently without significant operator intervention and, at the same
              time, provide a quality control output, (3) quantify the market for these
              products, and (4) develop a product tree that  will  provide  customer 
              specific outputs  for  space weather effects mitigation.   The product of this
              proposal will have broad commercial applications. It will provide critical
              warning of Geomagnetically Induced Currents that severely impact power line
              transmission, and can affect pipelines, long communication lines and
              high-reliability "six sigma" manufacturing processes. It will  also benefit
              high-priority activities within the government, and will augment forecast
              capabilities currently under development for SEC and AFSFC. The potential
              savings are many millions of dollars per year.
