Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stable Relations and Their Loci in Operator Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9531841

Award Number: 9531841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Loring loring@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531841 Loring  The abstract properties of curves in Euclidean space defined by
              polynomial equations are well-understood.  In particular, a finite set of
              polynomials is a stable set of equations in commuting unknowns in the following
              sense:  any approximate solution (a point in Euclidean space where those 
              polynomials take a small value) will be close to the solution set.  The  same
              set of polynomials can become unstable when applied to operator values. Indeed,
              they often become unstable even when only matrix values are allowed in the
              variables; there can be tuples of matrices upon which the polynomials take
              small values and which are far away from the matrix-valued solution set to the
              equations.  A primary goal of this project will be to determine computable
              invariants for differentiating such "phantom" approximate solutions" from
              perturbations of true solutions.  These phantom approximate solutions can be
              misleading in the context of computer simulations of mathematical models.   A
              numerical linear algebra package cannot make exact calculations with matrices. 
              Until last year, for example, there was no way to tell if a matrix which almost
              satisfied the so-called normality equation represented an approximation of an
              actual normal matrix.  This is now known to be true.  Since much of the theory,
              and applications, of linear algebra must be changed when working with
              non-normal matrices, this is an important theoretical advance.  It adds to our
              confidence in our reliance on computer modeling.  By adding to the list of
              stability results that can be applied to linear algebra, this project should
              enhance that confidence.
