Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Grassland Ecology at Konza Prairie
               Research Natural Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1998      
File        : a9531310

Award Number: 9531310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Smith CCCSMITH@KSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane M. Post  (Principal Investigator former)
              John F. Cavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter K. Dodds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         This award will support the participation of  ten  undergraduate
              students each year in independent research studies  of tallgrass prairie
              ecology at the Konza Prairie Research  Natural Area (KPRNA)/ Long-Term
              Ecological Research Site of  Kansas State University.  Long-term subjects of
              investigation at  the site include study of the impact of fire and grazing on 
              native tallgrass prairie vegetation.  To facilitation  investigation of these
              variables, all watersheds on Konza Prairie  have been assigned to different
              burn regimes and native and  domestic grazers have been introduced to some
              watersheds.  The  watershed level manipulations on KPRNA offer a unique
              opportunity  for the study of many aspects of prairie ecology.  Currently, 41 
              Kansas State University faculty, 32 visiting scientists, 29  graduate students,
              and 15 undergraduate researchers are working  on 126 research projects on
              KPRNA.  The REU Sites Program on  KPRNA will feature several components
              including an independent  research project, a seminar/discussion course in
              grassland  ecology, a course in bioethics and ecology, and a trip to a 
              national scientific meeting.  Each REU student will have a  faculty mentor as
              well as contact with resident graduate students  and research associates. 
              KPNRA REU students will interact with  other undergraduates who are brought to
              campus each summer, at  the invitation of other programs, to do research in
              other  scientific disciplines.  At the conclusion of the summer,  students will
              make an oral presentation of the results of their  research and prepare the
              results for publication.  There will be  a yearly assessment of the program by
              student and faculty  participants in order to insure that the REU program
              continues to  provide a quality experience to all participants.       This
              award will foster the continued education and training  of individuals who will
              be part of the next generation of basic  researchers in the ecology.  It will
              also serve to produce  citizens informed about vari ous aspects of
              environmental sciences  and management and decision making in environmental
              issues.
