Title       : Mathematical Sciences: An Accelerated Research and Study Program for
               Undergraduates in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9531387

Award Number: 9531387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48481              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Mayer mayer@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lex G. Oversteegen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The process of encouraging undergraduates to select or continue  career choices
              in the mathematical sciences must begin as early  as possible.  In our
              experience, undergraduates usually choose to  major in mathematics early, often
              at matriculation, and, from  that point on, the process is all-too-often one of
              attrition.   Our Fast-Track Program in Mathematics and Statistics is designed 
              to identify potentially outstanding mathematics students as (and  before) they
              enter university, and immerse them in a stimulating  research-oriented
              environment over a five-year period which will  keep their interest in
              mathematics fresh as their competence  grows.  The principal ingredients in the
              program are intensive  mentoring by faculty who are involved in mathematical
              research,  an independent research/study project each academic term for each 
              student, a challenging mathematics curriculum, seminars in  mathematics and the
              ethics of mathematical research which will  emphasize student participant and
              interaction among students, and  small-group work projects.  In the process,
              students will  complete the requirements for both a Bachelor's and a Master's 
              degree in mathematics, meting all the liberal arts course  distribution
              requirements (core curriculum) of UAB, and will be  well-prepared for graduate
              work involving research in  mathematics.  The UAB Mathematics Department and
              NSF share in the  support of student participants while they are undergraduates
              (at  most four years).  Thereafter, support of the student is the 
              responsibility of the UAB Mathematics Department.
