Title       : Collaborative Research: Warm Water Pathways and Intergyre Exchange in the
               Northeastern North Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9531877

Award Number: 9531877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1140000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy S. Bower abower@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip L. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1326,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9531877    Bower    In this project, the PIs will study the North Atlantic
              Current, which    transports subtropical water northeastward from the Gulf
              Stream, and the   Poleward Eastern Boundary Current, which carries
              Mediterranean Outflow Water   northward along the European continental slope. 
              These two current systems are   thought to be the two most likely sources of
              warm, salty water that is   transformed into intermediate and deep water in the
              subpolar region.  Specific   objectives are to:  1) provide a quantitative
              description of the bifurcation   of the North Atlantic Current east of the
              Mid-Atlantic Ridge; 2) assess the   importance of meridional eddy fluxes,
              compared to large-scale advection, in   the northward flux of heat and salt in
              the northeastern North Atlantic; and 3)   establish the degree of continuity of
              the Poleward Eastern Boundary Current to   the entrance to the Norwegian Sea
              and the fate of the Mediterranean Outflow   Water carried by this current.   
              To meet these objectives, a total of 68 isopycnal, acoustically-tracked RAFOS  
              floats will be deployed in the eastern Basin of the North Atlantic, forty in  
              and adjacent to the North Atlantic Current, and twenty-eight near the eastern  
              boundary. The floats will drift submerged for two years, sampling three  
              cooling seasons, with tracking provided once daily using moored sound sources. 
                This study is a contribution to the US Atlantic Circulation and Climate  
              Experiment (ACCE), and to the International World Ocean Circulation Experiment 
               (WOCE). The high-resolution RAFOS floats will specifically address important  
              features of the circulation that have relatively short time and/or spatial  
              scales, such as bifurcations, eddy mixing and boundary flows.
