Title       : Primary Production in the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9531990

Award Number: 9531990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walker O. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9531990  SMITH    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
              Flux  Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and
              processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and
              (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon
              cycle.      The Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) has had three  successful
              field efforts (North Atlantic, Equatorial Pacific,  Arabian Sea), and the next
              major field effort will be in the  Southern Ocean.  The overall objectives of
              JGOFS are to quantify  and understand processes controlling the time-varying
              fluxes of  carbon and associated biogenic elements, and to predict the 
              response of marine biogeochemical processes to climate change.  The Southern
              Ocean is critical to the global carbon cycle, as  judged by its size and the
              physical process which occur there  (e.g., deep and intermediate water
              formation), but its present  quantitative role is uncertain.    In order to
              address the objectives of USJGOFS successfully, the  measurement of primary
              production is required for all process  cruises planned for the Southern Ocean
              Study.  Three methods will  be employed: in situ incubations, deck incubations,
              and the  photosynthesis-irradiance response.  The areas of study will be  the
              continental shelf of the Ross Sea, and the Polar Front region  to the north of
              the Ross Sea.  The controls on photosynthesis  will also be investigated.  It
              is hypothesized that on the  continental shelf, irradiance limitation is the
              major factor  controlling phytoplankton productivity, whereas in the Polar 
              Front region, the availability of iron limits phytoplankton  growth and
              influences the size distribution of the populations.  The productivity data in
              conjunction with hydrographic data, will  form a large part of the Southern
              Ocean JGOFS database which both   at-sea investigators and modelers will use to
              clarify the role of  the Southern Ocean in the global carbon cycle.
