Title       : Block Copolymer Self-Assembly: Morphologies, Thermo-mechanical Behaviors and
               Kinetic Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9531914

Award Number: 9531914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhen-Gang Wang zgw@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9531914  Wang  Motivated by the high promise of block copolymers as  materials
              for nanotechnology, and by their intrinsic  scientific interest as model
              systems for self-assembling  complex fluids, a systematic program of
              theoretical  investigations will be undertaken on a number of topics  involving
              self-assembled block copolymer nanostructures  using statistical mechanical
              techniques.  Some of these  topics deal with phenomenologies that are expected
              to apply  to a large class of amphiphilic systems, while others are  unique to
              block copolymers.    The thermo-mechanical properties of ordered nanostructures
               of block copolymers will be studied.  By including  mechanical stress or
              strain, a new dimension is added to the  study of self-assembling complex
              fluids.  Focus will be on  various thermo-mechanical instabilities and phase 
              transitions that occur when an ordered nanostructure is  subjected to
              anisotropic stress or strain.  Some of these  instabilities and transitions are
              unique to ordered block  copolymer nanostructures and are manifestations of
              length-  scale dependent ordering,i.e., fluid-like behavior on the  monomer
              scale and solid-like on the polymer length-scale.    Also to be studied will be
              kinetic pathways of order-  disorder and order-order transitions in diblock
              copolymers  using a time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau approach.  Focus will  be on
              possible non-trivial intermediate states during the  various transitions after
              a sudden change in the system  parameters.  Of special interest will be the
              existence of  the so-called pseudo-stable states which correspond to  saddle
              points on the free energy surfaces.  These states  will be explored both
              dynamically and in equilibrium.    Finally, the phase behavior and
              nanostructures of ABC  triblock copolymers will be studied using
              self-consistent  field techniques.   In contrast to the better studied AB 
              diblocks, a fundamentally new feature here is that the  morphological
              structures and phase behaviors depend not only  on the fraction of ea ch block
              and the overall molecular  weight, but also crucially on the sequence of the
              blocks in  the chain and on the relative strengths of the interactions  between
              the three unlike pairs of blocks.  %%%  This new award is to support
              theoretical research on  nanostructure and phase transitions in block
              copolymers.  The research particularly looks at the behavior of this  important
              class of polymers when subjected to mechanical  forces.  In addition to
              providing insight into fundamental  issues in polymer physics, the results will
              also be useful  in applications of this class of polymers for practical use. 
              ***
