Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Fourier Analysis to Banach Space Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9531594

Award Number: 9531594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Koldobsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9531594  Alex Koldobsky  University of Texas @ San Antonio    The study of
              subspaces of classical Banach spaces remains   one of the most important
              directions of the Banach space   theory. An approach based on the connection
              between embedding  of Banach spaces into Lp, positive definite functions and
              stable  measures was discovered by P. Levy in the 30's, and since then   has
              been under intensive development. The author's contributions  to this direction
              include a solution to the 1938 Schoenberg's   problem on positive definite
              functions, construction of common  subspaces of Lp-spaces, a Fourier transform
              criterion of isometric  embedding into Lp contributing to the 1937 P. Levy's
              problem,   a solution to the isometric version of the 1969 Kwapien's problem  
              on Banach subspaces of Lp with p less than 1. All these results   were obtained
              by using methods of Fourier analysis. The project   addresses open problems in
              this direction. The problems include   the description of positive definite
              norm dependent function,   the related question on the existence of isotropic
              measures   which are not mixtures of stable measures, characterization of  
              subspaces of Lp and zonoids, isomorphic versions of Kwapien's   problem and the
              problem on common subspaces, application of the  Fourier transform to computing
              the Banach-Mazur distance,  connections between the Fourier transform of norms
              and duality  of Banach spaces, and between the Fourier transform and the volume
               of sections of the unit ball. The problem of extending the Fourier   transform
              technique to certain infinite dimensional situations   has applications to
              stochastic processes and electrical engineering.        The Fourier transform,
              as a method of decomposing a signal into   a combination of simple frequencies,
              has proved to be  an important tool in different areas of mathematics, physics,
               engineering and statistics. The author has been working on  applications of
              the Fourier transform to the Banach space theory  for more than ten years, and 
              his contributions include a solution  to the Schoenberg problem on positive
              definite functions which had   been open since 1938, extension of the Fourier
              transform technique to   infinite dimensional situations, construction of
              common subspaces of Banach  spaces and other results. Work in this direction
              provides  important connections between functional analysis, harmonic analysis 
              and probability theory. For example, calculating the Fourier transform  of a
              norm one can find the volume of sections of convex bodies in  spaces of
              arbitrary dimension, or construct random variables  which are stable under
              summation. Situations where one has to calculate   the Fourier transform of the
              norm (distance) of a Banach space occur  in different applied areas. For
              example, if it is impossible to   measure a signal directly, and one only has
              the information about   the distance from the signal to fixed functions in the
              norm of a certain  Banach space, then one of the ways to identify the signal is
              to  solve a certain convolution equation involving the norm, which can  usually
              be solved using the Fourier transform technique. This happens  when, because of
              noise, one can only see the maximum of a signal   (the supremum-norm), which
              often happens in electrical engineering.  In the study of the strength of
              fibers, it is important   to find the frequencies of the main defects while one
              can not  measure the strength at every point and only knows the weakest  points
              of certain pieces of the material. Finding the spectral  function of the
              strength is an example of how the Fourier  transform of norms works for the
              study of materials.
