Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The MSRI Multi-Cast Backbone Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9531260

Award Number: 9531260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Osserman osserman@msri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Christy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Sci Res Inst
	      1000 Centennial Drive
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-0143

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Multicast Backbone is a new technology that makes possible efficient video,
              audio and written communication over the Internet.  Mbone is a robust
              technology currently used by the networking community.  It has allowed the
              Internet Engineering Task Force to replace frequent meetings by virtual
              conferences whose participants remain at their home sites.  However, the use of
              this medium within traditional academic disciplines has been sparse.  We are in
              a critical period when patterns of usage of the Mbone will be formed.  The
              Mathematical Sciences Research Institute is in a strong position to play a key
              role in establishing a constructive and valuable pattern for the use of the
              Mbone in the mathematical sciences.  Participating sites in this project are
              the mathematics departments of Indiana University Stanford University, The Ohio
              State University, University of British Columbia, several campuses of the
              University of California, the Universities of Southern California, Utah and
              Washington, and Washington State University.  Participating Institutes include
              MSRI, LBL, the Geometric Center, and the Fields Institute.  We intend to allow
              up to 20 additional mathematical sites to become project participants.  This
              will be done on a first-come, first -served basis, provided the sites meet
              specific minimum requirements for technical expertise and equipment.   
              Important meetings at MSRI will be multicast so that anyone able to receive
              Mbone broadcasts will be able to attend.  In addition, we plan to develop and
              regularly multicast a series of special events adapted to the new medium and a
              broader audience.  Sponsoring institutions will have the necessary equipment
              and software support to receive and to join in Mbone multicasts.  Participants
              in this proposal will be given the necessary software support to conduct
              whiteboard and talk sessions with other sites having Mbone capability.  A goal
              of this project is to assemble a critical mass of mathematical sites using this
              technology for mathematical commu nication.  We believe that once the utility
              is demonstrated, there will be a rapid spread of its use in the mathematical
              sciences community.  MSRI has about 1000 visitors in a typical year, who stay
              for periods ranging from one week (workshops) to one year.  Collaborations are
              initiated or continued during these periods.  Where appropriate, we will help
              departing researchers to install whiteboard collaboration software on their
              home machines and to be permitted access to the Multicast Backbone.  This will
              allow continued collaboration via this medium and, at the same time, further
              spread the capability to use the MBone into the mathematical community.
