Title       : SBIR Phase II: Catalytic Oxidation of Chlorofluorocarbons and Related Compounds
               for Pollution Abatement Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9531289

Award Number: 9531289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Rossin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Guild Associates Inc
	      5750 Shier-Rings Road
	      Dublin, OH  430161234    614/798-8215

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9531289   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project involves the
              development of a monolithic oxidation catalyst to control the release of CFCs
              (cholorofluorocarbons) and related compounds into the environment. The release
              of CFCs and related compounds is believed to play a significant role in the
              decline in the earth's ozone layer. Compounds intended to replace CFCs, which
              include HFCs (hydrofluorocarbons) and HCFCs (hydrochlorofluorocarbons) also
              possess ozone-depleting properties. As a result, the release of these compounds
              must be controlled. Catalytic oxidation is a technology well suited for
              controlling vapor phase emissions. However, catalysts capable of oxidizing CFCs
              and related compounds have rapidly deactivated due to degradation of the
              catalyst in the harsh acid gas environment. Under the Phase I effort, the
              feasibility of using a Pt/m-ZrO2 catalyst was investigated. The catalyst was
              highly reactive and was able to destroy 1,000 ppm of R22, R113 and R134a
              without deactivation for over 100 hours of continuous operation. The objectives
              of the Phase II proposal are to first modify the catalyst formulation in an
              effort to maximize the reactivity and durability of the catalyst, then
              incorporate the catalyst into the washcoat of a monolith and evaluate the
              reactivity and durability of said material. To meet these objectives, key
              physical properties of the catalyst will be systematically varied, with
              selected materials being evaluated for reactivity and stability. Once
              optimized, monolithic catalysts will be prepared and evaluated for reactivity
              and durability against selected CFCs, HFCs and HCFCs over a wide range of
              process conditions. Based on results obtained during the Phase I effort, it is
              anticipated that the monolithic catalyst will possess sufficient reactivity and
              durability to be employed in commercial pollution abatement applications.  
              Technologies capable of economically controlling the release of CFCs and
              related compounds are currently unavailable. Should the n ovel catalyst
              developed in this Phase II effort prove successful, economic pollution
              abatement systems may be designed around the catalyst to meet the needs of a
              wide variety of applications which include controlling plant fugitive emissions
              and fume abatement.
