Title       : Organic Geochemical Studies in the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9531763

Award Number: 9531763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293001             (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Hedges jihedges@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9531763  Hedges         This research project is part of the US Joint Global
              Ocean  Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better 
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical
              factors and processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these
              fluxes, and (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary
              global  carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a three-year  effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track the  flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic pathways from  the air-ocean interface through the entire
              water column into the  bottom sediment.   The experiment will make use of the
              RVIB  Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V Thompson.       This component concerns a
              cooperative study of organic  matter cycling in the water column and in the
              surficial sediments  of the Southern Ocean.  The main goals of the effort are:
              (1) to  determine how the composition and fluxes of organic material vary 
              regionally and seasonally within the Southern Ocean, (2) to  relate these
              variations to biological processing of the  punctuated organic input and its
              siliceous matrix,  (3) to follow  the downward diagenetic fate of planktonic
              remains through the  water column and into the underlying sediments, with
              special  emphasis on biochemical trends reflecting substrate quality 
              (freshness), and (4) to holistically account for total organic  matter at all
              stages of degradation by carbon-13 analysis of bulk  trap and sediment samples.
                    The shipboard work involves collecting suspended and raining  particulate
              material within the water column and from the  underlying sediment at several
              sites along the proposed study  transect. Suspended particles will be collected
              both by plankton  net tows and high volume filtration of surface water. 
              Sinking  particles will be collected w ith modular sediment traps deployed  in
              arrays of four.  Individual traps will be designed to  selectively collect
              sinking particles and reject swimming  zooplankton without loss of sample or
              biocide.  Two of the four  traps on each array will be fitted with 12-tube
              subsampling  carousels to study shorter term variations.       The collected
              trap and sediment core samples will be  analyzed for their basic biochemical
              building blocks, such as  carbohydrates, amino acids, lipids, lignins, and
              pigments.  These  make up the bulk of the organic matter produced in the upper 
              water column and are an important fraction of the material buried  in the
              sediment.  At the molecular level they can provide  unequivocal information on
              the sources of organic matter and its  decomposition at depth, and on the
              pathways by which biogenic  material is transferred to the sediment.  These
              data will be  combined with information obtained during prior JGOFS experiments
               to produce a global picture of the organic chemistry of  particulate matter in
              the ocean.  ***
