Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges' Summer Mathematics
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9531237

Award Number: 9531237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deanna B. Haunsperger dhaunspe@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges Summer Mathematics Program    Mathematics
              faculty from Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges are  engaged in an intensive
              four-week summer mathematics program for  talented undergraduate women. 
              Forty-eight young women will  participate over the three years.  The program is
              staffed by  mathematicians who are active professionals and outstanding 
              teachers.  The students immerse themselves in mathematics, living  and working
              in a supportive community of women scholars  (undergraduates, graduates, and
              post-graduates) who are  passionate about learning and doing mathematics.  The
              program is  intended to excite these young women about mathematics and 
              mathematical careers, to provide them with the tools they will  need to succeed
              in a mathematical career, and to connect them to  a network of fellow female
              mathematicians.    Students attend a lecture course which meets on Tuesday and 
              Thursday mornings and a seminar which meets on Monday, Wednesday,  and Friday
              mornings.  The seminar has a small-group work time,  led by a female teaching
              assistant, on Monday and Wednesday  afternoons.  In each of the classes, the
              students are introduced  to fields of mathematics beyond calculus that students
              usually do  not have the opportunity to study in a standard undergraduate 
              mathematics program.  Possible topics for these courses include  algebraic
              coding theory, graph theory, combinatorics, game  theory, and number theory. 
              Through these courses, and the  homework assigned in them, the students have an
              opportunity to  improve their skills in conjecture and proof, written and oral 
              expression, mathematical modelling, and library research.  Each  student will
              receive, at the close of the program, written  evaluations of her performance
              and accomplishments from her  instructors.    Recreational problem solving is
              offered each Monday evening for  those students who want to work on solving
              interesting problems.   Four afternoons are devoted to teaching a number of
              computer  applications,  from the basics of everyday computer communication  to
              the latest in mathematical computation.  Use of the computer  for communication
              and computation is a daily routine during the  program.  Each Tuesday afternoon
              there is a discussion on a topic  pertaining to the students' continued
              scholarship: succeeding as  a math major, career options, choosing and
              surviving a graduate  program, and being a woman scientist.  Each Tuesday and
              Thursday  there is a colloquium on a stimulating area of mathematics.  One 
              Friday afternoon the students take a field trip to the Geometry  Center in
              Minneapolis.
