Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of Artificial Pinning Center Niobium Titanium
               Superconductors with Optimal Overall Compositions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9531315

Award Number: 9531315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence Wong supercn@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Supercon Inc
	      830 Boston Turnpike
	      Shrewsbury, MA  015453386    508/842-0174

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9531315  Wong   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
              investigate the possibility of varying the composition of Niobium Titanium
              (NbTi) superconductors by using a novel artificial pinning center approach. 
              The technical objective of the Phase II is to develop a process for producing
              commercial scale billets via the Artificial Pinning Center (APC) process with
              compositions optimized for a particular applications.  Two different
              compositions will be chosen, one for high field use, the other for low to
              intermediate field use.  In addition the process to produce monofilamentary
              material will also be scale from R&D to commercial sized billets.  All
              conventionally produced NbTi superconductors use a melted alloy of single
              composition, Nb47wt%Ti.  Economic and technical limitations have prevented the
              use of other alloy compositions.  The Supercon APC process uses pure Nb and Ti
              sheets as the starting material, thus overall NbTi composition can be varied
              simply by changing the thickness of the sheets.  By varying composition, one
              should be able to optimized composition for particular applications.  For
              example, conductor that is used at high fields (>7T) must have the highest
              critical current densities at these fields.  Thus the composition that is most
              optimal would be one that optimizes the upper critical field.  For conductor
              that is used in low field applications, such as MRI, peak fields do not exceed
              5T.  In addition, these applications are very sensitive to conductor cost as
              measured by $/Kamp * M.  In this case a higher Ti content alloy would be
              attractive.  It has been shown that higher Ti content composites can achieve
              low field Jc's higher than the conventional melted alloy.  The use of higher Ti
              content reduces the raw material costs, as the Ti replace Nb which is 2-4 times
              as expensive.   This SBIR program will results in a highly economical process
              for the fabrication on NbTi superconductors with excellent Jc performance. 
              Conventional NbTi alloy derived superconduc tors are the principle competing
              product for this Supercon APC material.  Optimizing filament composition,
              elimination of the need for NbTi alloy and conventional precipitation heat
              treatments, and good ductility should provide the necessary cost advantage for
              APC material to compete successfully with conventional material.  Among the
              applications that can benefit from these improvements are MRI, laboratory
              solenoids, magnetic ore separation, magneto-hydrodynamic propulsion, magnetic
              levitation, fusion and high energy physics magnets, and nuclear magnetic
              resonance.
