Title       : Collaborative Research: A Study of the Extension of the North Atlantic Current
               and Pathways of Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9531878

Award Number: 9531878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1456207            (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Thomas Rossby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Prater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1326,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9531878    Rossby  As a contribution to the Atlantic Circulation and Climate
              Experiment (ACCE) of   the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), the Pis
              in this project will   seek to identify the pathways of the warm-water North
              Atlantic Current (NAC)   and the sites and mechanisms of frontal exchange
              across it using approximately   80 isopycnal RAFOS floats to be launched at
              various locations in the vicinity   of the NAC.  Specific objectives include:
              (1) exploring the structure of the   front which separates the cold, fresh
              subpolar water to the north and the   warm, saline subtropical water to the
              south, and (2) attempting to quantify   the mechanisms and rates of exchange
              between the two gyres.  In conjunction   with the field program of Drs. Bower
              and Richardson of the Woods Hole   Oceanographic Institution, they will also
              expand the study of the bifurcation   of the NAC as it enters the eastern North
              Atlantic.    The North Atlantic Current (NAC) is recognized as a crucial
              element of the  meridional overturning cell, both as the primary
              northward-penetrating  upper-ocean current and as a region where thermodynamic
              exchange occurs  between the subtropical and subpolar gyre.  Its character
              changes from an   intense, topographically controlled jet in the western
              boundary, to a less-  defined, perhaps filamented eastward flow after veering
              east north of the   Flemish Cap.  It is not clear whether the NAC is a discrete
              front that   translates north and south, a collection of fronts, or simply a
              broad swath of   eastward flow, nor is its fate fully understood.  Although
              most of the flow is    to the north and towards Europe, some recirculation
              occurs as well, and this   partitioning of pathways is important in attempting
              to understand and quantify   the controlling factors of the overturning cell.
