Title       : SBIR Phsse II: Development of a Standard Computer Access Method for People with
               Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9531291

Award Number: 9531291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Lynds   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WesTest Engineering Corp
	      810 West Shepard Lane
	      Farmington, UT  84025    801/451-9191

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9531291  Lynds         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project from WesTest Engineering Corporation will develop a standard method of
              providing computer access to persons with physical disabilities.  In recent
              years the use of personal computers in education has increased dramatically. 
              Because many persons with physical disabilities are not able to use a keyboard
              or a mouse, it is difficult to provide them with equal access to this
              education.  A variety of devices have been developed which provide an alternate
              means of controlling computers, but their usefulness is seriously compromised
              by the lack of a standard method of providing computer control.  Since 1991
              when the Personal Computer Memory Card International Association introduced the
              PCMCIA bus, the technology  has enjoyed widespread application, but it remains 
              technically immature.  To WesTest Engineering Corporation, the existence of the
              PCMCIA bus technology, which uses credit-card-sized interface devices,
              represents an opportunity to grapple with the challenging problems that must be
              solved in order to use the bus for an important new purpose:  To standardize
              computer access for persons with disabilities and to allow individuals to
              choose one or more modes of access according to what best suits their needs. 
              This project will develop software interfaces which will allow personal
              computers to be controlled through the PCMCIA bus.  A family of interface
              devices will also be developed.  Standard software drivers will be developed
              and documented in an open standard.  These drivers will be provided to both the
              computer industry and manufacturers of assistive technology.       This project
              will develop computer interface devices which are smaller, more portable, less
              expensive and provide greater functionality than any product currently
              available.  These advantages over currently available devices will assure the
              economic viability of the products. Establishment of the proposed virtual
              software architecture for altern ate access specification will set the
              standards for this type of device and will enable the development of
              alternative input devices in general.  ***
