Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Groupoid Quotients, Rational Curves on Open Varieties,
               and Curves with Ample Normal Bundle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9531940

Award Number: 9531940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean M. Keel keel@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Keel    This project concerns questions in Algebraic Geometry which may be
              divided into three categories:  Quotients by groupoids, Curves on
              quasi-projective varieties, curves with ample normal bundles.  It is common in
              algebraic geometry to consider the quotient of a variety by an algebraic group.
               Recently Keel and Mori proved that a quotient exists as an algebraic space
              under quite eneral conditions.  In particular there is a geometric quotient
              whenever the family of stabilizers is finite.  One goal of the project is to
              extend these results, in particular to allow for positive dimensional
              stabilizers.  This would have applications to moduli problems, and also to
              coarsely representing Artin-stacks.  One of the principal invairants of smooth
              projective varieties are the plurigenera, the number of global sections of
              various tensor powers of the canonical bundle (the dual of the top exterior
              power of the tangent bundle).  A main conjecture is that plurigenera all vanish
              iff the variety is covered by images of the projective line.  One of the
              principal results of Mori's program is the proof of this in dimension three.   
              There is a notion of plurigenera for open (i.e. quasi-projective) varieties as
              well (the so called log plurigenera), and it has been conjectured by Keel and
              McKernan that these vanish iff the variety is dominated by images of the affine
              line.  Keel and McKernan recently proved this in dimension two, and one of the
              goals of this project is to consider the case of dimension three.  An
              interesting special case is that of a smooth affine three-fold.  Harshorne
              conjectured that if smooth subvariety of a smooth projective variety has ample
              normal bundle, then some multiple moves in a large dimensional family.  This is
              known to be false in general, but remains open for curves.  One goal of the
              project is to consider the case of a curve in  a  three-fold.  A preliminary
              result has been obtained by considering hypersurfaces with high multiciplicity
              along the curve, and it is hoped that the  results can be extended.
