Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Representation Theory andAutomorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9531908

Award Number: 9531908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nolan R. Wallach nwallach@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        Abstract          Wallach          DMS-9531908                    This
              project will continue the principal investigator's   research in the
              representation theory of reductive groups and its   applications to number
              theory, geometry and physics. One of the   main themes in this project involves
              the study of  (so called) singular unitary representations using a   technique
              we call transfer which "moves"  unitary representations between real forms of
              the same   complexification.  To implement this idea one must have   very
              detailed information on the restriction of   representations to (generally
              non-compact) symmetric   subgroups.  This analysis is of interest in its own
              right   and has led (and will lead) researchers (including the PI)   to
              surprising generalizations of Howe's theory of reductive   dual pairs to
              exceptional groups.  It will also lead to   confirmation of special cases of
              some remarkable   conjectures of B.  Gross and D.  Prasad.  Another key  
              direction of this research involves the continued study   of the module theory
              of the ring of invariant polynomial   differential operators on a reductive Lie
              algebra.  This   work has already led to a new interpretation of the   Springer
              correspondence.  The new direction here will   involve some sort of "relative
              Springer correspondence".   This project also involves joint work with Matthew
              Clegg on   the development of a symbolic algebra package (to be called  
              "Groebner") designed for large scale computations using   parallel
              supercomputers or distributed networks of work   stations.          The
              solution to the problems described in this project  would expand our
              understanding of some of the most exciting   developments in the interaction of
              representation theory with   apparently unrelated parts of mathematics and
              physics.  For   example the detailed analysis of one singular representation  
              (by Kostant and his coworkers) has led to new solutions to   Einstein's
              equations.  Representation theory of the type   studied in this  project is
              also an important ingredient in the   Langland's program of which one very
              small part due to Wiles   led to his (Wile's) proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.
