Title       : SBIR Phase II: Effective Software for Contextualized Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9531281

Award Number: 9531281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Keavney keavney@sparkleinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sabrina Lin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sparkle Productions
	      2626 Bryant St
	      Palo Alto, CA  943062306    415/324-0365

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  Lin  9531281         New information technologies are seen as likely to be
              especially effective in providing meaningful and intrinsically motivated
              contexts for integrated and purposive learning of mathematical principles; and
              a wide array of recent scientific research efforts within psychology,
              education, and computer science documents the potentially major educational
              benefits of thoughtful uses of computers in education.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase II project conducted by Sparkle Productions, Inc.
              will address the demand for high quality, innovative, educational software
              capable of significantly increasing both the motivation to learn about
              mathematics and the depth of mathematics learning in children.  Phase I results
              indicated that the development of such software is technically feasible and
              that both teachers' and children's ratings of the prototype materials developed
              compared very favorably with current offerings in this market.  In addition,
              the results suggested that the present design approach may have special appeal
              to girls inasmuch as an effort was made to redress the balance, i.e., most
              computer-based mathematics activities have proved much more interesting and
              motivating for boys; thus contexts, themes, icons, formats, and other features
              were selected with the aim of being of interest to both genders equally or of
              interest particularly to girls.  The objective of the Phase II effort will be
              to leverage the Phase I results obtained and to continue development of a
              multifaceted educational software product that teaches children mathematics in
              the context of visiting and exploring cities.  As such, the research in Phase
              II will be devoted to the further development of the Phase I conceptual
              prototype into a complete software prototype, which can then be more fully
              evaluated by educators and students.  It is expected that the effort will
              further support the successful preliminary results from the Phase I research
              and will therefore yield promising approaches f or the creation of commercially
              viable educational software products for the teaching of mathematics.  Further,
              it is expected that the design techniques developed in this effort can
              potentially be leveraged for the design and development of educational software
              products for other domains as well.       The proposed research will further
              understanding of effective designs for educational software for mathematics
              learning.  Commercialization of the designs into innovative education software
              offerings can address the demand for educational software in the home,
              anticipated to be a billion dollar market by the end of the decade.  Moreover,
              this software may prove of special appeal to girls, a largely untapped half of
              this market.  ***
