Title       : High Frequency Radar Array Characterization of Temperate Glacier Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9531800

Award Number: 9531800
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58208              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Moran moran@hanover-crrel.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Arcone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The ultimate scientific objective of this study is to investigate a new high
              frequency radar array technology for characterizing temperate glaciers by
              mapping bed topography, basal ice hydrologic features, the thickness and
              distribution of saturated tills, and deep englacial drainage channels.  It is
              widely acknowledged that presently there are no effective direct, or remote
              methods capable of delineating these structures.  Radar methods fail because of
              the intrinsic high noise properties of temperate glaciers.  Modern radar
              instruments  have overcome random noise and antenna noise problems.  The
              current limitation on radar is noise resulting from subsurface water
              inclusions, which impose a 10 MHz upper frequency limitation on conventional
              temperate glacier surveying  methods.  A radar survey method utilizing array
              processing can significantly suppress noise from water filled scattering
              inclusions.    Numerical models and time domain data processing algorithms will
              be developed to guide the array design, performance analysis, and
              interpretation procedures.  In addition, a physical scale model of a temperate
              glacier will be used to collect radar data in the millimeter wave frequency (30
              GHz) range.  The physical model results will be used to verify numerical and
              theoretical array processing results and further refine the approach.  A field
              experiment will be carried out on the shallow (100 - 200m), readily accessible,
              Gulkana glacier, Alaska.  This field experiment will include conventional radar
              and radar array data collection methods with 100 MHz antennas.  In the field
              operations they will  be specifically interested in demonstrating the improved
              depth of penetration using the array method as compared to the conventional
              technique.    The immediate glaciologic benefits will be an accurate picture of
              how near surface englacial and basal ice water channels are interconnected and
              oriented on a small, but interesting temperate glacier.  The extended benefit
              will be the development of a practic al method for sounding much deeper
              temperate glaciers.  For example, on very deep (1000 m) temperate glaciers they
              believe the high frequency radar array could operate at a center frequency
              around 30 MHz.  In this band, multiple radar array stations, or a towed array,
              would have the potential to define, characterize, and spatially map meter scale
              englacial and basal ice hydrologic features as well as ice bed topography..
              This is particularly relevant since the depth and bottom topography of almost
              all large subpolar ice fields are unknown.  In addition, a high resolution deep
              penetration radar capability applied to large ice masses would help answer
              questions about steady flow and surge mechanisms, basal freeze, and sediment
              transport.  The radar array technique will also be applicable to Antarctic
              glaciers.
