Title       : Development of a Computerized Multi-Station Protein Crystallization Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9317981

Award Number: 9317981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Feigelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317981  Feigelson  This proposal is for the development of a multi-station, 
              computer controlled apparatus for the growth of high  quality, single crystals
              of biological macromolecules  (proteins) suitable for use in structure
              determinations by x-  ray diffraction.  The difficulties in growing suitable 
              crystals  1  has been one of the major factors limiting the  number of protein
              structures which have been completely  determined  2 .  The determination of
              the molecular  structure of proteins has become an important segment of  modern
              biology and pharmacology and its potential has been  barely tapped  2 .  The
              development of the proposed  apparatus is directed toward the growth of
              crystals with a  high degree of internal perfection which will facilitate the 
              process of structure determination.    In order to growth the highest quality
              crystals, it is  necessary to separately control the nucleation and growth 
              phases during crystallization.  Previous work in our  laboratory has
              demonstrated that the nucleation of crystals  in protein solutions can be
              controlled by controlling the  temperature in a small region of the solution. 
              The  subsequent growth was controlled by changing the ambient  temperature
              around the growth cell.  This technique,  Thermonucleation. has been used to
              nucleate and grow  crystals of both inorganic and protein materials  3,4 . 
              Thermonucleation relies on the independent control of the  temperatures in both
              the nucleating region and the bulk of  the solution.  Its use is limited to
              those proteins which  have some temperature dependence of solubility within the
               temperature range of approximately 0 to 35 C and thus is  applicable to a
              large number of proteins.    The intent of the proposed program is to develop a
              user  friendly, computer controlled, multi-station apparatus to  grow protein
              crystals using the principle of  Thermonucleation.  The growth module will be
              downsized from  the research instrument previously developed and will use 
              thermoclectric heating and cooling . The new design will  emphasize ease of
              crystal harvesting and changing of protein  solutions. The actual growth cell
              will be of a size  consistent with the small solution volumes used in protein 
              crystallization. Temperature sensing will be built into each  growth module.
              The module will also incorporate a nucleation  detection system which will
              allow switching from a computer  controlled nucleation program to the
              appropriate growth  program. Nucleation detection will be based on static light
               scattering techniques  5 .    The development of the apparatus will begin with
              the design,  construction and testing of the growth module.  Concurrent  with
              this, the nucleation detector will be developed.  These  two units will be
              integrated into a single module.  At this  point, interfacing with the computer
              and computer program  development will begin.  When the single module has been 
              thoroughly tested under computer control using a number of  crystallizing
              systems multiple unit apparatus will be  constructed and tested.  Results at
              each stage of the  apparatus development will be used to optimize the final 
              apparatus.  The goal of the proposed program will be to  develop this
              technology into a user friendly, semi-automated  apparatus which will allow
              biochemical worker to  reproducibly grow high quality single crystals of
              proteins  for x-ray structure determinations with a minimum of  operator
              interaction.
