Title       : Completion of High Performance Scanning Ion Microprobe Upgrade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9317959

Award Number: 9317959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Riccardo Levi-Setti riccardo@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317959  Levi-Setti       The radical upgrade of the mass discrimination
              capability and secondary ion detection sensitivity of the University of Chicago
              high resolution Scanning Ion Microprobe (UC SIM) is near completion. This
              upgrade has entailed the interfacing of the microprobe with a high performance
              magnetic sector mass spectrometer, while retaining the superior performance of
              the primary beam ion optics and allowing alternate use of the previous RF
              quadrupole mass filter. Although the principal hardware and electronic
              components needed for this complex upgrade have been constructed and are now
              operational, a most critical phase of new instrument development is still to be
              completed. The construction of several ancillary devices, originally deemed of
              secondary priority within the previous budgetary constraints, is now regarded
              as a worthwhile and necessary complement to the already successful instrumental
              upgrade. Most of all, the complexity of the joint operation of the microprobe
              with the highly sophisticated Finnigan MAT chemical mass spectrometer requires
              extensive optimization and performance evaluation, together with training of
              students and staff.         As demonstrated in previous phases of our
              instrument development, the concurrent pursuit of fundamental biological
              studies has remained consistently one of the highest priorities of our program.
              In collaboration with established biologists from several academic
              institutions, systematic investigations and exploratory applications of high
              resolution secondary ion imaging have already yielded unique results and have
              created a very productive interface between  the physical and the biological
              sciences. At a much improved level of performance, several pilot studies which
              already show promise will be actively pursued:    (a) Direct mapping of the
              distribution of isotope labelled nucleosides in human chromosomes and
              evaluation of the nucleotide content of fragile sites.   (b) Direct mapping of
              the distribution of isotope labelled nucleosides in   Drosophila melanogaster
              metaphase and polytene chromosomes.   (c)  Identification of the pathways of
              bone resorption initiated by osteoclasts.   Determination of the calcium to
              phosphorus radio in bone formation and   resorption, This will entail
              experiments with Ca isotopes as tracers, and   the detection and measurement of
              phosphorus.     u    ~ s  t     s       %           )   ~   +   *   ,       .  
              g   L   c   X   3   d       h                           Z       %              
              i       ?       -                   9317959  Levi-Setti       The radical
              upgrade of the mass discrimination capability and secondary ion detection
              sensitivity of t    u                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          )  
              u           O                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            !         !         !         !  
                         F                             K             K                       
                       ;    CG Times    Symbol  & Arial  1 Courier  0 MS LineDraw            
                  E E                           h      : % : %          F   =         =   
              abstract    Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
