Title       : Modified Nucleosides and tRNA Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9317196

Award Number: 9317196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314379             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell R. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317196  Davis  NMR spectroscopy will be used to determine the structure of RNA 
              oligonucleotides corresponding to structural domains in tRNAs.   Synthetic
              oligonucleotides corresponding to the anticodon stem-  loop region and the
              dihydrouridine stem-loop region will be  synthesized using synthetic
              phosphoramidite methods.  The  naturally occurring modified nucleosides
              pseudouridine, 2'-O-  methylcytidine, 2-methylthio-N6-isopentenyladenosine, 1- 
              methylguanosine, 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine, and  dihydrouridine will be
              incorporated into RNA oligonucleotides.   The structures for the modified
              oligonucleotides will be  determined and compared to the structures of the
              unmodified  analogs.  Structural changes induced by RNA modification will be 
              correlated to changes in the stability, both in terms of overall  structural
              integrity, and local conformational dynamics.  The  effect of divalent metal
              ion coordination on the structure and  stability will be determined for
              unmodified and modified  oligonucleotides.  In cases where  high affinity
              magnesium  coordination sites are indicated by KD measurements, the specific 
              metal ion bindings sites will be determined in subsequent high-  resolution
              structural studies.  Traditional 2D NMR methods along  with newer, homonuclear
              3D NMR experiments will be used to assign  RNA resonances and to derive
              structural information.  Distance  geometry and molecular dynamics
              calculational methods will be  used to convert NMR structural constraints into
              well-defined 3D  structures.  The structural data obtained for tRNA 
              oligonucleotide analogs will be used to explain the role of  modified
              nucleosides where these particular nucleosides have been  implicated in tRNA
              function.  %%%  Transfer RNA is a unique biological molecule that performs an 
              integral role in translating the genetic message contained in  DNA.  The DNA
              code in a gene is ultimately used to construct  specific proteins, tRNAs
              specific for each of the amino acids  that go into a protein are part of th e
              ribosomal protein  synthesis machinery.  The three-dimensional structure of
              each  amino acid specific tRNA is unique and this structural diversity  is the
              basis for assuring that the correct amino acid is inserted  into the protein
              sequence in response to the appropriate message  from the DNA.  tRNAs are
              composed of the ribonucleosides  adenosine, uridine, cytidine, and guanosine as
              well as an  enormous array of chemically "unusual" nucleosides that are 
              derivatives of the four common ribonucleosides.  These "modified"  nucleosides
              appear to play a critical role in defining the  structures of tRNAs.  The
              modified nucleosides are important in  assuring that tRNAs function correctly
              and also in discriminating  between tRNAs that code uniquely for each of the
              common amino  acids.  The goal of this proposal is to further the understanding
               of the function of modified nucleosides in tRNA.  The way in  which chemical
              modification influences structure is likely to be  critical to the correct
              function of tRNAs.  We will use a  powerful tool for elucidating the structure
              of tRNA, NMR  spectroscopy, to produce three-dimensional structures of modified
               RNAs.  The information derived from these studies will aid in  understanding
              the complex function of a biological macromolecule  that is central to all
              life.  ***
