Title       : Primary Productivity in Antarctic Pack Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9317380

Award Number: 9317380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67832              (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Kremer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Kremer  9317380    Models and estimates of primary production and biogeochemical
               cycling in the Southern Ocean must account for processes occurring  in at
              least four distinct regions:  the open ocean, the marginal  ice edge zones, the
              pack ice zone, and the coastal regions.  Of  these regions, the least studied
              is the pack ice zone, where rates  of primary production and nutrient cycling
              remain unknown.  This is  due to it's relative inaccessibility and the present
              lack of remote  sensing technology to evaluate the potential for primary
              production  in ice or ice covered waters.  Therefore, assessing primary 
              production and nutrient cycling in pack ice requires either ice  breaking
              capabilities and/or the establishment of temporary remote  facilities.  During
              1992, the first drifting ice station in  Antarctic waters, Ice station Weddell
              #1 (ISW-1) was established in  the perennial pack ice of the Western Weddell
              Sea.  ISW-1 provided  a platform for conducting the first time-series
              investigations  assessing primary production, nutrient cycling and net
              accumulation  of biogenic particulate matter in Antarctic pack ice.  During
              ISW-1  operation, additional ice cores were obtained by the ice physics  group
              and are now archived at the Cold Regions Research and  Engineering Laboratories
              (CRREL). Processing these cores for the  determination of biomass (as pigments,
              particulate organic carbon  and nitrogen) and biogenic silica will compliment
              the existing ISW-  1 biological data set, and extend the assessment of the new 
              production/accumulation of biogenic particulate matter to include  additional
              study sites and ice types that were not analyzed during  routine ISW-1
              operations.  Additionally, studies of primary  production, biomass
              distributions and nutrients in pack ice will be  extended to the Bellingshausen
              and Amundsen seas through a cruise  in August and September 1993.  This project
              will provide the  resources and time necessary for processing samples collected
              at  CRREL and from the Bellingshau sen-Amundsen seas and for the  
              interpretation of the results.  The data sets generated from ISW-1  operations
              and the Bellingshausen-Amundsen cruise will extend the  knowledge of the
              relative contribution of biogenic particulate  matter in the Southern Ocean and
              will be utilized in the  construction of or as verification of pack ice primary
              production  and nutrient cycling models presently under development.  ***
