Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of B Cell Activation and Desensitization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9317027

Award Number: 9317027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Coggeshall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317027  Coggeshall    The objective of this research is to determine the
              molecular basis  of B cell activation and the inhibition of proliferation by
              co-  crosslinking sIg and the Fc gamma receptor.  Experiments focus on  early
              events resulting from surface Ig triggering:  activation of  the various
              sIg-associated tyrosine protein kinases (TPK) and  phosphorylation of specific
              substrates.  Recent findings from this  laboratory indicate that B cells
              predominantly express and undergo  receptor-triggered tyrosine phosphorylation
              and membrane  translocation of a unique isoform of phospholipase C (PLC), PLC 
              gamma 2.  While tyrosine phosphorylation of PLC gamma 1 is an  important
              feature of signal transduction for many receptors, B cell  sIg is the only
              known receptor linked to PLC gamma 2.  Using ex  vivo B cells and B cell lines,
              experiments will be done to study  the mechanism linking tyrosine
              phosphorylation to PLC activation.   Specific goals are:  1) to define the
              regulation of PLC gamma 2  enzymatic activity by tyrosine protein kinses, 2) to
              establish the  molecular basis of Fc gamma receptor-mediated inhibition of B
              cell  proliferation, and 3) to study the relative roles of phospholipase  C
              gamma 1 and 2 in sIg-mediated cell activation.  The results  should define, in
              biochemical terms, the earliest events following  sIg stimulation and shed
              light on the molecular mechanisms involved  in inhibition of B cell
              proliferation mediated by the Fc gamma  receptor.  %%%  Cells receive important
              biological signals by means of receptors on  their surfaces.  These signals are
              then translated ("transduced")  through cascades of biochemical events to alter
              the cell's  physiological state or affect the expression of specific genes.  
              Cells have many different receptors for biological signals and the  receptors
              can be classified into different types based on their  structures and the types
              of biochemical pathways they trigger.   Identifying the critical components in
              the sequence of biochemical  events tri ggered by cellular receptors is an area
              of active  research.  The goal of this research is to work out the biochemical 
              details of the early steps in the signal transduction pathway  following the
              binding of a foreign material (antigen) to specific  receptors on the surface
              of certain cells of the immune system (B  lymphocytes).  This pathway of
              cellular signaling leads to  proliferation of the responding cells and
              ultimately to production  of specific proteins (antibodies) that bind the
              antigen and promote  its removal from the body.  ***
