Title       : Collaborative Research: Reproductive Periodicity in Planktonic Sarcodines:
               Implications for Temporal Variability in Abundance and Flux
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9317739

Award Number: 9317739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony F. Michaels   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9317739  Michaels        The symbiont-bearing planktonic sarcodines (Acantharia,
              Radiolaria  and Foraminifera) are one of the most conspicuous groups of micro- 
              /macrozooplankton in the surface waters of oceanic communities.   They are also
              one of the least studied for their importance in  energy flow, nutrient cycles
              and vertical fluxes in these  environments.    Planktonic sarcodines play an
              important role in the production of  organic material by organisms >70 um in
              oceanic plankton  communities (via their intracellular symbiotic algae). 
              Moreover,  by virtue of their large size (and consequently their potentially 
              rapid sinking rates) they also play a greater role in the flux of  material out
              of the mixed layer than would be predicted by their  overall contribution to
              planktonic biomass.  Previous studies  indicate great variability in the
              surface productivity and flux of  sarcodine material out of the mixed layer
              that may be related to  the reproductive periodicities of some species of
              symbiont-bearing  planktonic sarcodines or to episodic events leading to rapid 
              population growth.  This project will test this hypothesis, and  determine the
              extent to which these periodicities control the  temporal changes in the
              importance of planktonic sarcodines to  primary production in the surface
              waters of the oligotrophic  Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda, and to their flux out
              of the surface  waters at this site.  ***        The symbiont-bearing
              planktonic sarcodines (Acantharia, Radiolaria  and Foraminifera) are one of the
              most conspicuous groups of micro-  /macrozooplankton in the surface waters of
              oceanic communities.   They are also one of the least studied for their
              importance in  energy flow, nutrient cycles and vertical fluxes in these 
              environments.    Planktonic sarcodines play an important role in the production
              of  organic material by organisms >70 um in oceanic plankton  communities (via
              their intracellular symbiotic algae).  Moreover,  by virtue of their large size
              (and consequently their po tentially  rapid sinking rates) they also play a
              greater role in the flux of  material out of the mixed layer than would be
              predicted by their  overall contribution to planktonic biomass.  Previous
              studies  indicate great variability in the surface productivity and flux of 
              sarcodine material out of the mixed layer that may be related to  the
              reproductive periodicities of some species of symbiont-bearing  planktonic
              sarcodines or to episodic events leading to rapid  population growth.  This
              project will test this hypothesis, and  determine the extent to which these
              periodicities control the  temporal changes in the importance of planktonic
              sarcodines to  primary production in the surface waters of the oligotrophic 
              Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda, and to their flux out of the surface  waters at
              this site.  ***
