Title       : Acquisition of a Compact Dilution Refrigerator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9317417

Award Number: 9317417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Lee ml3g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elias Towe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Joseph Poon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9317417  Lee    This compact dilution refrigerator used in experiments probing 
              the electronic and electrodynamic response of advanced materials  and novel
              solid-state structures at very low temperatures at  University of Virginia. 
              These research projects focus on  electron tunneling, noise, and transport
              studies of the  fundamental ground-state and elementary excitation properties
              of  interacting electron systems.  Because full spin, Coulomb, and  quantum
              correlation effects often do not become manifest until  temperatures of ~ 0.1K,
              attainment of temperatures below those  achievable by pumped liquid 3H2(~0.3 K)
              will be required, making  necessary the use of a dilution refrigerator which
              can achieve a  base temperature of approximately 0.02K in a rapid and
              convenient  manner.    It is anticipated that normal use of the dilution
              refrigerator  will be divided among three principal investigators:  Prof. Mark 
              Lee, who will be the principal user responsible for the  maintenance of the
              facility, Prof. Joseph Poon, and Prof. Elias  Towe.  Dr. Lee seeks to elucidate
              aspects of the ground state in  variable range hopping (VRH) conductors such as
              Si:P and  PrBa2Cu3O7 in the strongly interacting regime around 0.1 K by 
              tunneling and noise experiments.  He will also use the dilution  refrigerator
              to investigate large scale quantum coherency at low-  temperature in high
              mobility superconductor-semiconductor  structures, and how the coupling between
              novel superconductors  and normal metals can shed insight into possibly
              unconventional  superconducting mechanisms.  Dr. Poon is interested in highly 
              ordered new materials, composed entirely of metal atoms, that  show
              semiconducting or insulating behavior at low temperature as  a result of
              unusual symmetries, as occurs in quasicrystals, or  low dimensionality.  For
              this work it is important to have the  ability to systematically measure
              resistivities down to ~ 0.03 K  in a convenient manner in order to confirm and
              study the  existence of non-metallic behavior.   Dr. Towe currently grows  high
              purity semiconductor heterostructures by molecular beam  epitaxy.  Quantitative
              characterization effective masses and  mobilities is typically done by
              measuring Shubnikov-de Haas  oscillations and of the Hall effect quantization
              at very low  temperatures.  Dr. Towe's investigation will include a study of 
              mobilities in heterostructures of varying crystallographic  orientation and
              development of nitride-based semiconductor  heterostructures.  This instrument
              is straightforward to maintain  and operate, has a relatively rapid cool-down
              and sample turn-  around time, and will thus serve as an excellent teaching
              tool  for graduate and undergraduate students in solid-state and low- 
              temperature experimental physics.  The dilution unit will be  housed in an
              existing 4He dewar equipped with a compensated 10 T  superconducting solenoid
              and will share pumping and gas support  facilities with an operational 4He
              variable temperature cryostat.    ***
