Title       : Covalent Phosphorus Residues in Xanthine Oxidizing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9317614

Award Number: 9317614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale E. Edmondson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Edmondson  9317614  This proposal is to investigate the possible catalytic role
              of a  phosphoseryl residue in the catalytic mechanism of xanthine  hydroxlation
              to uric acid by xanthine oxidase/dehydrogenase.   Previous studies have shown
              the phosphoseryl oxygens to be labelled  with H2180 in milk xanthine oxidase on
              substrate turnover.  This  line of investigation will be expanded to determine
              if the 190  labelled phosphoseryl residue is transferred to the substrate to 
              form 190 labelled uric acid when the reaction is carried out in  H2160.  The
              phosphoseryl peptides will be isolated from chicken  liver xanthine
              dehydrogenase and from milk xanthine oxidase and  sequenced.  The peptide
              sequence around these residues will then be  located in the known sequence of
              the chicken enzyme and the known  sequences of the rat or Drosophila enzymes to
              determine if they are  located about the Molybdenum-cofactor binding domain. 
              These  experiments will critically test the feasibility of the hypothesis  of a
              catalytic involvement of the phosphoseryl residues in this  class of
              molybdoenzymes.  %%%  This project addresses a hypothesis of a potentially new
              function  of phosphorylated amino acid residues in the detailed molecular 
              mechanism of molybdoenzyme catalysis.  Peptide sequence analysis of 
              phosphopeptides will be isolated from proteolytic digests of  chicken liver and
              bovine milk xanthine oxidizing enzymes, their  amino acid sequences determined,
              and their respective locations in  the respective amino acid sequences of known
              xanthine oxidizing  enzymes determined.  This information will determine if
              they are  located near the domains of the enzyme thought to contain the  active
              site molybdenum cofactor.  The pathway for H2160  incorporation into the
              product (uric acid) of the enzyme catalyzed  reaction will be followed by
              monitoring 180 labelling of the  phosphoseryl phosphate residue and the uric
              acid product by mass  spectrometry.  These experiments should provide
              definitive evidence  as to whether the  phosphoseryl residue in xanthine
              oxidizing  enzymes functions in a catalytic role.  If this hypothesis proves 
              correct, it would be the first demonstration of such a function for  enzyme
              phosphorylation.  ***
