Title       : Theoretical and Numerical Studies in Gravitational Collapse and Relativistic
               Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9317638

Award Number: 9317638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Evans evans@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Several theoretical and numerical studies are proposed in  gravitational
              collapse, critical phenomena in general  relativity and relativistic
              astrophysics.  The major focuses  of this program include:  (1) a vigorous
              investigation of  the critical phenomena recently discovered to be associated 
              with gravitational collapse in general relativity, (2) an  investigation of
              several steps toward modeling the orbital  decay and coalescence of black hole
              binaries, (3) several  investigations of the physics of eclipsing pulsars and 
              relativistic pulsar winds, and (4) numerical studies of  magnetohydrodynamic
              (MHD) winds and magnetically-confined  jets.    The objectives of work in
              critical phenomena are to  understand the connections to critical phenomena in
              other  areas such as statistical physics, to explore analytic  properties of
              the simplest examples of critical behavior in  collapse, and to discover
              additional, physically-distinct  examples of critical phenomena through
              numerical  experimentation.  The objectives of work on coalescing black  hole
              binaries are to develop and explore in two spatial  dimensions (2+1) the use of
              an apparent horizon inner  boundary condition for black holes and to develop
              algorithms  that efficiently utilize massively-parallel architectures.  In both
              cases, knowledge developed in 2+1 will be extendible  to three dimensions
              (3+1).  Work on eclipsing pulsars will  focus on investigating simple
              analytic/numerical models of  nonlinear plasma instabilities, which may be
              relevant for  short-period, low-mass systems, and investigating the 
              interaction between relativistic pulsar winds and normal  stellar winds. 
              Continued development of a general purpose  MHD code (AVATAR), begun in the
              last grant period, will be  pursued, with application to the study of
              self-collimation  of MHD winds and propagation of magnetically-confined jets.
