Title       : Replacement and Modernization of Greenhouse Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9317890

Award Number: 9317890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Lemieux   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Olmstead  (Principal Investigator former)
              Pamela K. Diggle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Ranker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317890  Olmstead  The proposed project will provide upgraded modern greenhouse
              facilities thereby permitting research activities presently unavailable. 
              Specifically, a 762 m2 (8200 ft2) greenhouse will be erected and equipped as
              follows: two rooms will be environmentally equipped to accommodate alpine
              research; environmental controls will be computerized to allow monitoring and
              integration of systems with greater accuracy as well as data collection of
              greenhouse environments; high intensity discharge (HID) lighting will be added
              for supplementing and controlling photoperiod; additional greenhouse systems
              will be added, such as humidification in additional rooms, automatic watering
              systems and black-out cloth in some sections; the headhouse will be equipped
              with an office and storage room; the greenhouse will be equipped with an
              aquatic tank to permit research on aquatic organisms; a protected outdoor
              growing area (lath house) will be constructed; additional minor modifications
              to electrical, HVAC and plumbing systems will permit more efficient operation
              of the facility. The proposed systems have become commonplace in academic
              research institutions.    The above equipment and modifications would upgrade
              the facility to accommodate research on plants and other organisms living in
              alpine environments. In addition, a variety of research areas investigated in
              EPO Biology would be better served through more accurate control of
              environments as well as greater capabilities within a given environment. With
              the present facility, a limited amount of space and number of environments are
              available using outdated control systems a nd, in some cases, inadequate
              equipment. The improved facility would be more versatile, permitting
              researchers to accurately set the environment within the greenhouses. Current
              research benefiting from these improvements would include work on
              photoprotection and photosynthesis, plant community ecology and population
              biology, plant-insect interactions, evolution and ecology of plant herbivore
              interactions, trace gas emissions, molecular phylogenetics and population
              genetics.    With upgrading under the current multi-user biological equipment
              program, the goals of the Department and University would be enhanced in the
              following ways:           1. increased ability to simulate natural
              environments, monitor history of environments and fine-tune research
              requirements as well as research directions           2. provide for a more
              integrated and versatile facility that reflects the needs of researchers and
              students, compared to plant sciences in peer institutions           3.
              increased efficiency, permitting operation of the facility with greater
              accuracy and with less wasted time and effort    The improved greenhouse and
              support buildings would be attractive to current and new faculty researchers
              and greater numbers of students because faculty and students in plant sciences
              require facilities that permit the observation and formulation of questions
              based on living plants. Research that seeks to understand plant adaptations to
              various parameters controlling plant growth, plant chemical ecology. allocation
              patterns, development, and molecular evolution, to name a few, is facilitated
              by the ability to cultivate organisms in an indoor environment in Colorado.
              Potential new students and faculty will be more inclined to select an
              institution that has both the space for research and a facility in which
              meaningful research can be learned and performed easily.                       
                                                   9317890  Olmstead  The proposed project
              will provide upgraded modern greenhouse facilities t hereby permitting research
              activitie    E                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   o   q     
                           =   ?   E                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          !         !         !         !         !          
                 F                                                                          
              E         E     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                        
                      "             h     5      %   %  #                 5        Deseree
              King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
