Title       : Neotectonic Evolution of Antarctic Peninsula/Scotia Sea Region: Multi-Beam,
               Sidescan Sonar, Seismic, Magnetics and Gravity Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1995    
File        : a9317588

Award Number: 9317588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Lawver lawver@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a marine geophysical investigation of the  Bransfield Strait
              and the Shackleton Fracture Zone and environs in  the Scotia Sea in an effort
              to understand the neotectonic evolution  of the region.  Multibeam swath
              mapping and sidescan sonar mapping  will be used along with multichannel
              seismic imaging.  The main  goal of this proposal is to collect multibeam and
              sidescan sonar  data to map the structural character and tectonic fabric of the
               evolving plate boundary in Southwest Scotia Sea, Shackleton  Fracture Zone,
              and Bransfield Strait.  Follow up multichannel  seismic surveys will be done in
              the Southwest Scotia Sea.  The  secondary goal is to use sidescan sonar
              reflectivity images to  generate detailed structural maps of the seafloor of
              these regions  and to integrate the new data with existing seismic reflection, 
              Geosat gravity, Hydrosweep and Seabeam bathymetric data.  Once the  base maps
              are produced they can be used by other researchers to  help interpret
              multichannel and single channel seismic reflection  records.    The neotectonic
              evolution of the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea  is extremely complex.
              Understanding the recent evolution of the  Drake-Scotia-Antarctic-South America
              plate intersections will  provide important information as to how major plate
              boundaries  reorganize after demise of a long-lived spreading center and the 
              consequential reduction in the number of plates.  The plate  reorganization
              probably resulted in the uplift of the Shackleton  Ridge which may have
              effected the sedimentary patterns in both the  Scotia Sea and possibly the
              Weddell Sea.  If the break of the  Shackleton transform fault can be traced
              with multibeam and  sidescan sonar as it intersects the southern end of South
              America  then the orientation and geometry of the faults, fractures and 
              deformation as the transform fault intersects the South American  continent
              will help to interpret the structures in that complex  region.     Bransfield
              Strait is presently undergoing extensi on based on high  heat flow, active
              volcanoes and inferences from seismic reflection  work.  Seismic refraction
              indicates thick crust similar to the East  African Rift or passive volcanic
              margins of continents.  In  contrast, analysis of isotopes and rare earth
              elements of the  recent volcanics shows seemingly no continental contamination.
               The  active extension in Bransfield Strait must be related to the plate 
              reorganization but it is unclear exactly what tectonic processes  are
              occurring.  Besides elucidating the tectonic fabric of  Bransfield Strait, the
              multibeam and sidescan sonar survey will  identify potential dredge targets and
              DSRV Alvin dive sites.
