Title       : Models for Classification and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9317256

Award Number: 9317256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141136             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Estes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317256  ESTES    This project will be devoted to the continuing development of 
              mathematical and computer models for human memory and  classification
              performance.  The objectives are twofold.  One  function of the models,
              analogous to that of the gene model in  genetics, is to help us understand what
              goes on in the memory  system when it is impaired by aging or brain damage or
              when it  gives rise to super-normal or "expert" performance, and to  provide an
              essential framework for relating experimental results  on cognitive functioning
              to mechanisms revealed by research in  neural science.  The second role of the
              models is that of   "learning machines" that can serve as components of
              intelligent  systems for accomplishing complex tasks like speech recognition, 
              language comprehension, medical diagnosis, and coping with the  vast quantities
              of data returned from spacecraft.    Estes has developed two types of models
              under his long-term NSF  support, one based on symbol processing, as in
              traditional  artificial intelligence, and one based on structures and 
              processes suggested by work on neural networks.  In this  research, Estes will
              test and refine both models further in  relation to several major outstanding
              problems:  How is it  possible to gain rapid access to the large amount of
              information  stored in human long-term memory?  How can people learn many 
              difficult categorizations simultaneously with little  interference, e. g.,
              learning several languages or several  computer operating systems?  How do
              people make decisions among  alternatives that differ in their constellations
              of associated  values and uncertainties of outcomes?  How do the hypothesized 
              short- and long-term memory systems of the computational models  relate to the
              neural systems of the hippocampus and frontal  cortex that are currently being
              studied.    ***
