Title       : Regulation of Assimilatory Nitrate Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9317557

Award Number: 9317557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry P. Solomonson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Cannons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,9178,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Solomonson  9317557  The nitrate assimilatory pathway is the major route by
              which  inorganic nitrogen is converted to a biologically useful organic  form. 
              Regulation of the first step in this pathway, catalyzed by  nitrate reductase
              (NR), is important to prevent toxic accumulation  of intermediates (nitrite and
              ammonia), to assure efficient  utilization of nitrate, and to permit rapid
              adaptation to changes  in environmental conditions.  Results of previous
              studies have  indicated that NR is regulated at several different levels by 
              multiple effectors and environmental factors reflecting the key  role of this
              enzyme and the biological importance of pathway  regulation.  Our research will
              focus on elucidating molecular  determinants and mechanisms which are important
              for the regulation  of NR at the molecular (enzyme) level and establishing 
              interrelationships between various modes of regulation.  Specific  aims will
              include: a) identification of functional groups involved  in NR turnover,
              catalysis, binding or regulation, and the  localization of these groups with
              respect to functional domain or  primary sequence site on the enzyme; and b)
              determination of  effects of possible activity modulators such as protein 
              kinases/phosphatases, metal binding effectors (e.g., nitric oxide  or cyanide),
              or other effectors on NR turnover and catalytic  efficiency.  The ultimate goal
              of our research is to obtain  information from this and other studies to
              develop procedures for  increasing the catalytic efficiency of NR and for
              regulating its  action in an effort to increase agricultural productivity.  %%%
               Nitrate is the major source of organic nitrogen in biological  organisms.  The
              process by which nitrate is converted to a  biologically useful, organic form,
              termed nitrate assimilation,  occurs in a wide variety of organisms including
              bacteria, yeast,  fungi and higher plants, which in turn supply the nutritional
               nitrogen requirements for other forms of life, including human.   One of the
              goals of this r esearch is to develop strategies for  increasing the catalytic
              efficiency and for regulating the activity  of the key enzyme, nitrate
              reductase (NR), in the nitrate  assimilation pathway.  The focus of our current
              research program is  to identify the functional groups of the NR molecule and
              other  factors that will help us learn more about the protein.  We may  then
              use this information to engineer agriculturally interesting  plants with more
              efficient nitrogen metabolism and increased  production capacity.  Plants with
              improved nitrogen metabolism will  result in decreased need to supply chemical
              fertilizers to our  crops.  ***
