Title       : Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food Web Structure in the Ross Sea:
               Phytoplankton Growth and Sulfur Cycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1994       
File        : a9317431

Award Number: 9317431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94313              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giacomo R. DiTullio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9317431     DiTullio  The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is
              short, but  intense.  There is an increasing body of evidence that in many 
              Antarctic habitats, the most active period may be very early in the  season, a
              period that has not been emphasized in previous  investigations.  This project
              is part of an interdisciplinary  program that focuses on the dynamics of the
              spring phytoplankton  bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic,
              the Ross  Sea.  The overall program will test hypotheses related to the 
              initiation of the phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of  ice melt, the
              mechanisms controlling phytoplankton growth and  productivity in spring, the
              implications and short-term fate of  high productivity in spring, and the
              transition from spring to  midsummer conditions.  This research will
              investigate the  initiation of the phytoplankton spring bloom, especially the 
              factors which may be important in triggering and terminating the  Phaeocystis
              pouchetii bloom.  Specific research will focus on  sulfur and manganese cycling
              processes especially with regard to  possible global climate change processes. 
              Correlations of  particulate and dissolved dimethyl sulfide concentrations will
              be  estimated with respect to phytoplankton pigment concentrations.  
              Phytoplankton growth rates will be assessed using pigment labeling  techniques.
               The fate of the dimethyl sulfide produced will be  determined.  Measurements
              will be performed to determine the  relative importance of:  (a) bacterial
              uptake (b) fluxes out of the  photic zone from sediment trap samples and (c)
              atmospheric  emissions.  The effects of acrylic acid production on various 
              components of the food web, such as its bactericidal properties  will be
              investigated.  The overall goal of this component is to  understand the
              dynamics of the oceanic sulfur cycle during the  spring bloom.
