Title       : The Mechanism of Folding of Dihydrofolate Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1995   
File        : a9317273

Award Number: 9317273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. R. Matthews crm@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9162,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9317273  Matthews  A combination of biophysical and genetic engineering
              methods will  be used to probe the mechanism of folding of dihydrofolate 
              reductase from Escherichia coli.  Kinetic studies of this process  reveal a
              variety of partially-folded forms which appear in the  millisecond time range
              and persist until the appearance of the  native form many seconds or minutes
              later.  Comparisons of the  results of optical and NMR spectroscopy provide
              information on the  development of secondary and tertiary structure in these
              transient  species.  Variations in solution conditions can provide information 
              into the stabilities of these intermediates and, thereby, the role  of
              thermodynamics in driving the folding to a successful  conclusion.  Mutational
              analysis pinpoints those individual amino  acids which play key roles in
              folding and, in combination with the  kinetic results, the step at which those
              roles are executed.  Taken  altogether, the information obtained by these
              various methods and  techniques will enhance our understanding of the mechanism
              by which  the amino acid sequence directs the rapid and efficient folding to 
              the native, functional form.  %%%  One of the outstanding problems in
              biochemistry is the mechanism by  which the amino acid sequence of a protein
              directs the rapid and  efficient folding to the native conformation.  A
              combination of  biophysical and genetic engineering methods will be employed to
               probe the structures and stabilities of partially-folded forms  which appear
              during the folding of dihydrofolate reductase.   Underpinning this approach is
              the rationale that an understanding  of these folding intermediates will serve
              to elucidate the complex  mechanism involved.  Success should enhance our
              fundamental  knowledge of biopolymers, increase our understanding of genetic 
              diseases, and lead to improved methods of production of protein  products by
              the biotechnology industry.  ***
