Title       : Collaborative Project: Analysis of Meristem Function in Plant Graft Chimeras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1994  
File        : a9317381

Award Number: 9317381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene J. Szymkowiak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317381  Szymkowiak    This is a collaborative project with Dr. Ian Sussex 
              (9317262).  Plant cells differentiate in a position-  dependent and not a
              lineage-dependent manner.  They must,  therefore, receive signals that inform
              them of their  position within the multicellular organism and differentiate 
              accordingly.  The nature of the signals, their origins and  how they are
              transmitted is largely unknown.  This  collaborative research project will
              address these questions  by examining how cells in the three layers of the
              shoot  apical meristem maintain functional coordination over the  course of
              meristem ontogeny.  The generation and analysis of  periclinal chimeras has
              demonstrated that interactions occur  among the cell layers of the meristem. 
              In general, the  outer two meristem layers, L1 and L2, develop in a 
              nonautonomous manner.  That is, cells occupying these two  layers do not
              develop according to their own genotype but  according to a pattern of
              development determined by cells in  the internal meristem layer, L3.  Cells
              comprising the  chimeras interact effectively both in the meristem and in  the
              tissues and organs generated by the meristem.  An  interesting exception occurs
              during floral meristem  development in certain chimeras between tomato and
              Solanum  nigrum.  The shoot meristems of these chimeras all function  normally
              during vegetative development.  Each chimera also  makes the transition from
              vegetative meristem to  inflorescence meristem.  However, development is
              arrested in  the floral meristems of four of the five cell layer  combinations
              generated between tomato and S. nigrum.  The  tomato-S. nigrum chimeras provide
              an excellent opportunity  to examine a developmental process in which cell-cell
               coordination has failed, in order to learn more about the  signaling that is
              necessary for coordinated development.  The main objective of this
              collaborative project is to use  these periclinal chimeras to investigate
              possible mechanisms  for coordinating cell layer function in t he meristem.  To
               achieve this, Drs. Szymkowiak and Sussex propose to:  (1)  determine if the
              arrested development of chimeric floral  meristems results from a breakdown in
              the coordination of  the patterns of development in each cell layer by using
              gene  probes specific for different stages of meristem ontogeny;  (2)
              investigate the role of plasmodesmata in cell layer  coordination by examining
              changes in plasmodesmata structure  and size exclusion limits by using
              dye-injection studies in  the aborting floral meristems before and during
              arrested  development; and (3) generate additional chimeras using  mutations
              that affect function in shoot meristems in order  to characterize further
              processes requiring cellular  interactions.  Achievement of these goals will
              contribute to  improved understanding of meristem organization and  function. 
              ***
