Title       : Development of a Land-Use/Land-Cover Change Science Plan forthe International
               Global Change Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9317844

Award Number: 9317844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie L. Turner bturner@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9317844  TURNER       Natural scientists involved in global change research need
               improved models of changing land cover because of the role that  land cover
              plays in dynamic natural processes across the globe.  Land-cover change cannot
              be adequately modeled or projected,  however, without an understanding of the
              land uses that affect  land cover.  Because land uses are largely the product
              of human  activities, social scientists therefore must contribute to 
              improvement in understandings of the social, political, and  economic dynamics
              that affect the use of land and other  resources.  In recognition of these
              interconnections and of the  need for both natural and physical scientists to
              work together to  address these important problems, the International
              Geosphere-  Biosphere Programme (IGBP) sponsored by ICSU and the  international
              Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change  Programme (HDP) sponsored by
              ISSC have agreed to sponsor a  focused scientific research program on global
              land-use and land-  cover change.  This award will provide support for a Core 
              Planning Project Committee (CPPC), which is developing a formal  science plan
              on behalf of IGBP and HDP.  The science plan will  outline strategies for
              identifying and demarcating common  situations through which various "driving
              forces" alter land use  and land cover.  It also will develop case studies for
              these  situations and frame global land-use and land-cover models based  on
              these situations and case studies.       This award will complement
              contributions for support of the  CPPC office at Clark University.  It also
              will help support three  international meetings that will bring the broader
              scientific  community into the development of the science plan.  The final 
              product of this activity will be a formal science plan to guide  future
              international collaborative research activities dealing  with land-use and
              land-cover change.  ***
