Title       : ANZFLUX (Antarctic Zone Flux Experiment) CTD/Tracer Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9317231

Award Number: 9317231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $909850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Martinson dgm@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Huber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Schlosser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1326,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317231  Martinson  The proposed work is part of an integrated research program 
              ("Anzflux") into the oceanographic structure of upper mixed layer  of the
              eastern Weddell Sea.  It is to be carried out from the RVIB  Nathaniel B.
              Palmer in the austral winter of 1994.  The work  proposed here concerns the
              collecting of hydrographic and  geochemical tracer data to determine the
              three-dimensional oceanic  structure on various spatial scales and to provide
              data for the  validation of oceanic models.     The eastern Weddell Sea is a
              region where a warm regime, defined by  the intrusion of warm circumpolar deep
              water with temperatures near  +1 deg C, and a cold regime exist side by side. 
              The cold regime  occurs to the west, where deep water is overlain by a thick
              near-  freezing mixed layer. In both regions however enough heat is  seasonally
              carried to the sea ice to melt it completely.      The objectives of this
              project are to allow the reconstruction of  the overall configuration of the
              Weddell Gyre, the warm and cold  regimes, and to determine the large-scale
              baroclinicity, upwelling,  and ventilation of intermediate water masses.  On a
              smaller scale  this work will characterize the specific differences between the
               two drift stations and provide initial conditions for modeling the  oceanic
              processes.  The tracer measurements will complement the  direct observations,
              and will constrain estimates of the net  transfer of warm deep water into the
              surface layer.    These measurements, in conjunction with the other concurrent 
              experiments to quantify the energy brought to the underside of the  ice, will
              form the basis of a regional study of the processes  responsible for the
              relatively thick upper mixed layer and thin ice  cover.  It is believed that
              these conditions are only marginally  stable, and are maintained by a
              relatively high upward heat flux,  which, if interrupted, could lead to deep
              vertical convection, and  a significant change in the oceanic climate.  ***
