Title       : Acquisition of Circular Dichroism and UV-VIS Spectrophotometers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9317845

Award Number: 9317845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erin K. O'Shea oshea@mama.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Agard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith R. Yamamoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317845  O'Shea  This proposal seeks funding for circular dicroism (CD) and UV
              VIS spectrophotometers. These instruments will be used in a series of
              biochemical and biophysical studies concerned with how proteins fold and how
              they interact with one another and with other macromolecules. The proposed
              research includes studies in the following broad research areas: (1) protein
              structure, structure prediction and protein folding, (2) protein protein and
              protein nucleic acid interactions.    (1) Studies on protein structure,
              prediction and folding will involve both model peptides and a bacterial
              protease, a lytic protease. Computational predictions of protein structure will
              be tested using synthetic polypeptides. The structure of designed peptides will
              be studied to investigate fundamental aspects of protein stability and
              structure. Structural studies of a stable intermediate in the folding of a
              lytic protease will be carried out to understand the forces which stabilize
              this intermediate. Conversion of the intermediate to the native enzyme is
              catalyzed by an additional polypeptide sequence. Thus, a further goal of these
              studies is to understand the mechanism by which folding to the native state is
              catalyzed.    (2) Studies on protein protein interactions will involve a group
              of proteins that play important roles in transcriptional regulation. These
              include the glucocorticoid receptor from mammalian cells and the  SYMBOL 97 \f
              "Symbol" 2, al, MCM1, PHO2, PHO4, and PHO80 proteins from yeast. A goal of
              these studies is to identify domains that comprise autonomous folding units, as
              well as domains that are responsible for inte ractions between proteins of
              multisubunit transcription complexes. An additional goal is to investigate
              changes in conformation of these molecules upon interaction with one another.
              These studies will provide an essential first step in obtaining three
              dimensional information on multi subunit protein complexes.    The CD and UV
              VIS spectrophotometers are essential instruments for carrying out these
              studies. CD provides a simple and informative measure of secondary structure.
              It also provides a way to assess conformational changes in mixtures of
              macromolecules, such as two different proteins (or domains) or a protein and
              DNA. The UV VIS spectrophotometer provides a sensitive assay for measuring
              protein concentrations, a necessary component of a CD experiment. Additionally,
              UV VIS spectroscopy provides a method for measuring the stability of a molecule
              by monitoring absorbance. For proteins, the information derived from such a
              study is often complementary to that obtained from CD because changes in the UV
              spectrum are typically reflections of tertiary structure while CD is most
              sensitive to secondary structure. Finally, UV VIS spectroscopy provides a very
              sensitive way to monitor changes in nucleic acid stability and structure.   
              These studies shall be carried out as part of ongoing, active research programs
              in which training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows is a strong
              component.     u    ~ 9317845  O'Shea  This proposal seeks funding for circular
              dicroism (CD) and UV VIS spectrophotometers. These instruments will be         
                .   /   0   x                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 k   m   I   K   '   )           v   x       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              !         !         !         !         !         !              F             
                                   x       N                                         x     ; 
                CG Times    Symbol  & Arial  1 Courier  0 MS LineDraw              9         
                                  N                 h                                     =  
               ABSTRACT    Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
