Title       : Structural Determinants of the Biological Activity of Ryanodine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9317684

Award Number: 9317684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375762             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Welch welch@unr.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317684  Welch    Ryanodine is a plant alkaloid which binds to a specific
              receptor,an  intracellular calcium release channel, first identified at the 
              triad junction of skeletal muscle.  Subsequently, ryanodine  receptors (RyR)
              have been found in many non-muscle cells including  cells of the central
              nervous system.  Ryanodine has been shown to  be a powerful effector of calcium
              regulation in muscle.  Although  the ryanodine molecule is complex, important
              stearic and  electrostatic interactions can be localized to relatively small, 
              specific regions of the molecule.  The overall goal of this project  is to
              elucidate the relationship between ligand structure and the  biological
              activities of the ryanoids.  The aims are to (1) develop  biologically active
              ryanoids with minimal structure, (2) develop  agents which effect specific
              alterations in RyR properties,  (3)define the mammalian skeletal muscle
              ryanodine binding site,  (4)lay the groundwork for development of RyR
              isoform-specific  agents and (5) define endogenous effectors.  This project
              will  focus on rabbit skeletal muscle RyR.   Approaches will be: (I) New 
              ryanodine analogs will be developed.  (II) The biological activity  of these
              compounds will be assessed by measurements of ligand  binding to the RyR, the
              modulation of ion channel activity of the  RyR using ionic flux and planar
              lipid bilayer single channel  measurements, and functional effects on intact
              cells.  (III) The  conformations of the ryanoids will be deduced from the
              covalent  structures by molecular mechanics, molecular dynamics and quantum 
              mechanics.  The deduced conformations will be compared to NMR or 
              crystallographic data whenever possible (for example, the X-ray and  NMR
              structures of ryanodine have been solved).  A comparative  molecular field
              analysis (ComFA) will be produced for selected  analogs, and correlations
              between the stearic and electrostatic  fields computed to discern the
              relationship between the biological  activities and the structure of the
              ryanodine a nalogs.  (IV) The  results of the CoMFA will be used to design new
              ryanoids for  testing, refinement and correction of hypotheses.  %%%  Calcium
              ion regulates many critical cellular functions such as  muscle contraction. 
              The levels of calcium free in cells are  precisely regulated by physiological
              control mechanisms.  Ryanodine  is a plant alkaloid which has a powerful effect
              on calcium  regulation in cells and can serve as a useful tool in studying  
              calcium control mechanisms. Ryanodine acts by binding to a specific  receptor,
              an intracellular calcium release channel.  Ryanodine  receptors were first
              identified in skeletal muscle, but have also  been found in many non-muscle
              cells including cells of the central  nervous system.  Although the ryanodine
              molecule is complex, its  functional interactions with its receptor can be
              localized to  relatively small, specific regions of the molecule.  The overall 
              goal of this project is to elucidate the relationship between the  structure
              and the biological activities of the ryanoids.  This will  result in the
              development of important new probes which will  enhance our understanding of
              cellular calcium regulation.  ***
