Title       : X-Ray Diffraction Resource for Biochemical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9317398

Award Number: 9317398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan Rayment   (Principal Investigator current)
              Perry A. Frey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hazel M. Holden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Markley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Cleland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9317398  Rayment  Funds are requested for an x ray area detector system that
              will be used to determine the structures of a wide variety of proteins at the
              University of Wisconsin, Madison. The instrument will be located at the
              Institute for Enzyme Research and will be used by seven laboratories on campus.
              These groups have crystallographic projects ready for x ray data collection and
              are currently limited by restricted access to the necessary instrumentation.   
              To date, x ray crystallography is the most powerful technique for determining
              the accurate positions of atoms in proteins and macromolecular aggregates, and
              thus should be made available to all studies that are directed towards
              understanding the molecular basis of structure/function relationships. Due to
              major improvements in x ray data collection hardware and software, it has
              become possible, in recent years, for an increased number of investigators to
              conduct x ray crystallographic studies. As a consequence, it is now realistic
              and appropriate for these techniques to be incorporated into a wide range of
              research programs. At the University of Wisconsin there are currently seven
              groups who have obtained high quality protein crystals and need access to
              suitable x ray data collection hardware.    The proteins under investigation in
              the above mentioned groups differ significantly in both their physical size and
              biological function. At one end of the spectrum, continued studies of myosin
              subfragment 1 will provide the structural information necessary for
              establishing the molecular basis of muscle contraction (Rayment). The
              combination of x ray crystallographic a nalyses with biochemical and kinetic
              approaches to study UDP galactose 4 epimerase, biotin carboxylase, and pyruvate
              kinase will provide a molecular framework for understanding the catalytic
              function of these enzymes, all of which proceed through different classes of
              chemical reactions (Cleland, Frey and Reed). Likewise, the proposed studies of
              peptide inhibitors bound to pepsin and similar enzymes will provide an
              opportunity to test and develop strategies for rational drug design (Rich).
              Finally, the application of NMR and very high resolution x ray crystallography
              to the study of electron transport proteins will yield unique insight into
              those structural factors that modulate oxidation reduction potentials and
              electron transfer rates (Holden and Markley).    Although most of the
              investigators are specialized in other biochemical disciplines, they are all
              committed to using and supporting the instrumentation requested in this
              proposal. Indeed, they have already invested considerable time, effort, and
              personnel in the development of these crystallographic projects as
              complementary approaches to their research interests. At present, these
              programs are severely limited by the lack of access to suitable x ray data
              collection hardware.   u    ~      ~CRD0521TMP            A        ~MF240B TMP 
                       7N        ~CAL2B38TMP           2y        ~CRD2523TMP           5y    
                 ~CAL0607TMP                       9317398  Rayment  Funds are requested for
              an x ray area detector system that will be used to determine the structures of
              a wid                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    S   U   z   |            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       !         !         !         !         !             
              F                             S             S                                 ;
                 CG Times    Symbol  & Arial  1 Courier  0 MS LineDraw                       
                                     h        e   e              I         =    abstract   
              Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
