Title       : The Mariner Transposons of Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9317586

Award Number: 9317586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh M. Robertson hughrobe@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9178,9197,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9317586  Robertson   The transposon, mariner, was initially found in Drosophila
              melanogaster. It was isolated and characterized. Five major subfamilies of
              these elements were found in insects and closely related arthropods using a PCR
              assay with primers designed to regions of amino acid conservation in their
              putative transposases. Other workers have discovered additional mariners  in
              more diverse organisms including a nematode and a planarian. We have recently
              discovered mariners in other platyhelminthes, hydra and most recently in
              humans. A homologous relationship of the mariner family with the Tc-related
              family of transposons in nematodes, insects, and fish has also been recently
              recognized. On this basis, we postulate that the evolution of these transposons
              involves horizontal transfer into new hosts followed by a amplification of copy
              number, after which neutral evolution usually results in extinction of the
              element. The work proposed here will examine two aspects of the diversity,
              evolution, and interactions of these mariners.The PCR survey will be continued
              and selected interesting elements, particularly those indicating recent
              horizontal transfers across phyla will be cloned and sequenced. Related species
              will be examined to test the hypothesis of recent horizontal transfer. Rates of
              evolution will also be examined directly by comparison with mariner elements
              isolated from amber fossil insects. The interaction of the different mariners
              and Tc-like found in some genomes will be investigated by genetically combining
              active and marked representatives of the different families and subfamiles into
              the genome of Drosophila melanogaster and assaying their ability to mobilize
              and/or repress each other. Similar mix-and-match experiments will be done in a
              comparative study of the different transposases.  %%%  The discovery that a
              specific transposon, first detected in Drosophila melanogaster, is also present
              in many different species and phyla suggests that the horizontal transfer of
              DNA has occurr ed. This hypothesis will be tested in various ways and the
              search for mariner elements in insects, other arthropods and other animals will
              be continued. The proposed work will develop mariners as the best understood
              example of molecular evolution of the short inverted terminal repeat class of
              transposons in eukaryotes. It will also provide information on horizontal
              transfer of transposons necessary for regulatory evaluation of risks of release
              of genetically engineered arthropods.  ***
