Title       : Reproductive Endocrinology of Free-Living Adelie Penguins at Torgersen Island,
               Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9317356

Award Number: 9317356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Vleck cvleck@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa L. Bucher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                9317356  Vleck  The goal of this research is to understand the physiological
              and  hormonal basis for individual variance in reproductive behavior  and
              breeding success in free-living Adelie penguins at Torgersen  Island, Palmer
              Station, Antarctic Peninsula.  Aspects of  reproductive demographics and
              behavior, including return rate to  the colony, reproductive success, patterns
              of mate acquisition  and nest attentiveness have been monitored in a population
              of  penguins at Torgersen Island since 1990.  Methods will include  weighing
              and measuring birds in the breeding colonies and  collecting blood samples for
              hormone analysis from individuals  expressing known behaviors.  Intensive
              behavioral observations of  banded individuals will be carried out at every
              stage of the  reproductive cycle.  The hormonal and body mass changes that 
              accompany the different stages of the reproductive cycle will be  determined. 
              The relationship between those measurements and  reproductive success will be
              determined.  Competing hypotheses  concerning reproductive competency and
              general body condition  will be tested as explanations for why a high
              proportion of  breeders successful in one year do not breed in following year. 
               The physiological underpinnings for the long shifts that birds  spend in
              attendance at the nest will be studied in order to  understand the interaction
              of hormonal and energetic  considerations that influence incubation behavior. 
              Understanding  these proximate causes of individual behavior will shed light on
               the evolutionary bases of life history patterns.  The effects of  stress will
              be measured in birds at different stages of the  reproductive cycle by
              determining basal levels of corticosterone  and its maximum rate of increase. 
              The hormonal effects of stress  will be compared in penguins.  This research
              will allow  determination of whether human interference affects penguin 
              reproductive success and whether such effects vary in degree  through the
              reproductive cycle.
