Title       : Molecular Genetics of Gibberellin Signal Transduction in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9317524

Award Number: 9317524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Olszewski neil@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317524  Olszewski    The question of how signal transduction pathways for
              hormones and other signals function is central to our understanding of the
              processes of growth and development.  The long term goal of this research is to
              understand the molecular genetic basis of the signal transduction that occurs
              in Arabidopsis thaliana following the perception of gibberellins, a class of
              phytohormones.  Recessive mutations in the SPINDLY (SPY) gene of Arabidopsis
              overcome all effects of gibberellin deficiency and are phenocopies of wild-type
              plants that have been treated repeatedly with gibberellic acid.  Thus, it is
              hypothesized that SPY mutations cause constitutive activation of the
              gibberellin signal transduction pathway at a point that is common to all
              gibberellin responses.  The SPY-4 allele is believed to be caused by the
              insertion of T-DNA into the SPY gene because the kanamycin resistance marker
              carried on the T-DNA cosegregates with SPY-4.  The T-DNA that is linked to
              SPY-4 will be used as a molecular tag to clone the Arabidopsis sequences
              adjacent to this T-DNA.  These Arabidopsis sequences will then be used as a
              probe to clone the SPY gene and a complete SPY cDNA clone.  It will be
              confirmed that the SPY gene has been cloned by introducing the SPY gene into
              the SPY-1 mutant and demonstrating that it complements the SPY-1 mutation.  The
              sequence of the SPY cDNA will be determined.  Analysis of this sequence will be
              performed to determine if the SPY gene product is similar to gene products with
              known functions.  The SPY protein will be produced in a bacterial expression
              system and purified.  The purified protein wil l be used in biochemical studies
              to confirm any putative functions that are predicted by the sequence of the SPY
              cDNA.  The expression of SPY mRNA and protein will be extensively
              characterized.  The tissue specificity, developmental regulation, and effects
              of different phytohormones and mutations on SPY mRNA and protein expression
              will be determined.  Genetic studies that will identify additional components
              of the gibberellin signal transduction pathway will also be performed.  By
              continuing the screens that were employed to isolate the SPY mutants, and
              identifying enhancers of SPY-1, other components of the gibberellin signal
              transduction pathway will be defined.  In addition, the SPY-1 mutation will be
              used as a tool to screen the existing gibberellin-insensitive dwarf mutants of
              Arabidopsis and identify mutations that affect the gibberellin signal
              transduction pathway. This will be done by identifying the dwarfing mutations
              that are hypostatic to SPY-1.  Mutants identified in these screens will be
              characterized with respect to their sensitivity to gibberellins.  The proposed
              experiments will identify new components of the signal transduction pathway and
              provide insight into the function of the SPY product.  This information can
              then be used to generate new testable models describing the mechanisms of
              gibberellin signal transduction.  ***                                          
                                   9317524  Olszewski    The question of how signal
              transduction pathways for hormones and other signals function is central to our
                 B                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              =   B                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         !               !              F    
                                                                      B         B     (   
              Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                 "           
               h     6d  ez %dz %                    +        Dana Brigham Dana Brigham      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
