Title       : Parallel Signalling Pathways of Flagellar Excision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9317359

Award Number: 9317359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne M. Quarmby   (Principal Investigator current)
              H.  Criss Hartzell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317359  Quarmby      The goal of this proposal is to analyze the signaling 
              pathways in Chlamydomonas, a unicellular, biflagellate alga.  Chlamydomonas
              exhibits three behaviors that all involve  increases in Ca++: these are
              phototaxis, mating and  flagellar excision.  The ultimate objective is to
              understand  the mechanisms by which different stress stimuli are  transduced to
              flagellar excision, while other stimuli, such  as light, result in the change
              of swimming behavior and not  in flagellar excision, even though all these
              pathways appear  to involve Ca++ in signaling.  The proposal has two 
              objectives.  The first is to isolate and characterize  excision mutants of C.
              reinhardtii to test the hypothesis  that low pH activates a signaling pathway
              that is different  from the signaling pathways activated by the chemical 
              inducers of flagellar excision.  The hypothesis for such a  dual pathway is
              supported by physiological and  pharmacological data, but a genetic analysis
              will verify the  existence of independent signaling pathways leading to a 
              common response.  Mutants will be generated by insertion of  exogenous DNA and
              selected for signaling defects.  Heterocaryon analysis will be used to study
              the relationship  of selected mutants.  The second objective is to use Ca++ 
              flux and electrophysiology to test the hypothesis that  activation of a Ca++
              channel is a key event in low pH  induced flagellar excision.  Dr. Quarmby has
              strong  circumstantial evidence that influx of Ca++ that is  stimulated by
              decreasing pH is necessary for acid-induced  flagellar excision.  %%%  The
              research objectives chosen by the PI provide a powerful  experimental system to
              study how different signals elicit  the same response, and how the different
              signals that use  Ca++ elicit distinctly different physiological responses. 
              Because it is presently thought that the fundamental  mechanisms of such
              signaling pathways have been conserved  throughout evolution, results of these
              studies will be  instrumental in our understa nding of how intracellular 
              communication takes place in living organisms.  ***
