Title       : Acquisition of an Optima XL-A Analytical Ultracentrifuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9317749

Award Number: 9317749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72532              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Brewer   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. David Puett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lars G. Ljungdahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We are requesting funds from the National Science Foundation  to purchase an
              Analytical Ultracentrifuge.  This is to  replace our 26-year old Model E
              ultracentrifuge, which is  nearly impossible to maintain and for which certain 
              accessories are no longer produced.  Also, the XL-A has  greatly increased
              sensitivity as a result of a very much  shorter optical path length and
              advances in component  quality over the last quarter century.  Furthermore, its
               output is now fully computer processed, enabling far more  rapid and reliable
              processing of results.    With this instrument, we will be able to obtain
              molecular  weights, effective partial specific volumes and  sedimentation
              constants.  These pieces of information will  allow us to determine molecular
              architecture of multisubunit  assemblies, more reliably estimate compositions
              of  macromolecular aggregates which are complex and which may  interact
              extensively with solvent constituents, and obtain  quantitative parameters of
              protein association reactions.  Specifically, the instrument will be used to
              obtain "true"  (in a thermodynamic sense) molecular weights of cellulase 
              components, metalloenzymes and redox proteins from  hyperthermophiles, explore
              subunit interactions in human  choriogonadotropin, measure hydration and salt
              binding in  yeast enolase and measure complex formation between  reactants in
              the bacterial luciferase reaction.
