Title       : Workshop on Seismic Design of Solid Waste Landfills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9317931

Award Number: 9317931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey R. Martin geomar@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9317931  Martin  New Federal minimum design standards for Municipal Solid Waste 
              Landfill Facilities (MSWLF) take effect on October 9, 1993.  These standards,
              as specified in the EPA (Environmental  Protection Agency) criteria for
              municipal solid waste landfills,  include minimum design standards for seismic
              resistance.  Little  information on the dynamic material properties of
              municipal solid  waste containment systems, or on the performance of solid
              waste  landfills subjected to earthquake loading, is available to the  engineer
              wishing to evaluate the seismic response of Municipal  Solid Waste Landfill
              Facilities.  Furthermore, little guidance is  available for establishing
              seismic performance criteria for solid  waste containment facilities.    The
              new Federal Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Facilities design  standards, know
              as Subtitle D of the Resource Conservation and  Recovery Act, impact the
              seismic design of landfills in two ways.  First, the standards require that
              landfills be designed for a  horizontal peak ground acceleration in lithified
              rock with a  probability of exceedance of 10 percent in 250 years.  This 
              provision results in design accelerations in excess of 0.6g in  parts of
              California and 0.2g in many areas of the United States,  including large areas
              on the East Coast and in the Central United  States.  Second, the standards
              require that landfills be lined at  the base with a composite liner that
              includes a geomembrane and a  2 foot thick layer of soil with a permeability of
              less that 10-7  centimeters per second.  This provision virtually guarantees a 
              low shear strength at the bottom of the landfill.  This  combination of a high
              seismic excitation and a low shear  resistance at the base of the landfill make
              consideration of  seismic response an important facet of landfill design in
              many  areas of the Western, Central and Eastern United States.    A workshop is
              being held at the Southern California Earthquake  Center in Los Angeles to
              examine the impact of these new Federa l  regulations.  The primary results of
              the workshop will be  identification and prioritization of research needed to
              improve  seismic analyses and design of solid waste landfills.  The  results of
              the workshop are expected to significantly increase  the existing knowledge
              base on seismic design and performance of  landfills through the exchange of
              information and interaction  between workshop participants.  The proceedings of
              the workshop  will provide a succinct summary of the state of the art, the 
              state of practice, and the research needs.    ***
