Title       : Characterization of Factors in the Neural Tube That Induce Skeletal Muscle
               Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9317533

Award Number: 9317533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Lassar andrew_lassar@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9317533  Lassar    The regulation of cell type determination is a crucial 
              aspect of early embryogenesis in all multicellular  organisms. A variety of
              approaches taken by several  laboratories has led to the identification of a
              family of  structurally related skeletal muscle transcriptional  regulators
              (the myogenic HLH proteins) which play a crucial  role in skeletal muscle
              determination and differentiation.  The myogenic HLH regulators can activate
              muscle gene  expression in various cellular contexts implying that no  tissue
              specific factors other than this family of regulatory  proteins are needed to
              initiate muscle differentiation in  the mesodermal and non-mesodermal cells
              tested. During  vertebrate development skeletal muscle precursors are first 
              observed in the somite, an axial structure which gives rise  to dermis,
              skeletal muscle, cartilage and bone. The earliest  expression of the myogenic
              bHLH regulators occurs in the  myotomal cells of the somite, which give rise to
              all  skeletal muscle in vertebrates. The expression of the  myogenic bHLH genes
              during cell type specification of  skeletal muscle suggests that activation of
              these regulators  may in fact commit cells to the skeletal muscle cell 
              lineage. There are a number of unanswered questions  regarding  specification
              of  somitic cells into the muscle  lineage: 1) When are the somitic cells
              giving rise to the  myogenic lineage first specified to this fate, 2) what 
              triggers the final commitment and 3) which signals are  involved in this
              process?  Experiments have demonstrated  that early somite cells of chicken or
              mouse, when explanted  in tissue culture, are not able to differentiate into
              muscle  unless they are co-cultured with either neural tube or  overlying 
              epithelial cells. Thus neural tube (and some  types of epithelia) are inducing
              the pluripotent early  somite cells to differentiate into muscle. Dr. Lassar
              has  recently demonstrated that neural tube dependent induction  of somitic
              skeletal muscle differentiation is ac companied by  activation of the myogenic
              HLH regulators. Thus a factor(s)  from the neural tube induces skeletal muscle
              differentiation  in somitic cells via activation of the myogenic HLH 
              regulatory family. By employing an in vitro induction assay,  he will attempt
              to characterize and molecularly clone the  neural factor(s) responsible for
              inducing chick and /or  mouse early somite cells to enter the skeletal muscle
              cell  lineage. The goal of this work is to understand both the  inductive
              events as well as eventually identify the  intracellular mediators necessary
              for activation of the  myogenic bHLH regulators.  ***
