Title       : Development of a Volume Imaging X-Ray Micro-CT Scanner
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1996   
File        : a9317816

Award Number: 9317816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik L. Ritman elran@mayo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mayo Foundation
	      200 First Street South West
	      Rochester, MN  55901    507/284-2220

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9317816  Ritman  The objective of this proposal is to fabricate and evaluate  a
              prototype volume imaging x-ray micro-CT scanner (augmented  by novel
              tomographic image reconstruction, 3D image analysis  and display software) for
              application to biological  specimens.  The scanner design is inspired by a
              unique micro-  CT scanner developed by a research group of the Exxon  company
              for their geological purposes.  Members of the Exxon  Research team will
              provide consultations needed for  duplication of important aspects of their
              scanner.  This new  capability has great potential for providing quantative 
              insights into how mechanisms at the cellular level integrate  to express
              themselves in the anatomy of organs at the micro  and macroscopic scale.  This
              proposed scanner will generate  volume images of at least 5123 cubic voxels (10
              to 40m on a  side).  This scanner extends current micro-CT methods,  developed
              primarily for material sciences and nondestructive  testing purposes, by
              imaging larger volumes with greater  spatial resolution, within a reasonable
              period of time.  This is an improvement over optical microscopic and 
              conventional x-ray  magnification techniques in that the  logistics of image
              data analysis are greatly improved.  The  reason a computed tomographic imaging
              approach (which  eliminates re-assembly of one-at-the-time scanned slices)  and
              because we have already developed software for  quantitative analysis and
              display of the 3D volume images.  This software can be readily expanded to
              handle the huge 3D  images (e.g., up to 109 voxels) to be generated with the 
              proposed scanner.    Several software approaches, which we have developed in 
              recent  years for 3D whole body scanning CT image data,  should greatly extend
              the power of the x-ray micro-CT  methodology as follows:       a)    Ability to
              scan objects greater than the size of  the fluorescent screen because we can
              use the 'local'  (as  compared to the conventional 'global') reconstruction 
              algorithm that our collaborators Drs.  Faridani and Smith of  Oregon State
              University have developed.  This algorithm  needs to 'see' only the projection
              through the volume of  interest within a larger specimen.  Consequently organs 
              within the intact body of small animals can be scanned  without the need to
              scan the entire transverse anatomic  extent of the body, thereby greatly
              reducing scanner cost.       b)    Another new algorithm has been developed by
              Dr.  Faridani that may provide almost double the spatial  resolution "allowed"
              by the traditional relationship between  numbers of angles-of-view and numbers
              of samples along the  transverse x-ray absorption profile.       c)     Ability
              to automatically segment large and complex  3D images such as the entire
              arterial trees with its  thousands of branches, using an algorithm of the type 
              developed by Dr. Higgins of Pennsylvania State University.        d)    Ability
              to automatically analyze the segmented  vascular trees for segmental dimensions
              and branching angles  using modified versions of the algorithms and image
              analysis  software developed in our laboratory for analysis of  macrovascular
              arterial tree geometry.
