Title       : Retroviral Vectors for Gene Transfer Into Zebrafish and Gene Trap Screens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1995   
File        : a9317469

Award Number: 9317469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Driever driever@helix.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9317469  Driever    The organisms best suited to study fundamental
              principles of  vertebrate development should allow the application of large 
              numbers of  different experimental approaches: classical  genetic analysis,
              experimental embryology, and molecular  genetics, especially the generation of
              transgenic animals.  Zebrafish (Brachydanio rerio), a small tropical freshwater
               teleost, is most amenable to the former two approaches, but  methods for
              controlled and efficient generation of germline  transgenic zebrafish have not
              been developed. The objective  of the proposed research is to optimize methods
              for the  infection of zebrafish germline cells with retroviruses  which are
              pseudotyped with the vesicular stomatitis virus  (VSV) G glycoprotein.
              Preliminary experiments have  demonstrated that the VSV-G protein broadens the
              host range  of murine leukemia virus derived vectors to zebrafish cells  and
              other non-mammalian hosts. These methods will be applied  to perform
              insertional mutagenesis screens in zebrafish to  identify novel genes that are
              important for pattern  formation and organogenesis in the embryo. Specific aim
              1 is  to optimize conditions for infection of zebrafish germline  cells with
              VSV-G pseudotyped murine leukemia virus-derived  vectors and to study germline
              transmission of integrated  DNA. Specific aim 2 is to construct viral vectors
              for a)  cell marking experiments to allow high resolution lineage  analysis in
              the developing embryo, b) over expression of  known proteins to study their
              function in development, and  c) gene transfer of cloned zebrafish genes back
              into  zebrafish hosts mutant for developmental regulator genes to  allow tests
              for complementation. Specific aim 3 is to  construct promoter trap and enhancer
              trap retroviral vectors  and to perform initial screens for expression patterns
              that  might reveal integration of the virus into developmental  control genes.
              Retroviral vectors are superior to other  means of insertional mutagenesis
              because of the defined  s tructure of the integrated DNA, and the high
              efficiency at  which the vector is delivered into the host cells. Because  the
              VSV-G pseudotyped vectors infect a broad range of host  cells including fish,
              Xenopus laevis, and insect cells, the  methods and vectors developed during
              this project can also  be applied to other non-mammalian developmental systems.
               ***
