Title       : Dynamics of Elementary Processes in Solutions of Biopolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9317042

Award Number: 9317042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Schurr schurr@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317042  Schurr  The rotational, translational, and deformational Brownian
              motions  of particular DNAs and DNA/ligand complexes are studied by modern 
              optical techniques, namely time-resolved fluorescence  polarization anisotropy
              (FPA), dynamic light scattering (DLS),  transient photodichroism (TPD), and a
              transient polarization  grating method proposed for development.  Specific
              objectives are  (1) to investigate the length dependence of the hydrodynamic 
              radius of DNA; (2) to determine the dynamic bending rigidity of  DNA and its
              dependence upon salt concentration, intercalator  binding, and other factors;
              (3) to complete construction of the  transient grating instrument; (4) to
              examine the effect of  bending strain upon the torsion constant and circular
              dichroism  spectrum by studying small DNAs before and after circularization, 
              and to study structural transitions induced by temperature in  those DNAs; (5)
              to examine the effects of Mg2+ ions upon the  structure of plasmids as a
              function of superhelix density; (6) to  study circular DNAs as a function of
              superhelix density to  observe and characterize the first transition to writhe;
              (7) to  apply a new Monte Carlo algorithm to generate canonically  distributed
              sets of tertiary configurations for circular DNAs  with fixed linking number,
              from which average static structure  factors and transnational diffusion
              coefficients are calculated,  and to calculate the differences in free energy
              between  topoisomers; (8) to determine the effect of anisotropy of the  bending
              potential upon the structure, distribution of torsional  strain, and free
              energy difference between topoisomers; and (9)  to examine the effect of the
              ordinary-extraordinary transition  upon the rotational dynamics of 150 bp DNAs.
               %%%  In their natural setting, most DNAs are highly bent and/or  twisted, and
              there are many instances where this deformation is  achieved at considerable
              energy cost to the cell.  The reasons  why cells maintain their DNAs in such
              deformed states are stil l  unclear, although several hypotheses have been
              advanced.  One  speculation is that sufficient bending deformation may alter
              the  internal structure of the DNA (in a way that goes beyond simple  elastic
              strain), so that a new internal structure or combination  of structures
              results.  In this way, the properties of the DNA  could be altered, and thereby
              regulated, by the degree of  deformational strain.  The present work endeavors
              to investigate  this possibility in several ways.  In one experiment, both
              linear  and circular forms of the same short DNA are examined to  ascertain
              whether the internal structure is substantially altered  by the bending
              inherent in the circular molecule.  In another  experiment, the different
              responses of the DNA to very rapidly  and also very slowly varying bending
              forces are compared.  When  the bending forces fluctuate more rapidly than the
              changes in  internal structure can take place, the DNA appears stiffer than  it
              does in response to slowly varying (or permanent) bending  forces that allow
              sufficient time for changes in internal  structure to occur.  These experiments
              rely on sophisticated  optical measurements that are capable of determining the
              twisting  and bending rigidities of these molecules in very short times as 
              they move and spontaneously deform in solution.  In another  experiment, the
              responses of differently deformed DNAs to Mg2+  ions are investigated to better
              understand the roles of both Mg2+  and DNA deformation in controlling the
              internal structure and  overall conformation.  In this case extensive computer 
              simulations are required to interpret some of the optical data  pertaining to
              DNA conformations.  The results of this work  provide a foundation for
              understanding the manner in which DNA  deformation controls the internal
              structure and overall  conformation, and thereby regulates its interactions
              with various  proteins involved in the read-out of its genetic information. 
              ***
