Title       : Signal Transduction Pathways Controlling Skeletal Myogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9317640

Award Number: 9317640
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Taparowsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9317640  Taparowsky    Understanding how programs of cellular growth and 
              differentiation are regulated during morphogenesis  represents one of the
              fundamental experimental goals in cell  and developmental biology. Skeletal
              muscle provides an  excellent model system for investigating these programs due
               to the availability of cultured myogenic cell lines and the  wealth of
              information on the molecular mechanisms regulating  muscle specific gene
              expression. Recently, the developmental  control of skeletal myogenesis has
              been linked to the  activities of a family of muscle regulatory factors (MRFs) 
              that function to convert undetermined cell types to  committed myogenic
              lineages and to trans-activate muscle  specific gene expression. Intrigued by
              the possibility that  MRFs may represent a common target for the actions of 
              several inhibitors of myogenesis in culture, Dr.  Taparowsky's  laboratory
              demonstrated that oncoproteins (Ras  p21 and Ad5 E1A) and growth factors (bFGF
              and TGF-beta)  antagonize skeletal muscle differentiation by down  regulating
              expression of MRF genes, such as MyoD, and/or by  interfering with MyoD protein
              function. To extend these  studies, this proposal is designed to investigate
              the  intracellular pathways through which MyoD activity is  regulated by these
              inhibitors. Since MyoD is a  phosphoprotein, the role of phosphorylation in
              modulating  MyoD function will be established. In addition, the role of 
              specific protein kinases in directly phosphorylating MyoD,  or otherwise
              contributing to the inhibition of myogenesis,  will be explored. Experiments to
              integrate the activities of  protein kinases into the signal transduction
              pathway(s)  initiated by bFGF or TGF-beta (and perhaps mediated by Ras  p21)
              will be examined using kinase inhibitors and dominant  negative mutations. The
              long term goal of these studies is  to provide a complete picture of the
              molecular pathway(s)  through which the effects of negative and positive
              factors  are delicately balanced to regulate this im portant  developmental
              pathway.  ***
