Title       : RUI: Structural and Functional Analysis of Bovine Ceruloplasmin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9317963

Award Number: 9317963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina A. Goode   (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Kantardjieff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Goode  9317963  Ceruloplasmin is a serum protein that is believed to be involved
              in  the transport of copper to specific extra-hepatic cells.  This  process is
              mediated by cell surface receptors which have been  identified in tissues such
              as brain, heart, placenta and aorta.   Using the bovine system, we will attempt
              to isolate the  ceruloplasmin receptor from brain and placenta.  The isolated 
              receptor will be characterized using standard techniques including 
              size-exclusion chromatography, SDS-PAGE, N-terminal sequence  analysis and
              peptide mapping.  Use of antibodies against the  receptor in preventing
              cellular uptake of copper from ceruloplasmin  will also be investigated.  In
              addition to studies on ceruloplasmin  receptor, we will also characterize two
              isoforms of bovine  ceruloplasmin.  This will be accomplished using both
              biochemical  and physical techniques including carbohydrate analysis, peptide 
              mapping, circular dichroic and atomic absorption spectroscopies and  single
              crystal X-ray diffraction.  Information on the role(s) and  nature of these two
              forms may aid in our understanding of the  mechanisms by which copper is
              removed from the protein into the  receptor cell.  %%%  The average American
              consumes 1.2-1.7 mg of copper per day of which  roughly half is actually
              absorbed and enters the blood and tissues.   A key player in copper metabolism
              is the serum protein  ceruloplasmin, which is believed to be involved in the
              transport of  copper to specific cells such as brain, heart and placenta. 
              These  cells recognize and bind ceruloplasmin through the presence of cell 
              surface receptors.  Our work will study the chemistry and role(s)  of different
              forms of bovine ceruloplasmin isolated from bovine  serum, using various
              biochemical and physical techniques.  In  addition we will continue to
              investigate the role of the membrane  receptor in copper delivery to cells. 
              This information will help  to clarify the role of ceruloplasmin in copper
              metabolism, and  perhaps give us a clearer pictu re of the mechanism by which
              copper  is distributed in the body.  ***
