Title       : Characterization of a New Motility in Eukaryotic Flagella Unrelated to Flagellar
               Beating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9317133

Award Number: 9317133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Rosenbaum joel.rosenbaum@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317133  Rosenbaum     A new motility system in the flagella of the alga 
              Chlamydomonas has been discovered.  This motility, termed  IFT (intraflagellar
              transport) can be observed by DIC optics  as the bi-directional translocation
              of granule-like  particles beneath the flagellar membrane.  Electron 
              microscopy shows raft-like arrays of ball-and-stick-like  structures between
              the flagellar membrane and microtubular  axoneme that appear to connect the
              membrane to the flagellar  outer doublet microtubules.  There are sufficient
              numbers of  these arrays to suggest that they are the structures  observed
              moving with DIC optics. Epitopes for actin, myosin-  I, cytoplasmic dynein, and
              kinesin-related proteins have  been found in the isolated flagella, and a gene
              encoding a  flagellar kinesin-like protein has been cloned.  IFT looks  very
              much like neuronal axoplasmic transport, but there are  no vesicles in the
              flagellum.  Since axoneme assembly occurs  at the tip of the flagellum, IFT may
              be involved in the  translocation of proteins or protein complexes to the 
              assembly site, and also in the maintenance of the flagellum.  The nature of the
              motors responsible for IFT will be  determined, with emphasis on the
              possibility that  cytoplasmic dynein may be involved.  An in vitro IFT system 
              in permeabilized flagella will be developed. in order to  better characterize
              the newly described transport, and in  order to provide a rapid assay for
              movement.  This assay  will be used to test the nucleotide specificity of the 
              motility as well as the effects of specific inhibitors,  which may help
              identify the motors.  %%%  It is not often that a new type of motile
              subcellular  behavior is described, and particularly not often in a cell  type
              as well studied as Chlamydomonas.  Chlamydomonas is a  free-living,
              photosynthetic, motile, single-celled  eukaryotic alga, which has been valuable
              as a model system  for studying a variety of important cellular properties and 
              functions, including motility.  The best-studied mo tility  mode in this
              organism is its ability to swim by flagellar  beating, and studies on
              Chlamydomonas flagellar organization  and beating have often led to pioneering
              advances in the  field with direct applicability to understanding the 
              mechanism of beating in flagella and cilia of other cell  types, including
              sperm and respiratory epithelia.  The  organism is also capable of gliding, on
              the membranes of its  flagella, although this form of motility is not as well 
              studied as flagellar beating.  Now, a new type of motility  has been discovered
              in the flagellum, which appears to  consist of the transport of particles up
              and down the length  of the flagellum in the region just beneath the flagellar 
              membrane (between the flagellar axoneme and the membrane).  It is possible that
              this motility is similar to the movement  of particles along microtubular
              arrays in the axons of nerve  cells.  It is likely that other flagella and
              cilia also  possess this type of motility, and that the movement is  essential
              for normal flagellar function and/or maintenance.  The studies to be performed
              in this research project will,  first, establish a convenient in vitro assay
              for this  motility, and second, begin to use this assay to identify  the
              functional components of the system and determine the  mechanism.  Although the
              long-term practical applications of  this knowledge cannot really be predicted
              at this stage,  some possibilities may include issues of male fertility, 
              respiratory function, and nerve function, growth, and  regeneration.  ***
