Title       : The Role of Antifreeze Proteins in Freezing Avoidance of Antarctic Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9317629

Award Number: 9317629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. DeVries adevries@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317629  DeVries  McMurdo Sound fishes are the most freeze resistant, and are 
              exposed to greatest extremes of ice and temperature of any fishes  in
              Antarctica. The project will focus on the extent of the ice  association and
              its fate within these polar fishes.  The deepest  depths of ice exposure will
              also be determined.  These results  will be compared to those obtained for
              fishes living in less icy,  warmer environments near the Antarctic Peninsula
              where the  influence of ice shelves is absent.  The fate of experimentally 
              introduced endogenous ice will be determine to find out whether  Antarctic fish
              possess mechanisms for disposing of accumulated  ice.  The relationship of
              structure to function of the  antifreezes will also be investigated by
              determining the three-  dimensional structures of some of the antifreeze
              peptides (AFPs)  and searching for lattice matches between their polar residues
               and their ice adsorption plane.  Two-Dimensional Nuclear Magnetic  Resonance
              and molecular modeling techniques will be used.  With  the antifreeze
              glycopeptides (AFGPs), the importance of size for  adsorption to specific
              planes will be determined. These studies  will indicate what the important
              features are which give rise to  antifreeze function in structurally diverse
              molecules. The  investigation of the inhibition of ice growth by the various 
              antifreezes (AFs) will also be continued on how adsorption to  various ice
              planes leads to inhibition of ice growth. This  question remains thus far
              unanswered, which they hope to address  by examining the effects of the various
              AFs on the growth forms  of single ice crystals.  The organization and
              structure of the  antifreeze genes of Antarctic fish will also be investigated
              by  identifying and sequencing genes that code for the high molecular  weight
              AFGPs and comparing them to organization of the small  AFGPs.  The sizes of the
              AFGP polyprotein gene family will be  determined by fluorescent in situ
              hybridization.  Information on  the organization and struc ture will lead to an
              understanding of  the factors that lead to the necessarily high levels of AF
              needed  for survival in this extreme freezing Antarctic environment.  ***
