Title       : Three-Dimensional Modeling of Contaminants Transport in Subsurface Environment:
               From the Land Surface Through the Unsaturated Zone and Fully Saturated Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9317009

Award Number: 9317009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tian-Chyi  Jim Yeh ybiem@mac.hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317009  Yeh    The importance of field heterogeneities in groundwater pollution
               problems has been widely recognized during the last decade.  Many  field and
              theoretical studies have been conducted to enhance our  understanding of their
              impacts and to improve our predictive  ability of contaminant migration in the
              field.  Conditional  simulation is generally accepted as the most logical
              approach that  can improve our prediction of contaminant transport in the
              field.   Many studies are, however, adopt simplified and unrealistic  scenarios
              such as one or two-dimensional steady-state flow.   Studies have never been
              conducted where contaminants move multi-  dimensionally through the unsaturated
              zone to the water table and  propagate through the aquifer.  One of the
              limiting factors is  computational difficulty and the enormous amount of CPU
              time  required for multi-dimensional numerical simulation.  This problem  is
              most severe in the case of flow and transport in the unsaturated  zone due to
              the nonlinearity of the governing flow equation.   Stochastic conditional
              simulations are even more formidable.  An  approach recently developed by the
              investigator reduces the CPU  time for simulating transport of solutes in
              two-dimensional  unsaturated heterogeneous soils by two or three orders of 
              magnitude.  This technical breakthrough allows conditional  simulation of
              solute transport in heterogeneous porous media under  unsaturated conditions. 
              The robustness of the approach compels us  to try it on three-dimensional
              transport of contaminants from  heterogeneous unsaturated vadose zones to fully
              saturated aquifers.   The overall objectives of the study are to develop a 
              computationally feasible algorithm for simulation of contaminant  transport in
              three-dimensional heterogeneous porous media under  variably saturated
              conditions and to investigate the potential of  our proposed conditional
              concept for designing sampling procedures  that improves our prediction of
              contaminant migration in subsurface  envir onment.  In other words, we would
              like to assess the degree of  sampling is necessary to predict migration of
              contaminants in the  subsurface environment.
