Title       : GRGC: Uplift History of the Bolivian Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1995  
File        : a9317078

Award Number: 9317078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn Gregory gregory@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon P. Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9317078  Gregory    The history of Andean uplift is of great interest to both
              climatic  and tectonic studies.  The Andes form the only major barrier to 
              zonal atmospheric circulation in the southern hemisphere and they  extend
              throughout the tropics, a sensitive zone where small changes  in climate impact
              on a global scale.  In terms of tectonics, the  Andes are one of the few modern
              examples of an ocean-continent  subduction zone with associated crustal
              deformation.  As of now,  the development of Andean elevation is poorly
              constrained.  The  objective of this study is to estimate the paleoclimate and 
              paleoelevation of late Tertiary floras from the Bolivian Altiplano  using a new
              leaf physiognomy-based method.  An existing multiple  regression model explains
              93.3% of the variance in mean annual  temperature (MAT) using leaf physiognomy
              of modern vegetation.   This model will be updated by adding sites from modern
              tropical  forests.  A new MAT-leaf physiognomy relationship will be derived 
              and will be used to estimate the paleoMAT of the samples from the  Bolivian
              sites.  When combined with coeval sea level temperature  and terrestrial lapse
              rate, the paleoMAT data from the Altiplano  can be used to estimate
              paleoelevation.  These estimates of  paleoclimate and paleoelevation will
              address the following  climatically and tectonically important questions:  1)
              As the only  barrier to circulation in the southern hemisphere, how did uplift 
              of the Andes impact global circulation, especially in terms of the  production
              of water vapor?  Could Andean uplift have been partly  responsible for late
              Tertiary global cooling?  2) Did the uplift of  the Andes predate or postdate
              the desiccation of the Altiplano?   Was this desiccation a function of the
              elevation of the Andes, or  of global climate changes?  3) How do botanically
              derived estimates  of Oligocene-Miocene tropical paleoclimate compare with
              those from  general circulation model (GCM) climate reconstructions?  4) Was 
              uplift of the Bolivian Altipla no coincident with crustal shortening  or did
              elevation develop in the late Miocene-Pliocene?
