Title       : Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling: Cape Roberts Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9317979

Award Number: 9317979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter-Noel Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award represents participation of the United States  Antarctic Program
              (USAP) in the Cape Roberts Project  (CRP), a  multi-national program of
              scientific drilling in the southwestern  Ross Sea region of Antarctica.  The
              USAP will join the national  Antarctic research programs of New Zealand, Italy,
              Germany, and  the United Kingdom in sponsoring this project.  The New Zealand 
              Antarctic Program (NZAP) is the lead organization and is joined  by the Italian
              and US Antarctic Programs as major equal partners.   Germany and the United
              Kingdom are minor sponsors of the CRP.   This award supports the scientific
              management activities  associated with participation of US investigators in the
              CRP and  along with this award is a commitment for logistical resources  from
              the USAP in support of the project.     The CRP was conceived to address
              several diverse issues in  geosciences related to the Cretaceous to Paleogene
              (100-36  million years ago) history of the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica  as
              well as early development of the southern ocean.  Four holes  are planned to
              investigate a 1500 meter sequence of the western  Victoria Basin.  Drilling is
              expected to be accomplished over two  years.  It would be done from land-fast
              sea ice early in the  Austral summer and the drill system is expected to
              produce about  95% core recovery.    The scientific objectives of the project
              include: 1) establishing  the history of the extensional plate fragmentation of
              the western  Ross Sea part of the West Antarctic Rift System; 2) determining 
              the subsidence and emergence histories of the Victoria Land Basin  and the
              Transantarctic Mountains; 3) determining the erosional  and depositional
              budgets associated with rift margin uplift and  basin development; 4)
              recovering the first late Cretaceous to  Paleogene succession from the
              southwest Pacific close to  Antarctica and attempting to recover paleoclimatic
              and  paleoceanographic records for the region; 5) investigating  relationships
              between uplift of the Transantarctic M ountains and  climatic changes in the
              region; 6) determining the presence or  absence of terrestrial or marine
              glaciation in the succession;  and 7) documenting the impact of tectonic,
              sedimentologic,  paleoclimatic, and eustatic oscillations on biotic evolution, 
              biogeography, and marine circulation between 100 and 36 million  years ago. 
              This interdisciplinary research plan will provide  valuable new data for Earth
              systems modeling, and it will  reinforce global science agendas of projects
              such as the Ocean  Drilling Program and the International Geosphere-Biosphere 
              Program.
