Title       : Regulation and Physiological Role of Isoprene Emission from Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9317900

Award Number: 9317900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Sharkey tsharkey@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9161,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                          9317900  Sharkey  Isoprene is emitted from plants and animals in
              significant  quantities.  Many plants emit 2% of the carbon fixed in 
              photosynthesis as isoprene making it a major metabolic pathway in  these
              plants.  Isoprene emitted from plants substantially affects  atmospheric
              chemistry.  The metabolic control of isoprene emission  and the advantage to
              plants and animals which emit isoprene are  unknown.  The regulation of
              synthesis of many isoprenoids is  affected by hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA
              reductase (HMGR) and it is  speculated that most HMGR activity of isoprene
              emitting plants is  required for isoprene synthesis.  This project deals with
              the  regulation of isoprene synthesis, focusing on HMGR and the recently 
              discovered isoprene synthase.  The location of the HMGR needed for  isoprene
              synthesis will be determined by chloroplast isolation and  by nonaqueous
              fractionation of leaf material.  The research will  exploit recent discovery
              that a wound-induced signal in one leaf  can travel to a second leaf and reduce
              the rate of isoprene  emission by as much as 80% within 3 minutes.  The
              activity of HMGR  and isoprene synthase before and after the arrival of this
              wound  signal will be measured to determine how isoprene synthesis is 
              regulated.  The research will also exploit the discovery that kudzu  (Pueraria
              lobata (Willd) Ohwi.) leaves do not emit isoprene when  grown at 20 degree
              centigrade but can be induced to emit isoprene  by a 6 hour treatment of 30
              degree centigrade.  The physiological  role of isoprene emission will be
              investigated by exploring the  recent evidence of thermal protection for the
              photosynthetic  apparatus provided by isoprene.  The proposed research is
              needed to  determine whether it will be possible or desirable to modify 
              isoprene emission from plants.  Isoprene is an important raw  material for
              synthetic rubber synthesis.  The current market is one  billion dollars per
              year.  Because of carcinogenicity of the common  substitute for isoprene,
              batadiene,  an inexpensive biogenic source  of isoprene could have a large
              impact on the rubber industry.   Finally, the synthesis of free isoprene is a
              major metabolic  pathway in plants and animals which has been largely
              overlooked  until now.  Understanding the physiological relevance of isoprene 
              emission may lead to important and useful insights which cannot yet  be
              predicted.  ***
