Title       : Instrumentation for Computer-Based Detection and Imaging of Biological Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9317852

Award Number: 9317852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56673              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Curtiss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Landick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Curtiss  Computer assisted analysis has evolved to a point that  access to
              several advanced technologies is, or soon will be,  indispensable for the
              conduct of modern biological research.  Advances in the sensitivity ranges of
              isotopic detection and  the ability to digitize, record and analyze data has
              reached  the level where computer assisted acquisition, analysis and  storage
              of data is no longer a luxury but a necessity  required by those wishing to
              remain current and competitive.  The Computer-Based Electrophoresis Analyzer
              and Phosphor  Imager will serve as shared equipment to provide the primary 
              functions of data acquisition, analysis, and storage for  members of the
              Department of Biology.  Increased sensitivity  of isotopic detection and
              digitization of a wide range of  sample media have resulted in the chance to
              explore  questions previously considered unanswerable due to  limitations of
              detection methods.  These technological  advances in turn provide a formidable
              amount of data which  can often overwhelm manual analysis and even traditional 
              software programs.  The goal of these proposed acquisitions  is the efficient
              use by the maximum number of participating  scientists of instruments which
              cannot be afforded in  individual laboratories.  Funds are requested to
              purchase  (i) an Optical Electrophoresis Analyzer, consisting of CCD  Camera,
              workstation, and accompanying software, and (ii) a  phosphor imaging system
              consisting of scanning module,  workstation, and accompanying software. The
              Department will  provide other essential equipment, including phosphor  storage
              screens, auxiliary software, and installation of the  Ethernet networking
              system to allow maximum usage of all  equipment by those in the Department. 
              The equipment will be  supervised by Drs. Roy Curtiss III and Robert Landick. 
              Use  by graduate students, post-doctoral associates, and faculty  will be
              scheduled so as to make maximum use of the equipment  to advance research
              progress by all participants.
