Title       : Polypeptide/Nuclei Acid Structural Analysis & Organic Synthesis Core Biological
               Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9011758

Award Number: 9011758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154546             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Glabe cglabe@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry E. Manning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Agnes Henschen-Edman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1102      BIOLOGICAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funding for instrumentation to further                  
              develop a comprehensive and integrated core facility for the                   
              structural characterization of peptides, proteins and nucleic                  
              acids and their organic synthesis for use as reagents.  The PIs                
              propose to purchase an automated DNA sequencing instrument to                  
              facilitate the analysis of DNA sequences.  In addition to the                  
              major users of DNA sequencing, the PIs have a relatively large                 
              number of users who sequence a few KB of DNA per year that could               
              benefit from this instrument.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Currently one of the major services of the existing core                       
              facilities is in the synthesis of oligopeptides and                            
              oligonucleotides.  Demand for synthetic peptides is increasing                 
              for use as  models of protein structure and function and the                   
              production of anti-peptide antibodies.  Anti-peptide antibodies                
              are useful reagents for identifying gene products and probing the              
              relationships between protein structure and function.  The rate                
              limiting step in the production of synthetic peptides has become               
              the purification of the desired product by HPLC as most of the                 
              users do not have their own chromatography instrumentation.                    
              Funding for critical supporting instruments such as liquid                     
              chromatographs to purify synthetic peptides and capillary                      
              electrophoresis equipment to assess purity is also requested.                  
              Chromatography equipment is requested for the isolation of                     
              proteins prior to sequencing.
