Title       : Analysis and Optimization of Mycelial Fermentors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9011099

Award Number: 9011099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : May 1,  1991         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9503               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Hanley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will characterize gas-liquid mass                        
              transfer in mycelial fermentations and optimize reactor                        
              performance utilizing a model mycelial fermentation.  A                        
              new chemical technique for the measurement of mass                             
              transfer coefficient will be utilized to characterize the                      
              gas-liquid mass transfer.  An unsteady-state chemical                          
              technique utilizing an instantaneous reaction between                          
              ozone and indigo dye has been developed and is well-                           
              suited for modelling mycelial fermentations because of                         
              low ionic strengths and ease of data collection and                            
              analysis.  The biological phase will be modeled with                           
              cellulose fibers, which in suspension behave similarly to                      
              mycelular growths.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This model system will be used to characterize the gas-                        
              liquid mass transfer as a function of stirrer speed,                           
              gassing rate and solids concentration in a variety of                          
              agitated reactors.  The replacement of turbine agitators                       
              with hydrofoil impellers has significant industrial                            
              interest, primarily due to energy savings and lower shear                      
              exposure for the mycelial broth.  The reaction of glucose                      
              to gluconic acid by Aspergillus niger will be carried out in                   
              the most promising reactor configurations to determine if                      
              the improvements in gas-liquid mass transfer translate                         
              into improvements in the mycelular reactor performance.
