Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Mathematics): Function Theoretic Methods in
               Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9011085

Award Number: 9011085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Gilbert gilbert@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1261,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a two.year collaborative research project                              
              between Robert P. Gilbert of the University of                                 
              Delaware and four Chinese mathematicians from                                  
              Beijing University, Fudan University in Shanghai,                              
              and Zhongshan University in Guangzhou.  The project                            
              is sponsored by NSF and the Chinese National                                   
              Natural Science Foundation.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Partial differential equations are the means by                                
              which many problems in the physical sciences and                               
              engineering are described.  Progress in these                                  
              applied fields is dependent to a large degree on                               
              progress in the development of methods for solving                             
              partial differential equations and the numerical                               
              implementation of these methods.  Two current areas                            
              where this interrelation is most apparent is in the                            
              area of injection molding and the design of                                    
              composite shells.  The injective molding procedure                             
              may be described by a Hele.Shaw flow, which in turn                            
              is what mathematicians refer to as an "elliptic                                
              moving boundary problem."  The composite elastic                               
              shells are described by an elliptic system of                                  
              equations.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The goal of this collaborative project is to reach                             
              a better understanding of these problems, using                                
              "function theoretic" methods and their numerical                               
              implementation.  The Chinese collaborating                                     
              scientists, who are especially strong in this field                            
              are:  Wen Guochun from Beijing University, Xu                                  
              Zhenyuan and Hou Zongyi from Fudan, and Lin Wei                                
              from Zhongshan.  Each of these scientists will                                 
              spend a few months working with Professor Gilbert                              
              and his research group at the University of Delaware.
