Title       : Collaborative Research: Dating of Hominid Sites by the Racemization and
               Accelerator Mass Spectrometry of Protein Amino Acids in Ostrich Eggshells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9011657

Award Number: 9011657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71157              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Edgar Hare Hare@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The preservation of amino acids within the calcite matrix of                   
              eggshells of the African Ostrich (Struthio camelus), has been                  
              shown to approximate a closed system.  Indigenous proteinaceous                
              materials are bound within the calcite crystals and there is                   
              essentially no loss of amino acids due to leaching or diffusion                
              despite a steady degradation of high molecular weight polypeptide              
              material to low molecular weight peptides and free amino acids.                
              Because of this closed system behavior, the natural variability                
              of specific degradation reactions in samples of known age is far               
              less that in other carbonate systems; additionally, the kinetics               
              of amino acid racemization are much simpler to model than in more              
              open systems such as molluscan and foraminiferal fossils.                      
              Consequently, the potential for precise age, and/or                            
              paleotemperature calculations from the extent of these reactions               
              is superior for the eggshell compared to all other media studies               
              to date.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Hominid lineages have a long history of interaction with                       
              ostriches.  The ostrich egg, weighing between one and two                      
              kilograms, has been utilized as a food source by hominids for                  
              more that two million years.  It is found commonly in association              
              with hominid artifacts in the lowest strata at Olduvai Gorge, and              
              in older beds elsewhere in Tanzania.  By the end of the Middle                 
              Stone Age humans were also using the eggshell as a source                      
              material for decorative items such as beads, and ostrich eggshell              
              fragments are commonly found in association with occupation                    
              levels at sites across Africa, the Near East, and Asia, where the              
              ostrich has only recently become extinct.  The ubiquitous                      
              occurrence of ostrich eggshell in hominid sites, especially in                 
              stratified sites, offers the potential of utilizing the                        
              remarkably straight forward time-dependent characteristics of                  
              amino acid racemization in the eggshell as a means of dating                   
              occupation levels beyond the range of radiocarbon.                             
                                                                                             
              The principal investigators will conduct an analytical program                 
              that will focus on developing a more precise model of                          
              racemization kinetics in the eggshells of ostrich and other avian              
              genera, including the modeling of decomposition reactions that                 
              hold the promise of extending the dating potential back into the               
              Pliocene.  They will apply the racemization reaction in ostrich                
              eggshell to address questions related to the earliest appearance               
              of anatomically modern humans in Africa, the emergence of                      
              specialized human cultures, and the migration of Homo sapiens                  
              sapiens across the Near East and Asia.  They will also extend the              
              eggshell research into Europe and Australia by utilizing the                   
              common occurrence of owl eggshell in the former, and emu eggshell              
              in the latter area.  Improved chronologies in these areas are                  
              relevant to questions related to persistence of isolated                       
              populations of Homo erectus and the colonization of Australia and              
              Europe, including the possible interactions between different                  
              species, or subspecies, of the genus Homo.
