Title       : Multi-Job Class Queueing Networks With Blocking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1991       
File        : a9011981

Award Number: 9011981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168084             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian F. Akyildiz ian@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Performance is a major issue in the design and implementation of               
              systems such as computer systems, production systems, communication            
              networks, and flexible manufacturing systems.  The success or failure          
              of such systems is judged by the degree to which performance measures          
              are of great interest.  In the last two decades it has been                    
              demonstrated several times that performance can be evaluated or                
              predicted well by queueing network models.  For queueing networks              
              with nodes of infinite capacity numerous methods have been introduced          
              in the last two decades.  However, since in actual systems nodes have          
              a finite capacity, queueing networks with blocking should be used for          
              accurate modeling for performance analysis.  Queueing networks with            
              blocking have thus become an interesting research topic in recent              
              years.  Several researchers have suggested  different solution                 
              techniques.  Previous studies, however, are restricted to exponential          
              service time distributions, single job classes and FCFS scheduling             
              disciplines.  In actual systems the devices may have different                 
              scheduling disciplines, the job behavior may vary and the service              
              times are drawn non-exponentially.  Therefore, this project                    
              investigates queueing networks having finite capacity, four different          
              node types and multiple job classes.  Several                                  
              approximate ways as well as exact solutions to solving these models            
              are studied.
