Title       : Social Learning in the Management of Global Environmental Risks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1990    
File        : a9011503

Award Number: 9011503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Clark william_clark@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   As governments and other institutions become aware of new                 
              information about changing conditions in their environments, they              
              alter their goals, expectations, and behavior.  This process by which          
              institutions change their skills, beliefs, and/or interpretations in           
              response to new information and experiences is called social learning.         
              Most research on learning has focused on individuals and small groups.         
              This project will continue research at a different scale, focusing on          
              the ways that national governments alter their attitudes and actions           
              with respect to environmental risks as new information becomes                 
              available.  Work begun in 1989 will be continued, with initial emphasis        
              on the prototyping of research methods in a case study in the Federal          
              Republic of Germany.  Those efforts will lay the foundation for a              
              subsequent comparative analysis that also will include the United              
              States, the Netherlands, Sweden, the U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom, and         
              the European Community.  Within each jurisdiction, news reports,               
              official records, and other sources of information will be used to             
              outline the historical sequence of major environmental events and              
              responses.  Among the major functions for which processes in different         
              states will be compared are (1) risk identification and                        
              characterization, (2) risk context, (3) risk estimation, (4)                   
              identification of control options, (5) assessment of costs of                  
              implementation, (6) goal selection, (7) strategy selection, (8)                
              strategy implementation, and (9) strategy evaluation.                          
                   This project will continue research on an important line of               
              inquiry into the processes by which human institutions perceive and            
              respond to changing environmental conditions.  It will enhance our             
              general understandings of how large, complex institutions function, and        
              it will provide a comparative framework for assessing the ways in which        
              different nations evaluate and deal with global environmental change.
