Title       : The Origins of Modern Anatomy and Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1990  
File        : a9011560

Award Number: 9011560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy G. Siraisi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The rise of modern science, especially modern biological science,              
              has been tied to a close observation of nature.  This is most                  
              closely associated with the brilliant observations of Andreas                  
              Vesalius whose anatomical drawings are as much works of art as they            
              are careful delineations of the human form.  Yet, if we have                   
              learned anything from the revolution in history and philosophy of              
              science of the 1960's and 70's, we have learned that "observation"             
              is "theory-laden."  To a very large extent, what we see is                     
              predetermined by the theory to which we ascribe.  In anatomy and               
              physiology, this "fact" can be seen in the observations of the                 
              human body.  For centuries, for example, writers on anatomy and                
              physiology wrote of the "horns" of the uterus and a five-lobbed                
              liver; but it is "apparent" to us that the human uterus has no                 
              "horns" while the liver has only two lobes, not five.  Similar                 
              observational "errors" can be found in dealing with the heart--we              
              now believe that the blood "circulates" but for millennia, the                 
              arterial and venal systems were considered to be separate.                     
                                                                                             
              Because the relationship of theory with observation is central to              
              contemporary philosophy of science, it is important to understand              
              their relationship in this first great modern observer of the human            
              anatomy.  Andreas Vesalius's De humani corporis fabrica, first                 
              published in 1543, is generally acknowledged to be one of the most             
              important books of the Renaissance.  Yet Vesalian scholarship has              
              mostly been concentrated on the illustrations, his minor works, and            
              his biography.  The lengthy text of the Fabrica--that is, the part             
              of the work that presents the theory which controlled in some sense            
              what he observed--has been much less studied.  With this grant,                
              Professor Siraisi aims to elucidate Vesalius's understanding and               
              presentation of anatomy and physiology in his principal work in the            
              context of the scientific culture of the age.  Her objective is to             
              investigate the Fabrica as an example of Renaissance scientific                
              writing, considering text and illustrations together as Vesalius               
              intended his readers to do.  The result will be a close reading of             
              the scientific and scholarly activities involved in Renaissance                
              anatomy and their relationship to humanistic medical culture, as               
              well as a fuller picture of the scientific and cultural assumptions            
              of a leading figure in Renaissance science.  The study will address            
              several broad historical themes of current interest:  the role of              
              the life sciences in scientific developments of the 16th and 17th              
              centuries; 16th century humanistic medical learning and the culture            
              of the medical community; the development of early modern                      
              scientific methodology and values, including the role of physical              
              demonstration and methods of persuasion and proof.  Her results                
              will be of interest to philosophers of science, especially of                  
              biology, of historians of science and medicine, and Renaissance                
              cultural and intellectual historians.
