Title       : Studies of Scientists' Uncertainty and Disagreement about Global Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9011868

Award Number: 9011868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Stewart t.stewart@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns scientists' judgments regarding the                      
              anticipated buildup of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse gases"             
              in the atmosphere.  Since there are major gaps in scientific                   
              knowledge about the greenhouse effect, policy makers are forced to             
              rely on scientists' judgments about the rate of climate change and             
              its effects.  It now appears that significant policy decisions will            
              have to be made in spite of continuing uncertainty and disagreement            
              among scientists.  Despite its importance, scientific judgment                 
              about the greenhouse effect has not been systematically studied.               
                                                                                             
              Relying on theory and methods derived from judgment research, the              
              project will identify the critical elements that affect scientific             
              judgment about the greenhouse effect.  Scientists involved in                  
              greenhouse research will be surveyed, and specific "points of view"            
              in the scientific community will be identified.  Follow-up                     
              interviews of proponents of the various points of view will probe              
              reasons for disagreements in critical areas.  The description of               
              scientific uncertainty and disagreement that is communicated to                
              policy makers by normal channels will be compared with the results             
              of this study.  The study will result in an improved understanding             
              of the roots of scientific disagreement about the greenhouse                   
              effect.
