Title       : US-UK Cooperative Research: An Experimental and TheoreticalStudy of the Ecology
               of the Control of Red Scale by Aphytis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1990      
File        : a9011084

Award Number: 9011084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pierre Perrolle                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15050              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Murdoch murdoch@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              William Murdoch, University of California at Santa Barbara, and                
              three British ecologists:   Profs. Roger Nesbit and William                    
              Gurney, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, and Dr. Charles                    
              Godfray, Population Biology Center, Imperial College Field                     
              Station, Silwood Park.  In cooperation with these scientists,                  
              Dr. Murdoch will develop and analyze a number of related models,               
              describing the interaction between red scale, a pest insect on                 
              citrus, and its controlling parasitoid, Aphytis.                               
                                                                                             
              Examples of biological control provide the population ecologist                
              with unparalleled opportunities to study the mechanism by which                
              enemies (parasitoids and predators) control host or prey                       
              populations.  Biological control has provided the impetus for a                
              broad range of parasitoid-host theory.  Surprisingly, however,                 
              very  few population ecologists have done field studies of real                
              biological control systems.  Dr. Murdoch has collected extensive               
              sets of experimental field data on red scale/Aphytis interactions,             
              and in collaboration with British colleagues, has also developed               
              several stage-structured models.  The proposed collaboration                   
              will complete the analysis of existing versions of these models,               
              parameterize and carry out extensive computer investigations of                
              these versions, and develop new versions in response to field                  
              results recently obtained by Dr. Murdoch.  The project will                    
              benefit from the complementary expertise of the U.S. and British               
              collaborators. Profs. Nisbet and Gurney are the foremost experts               
              on the development and analysis of the stage-structured models                 
              being used in this project.  Dr. Godfray is an expert on the                   
              strategic versions of the sex-allocation/host feeding model.
