Title       : RUI: Receptor Mediation of Antiestrogen Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9011263

Award Number: 9011263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet M. Gray grayj@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  While estrogens have long been known to have profound                     
              effects on reproductive physiology and behavior, this steroid                  
              hormone also alters feeding behavior, body weight gain and lipid               
              metabolism.  It is believed that these wide range of effects of                
              estrogens are mediated through a receptor-dependent process.                   
              Specific protein receptors are localized in target cells within                
              distinct brain regions and compounds that interfere with steroid-              
              receptor binding activity attenuates the hormone response.                     
              Indeed these compounds, also known as antiestrogens, are an                    
              excellent tool for elucidating the mechanisms underlying the                   
              action of estrogen.  An extremely interesting finding is that                  
              these synthetic agents partially or fully antagonize the effects               
              of estrogen on reproductive physiology and behavior but mimic the              
              effects of estrogen on regulatory processes, such as feeding.                  
              Dr. Gray will examine the receptor systems by which these                      
              antiestrogens exert their estrogenic agonistic vs antagonistic                 
              effects.  She has demonstrated the presence of two specific                    
              antiestrogen binding sites in different brain regions.  She will               
              now characterize the distribution and binding properties of                    
              antiestrogen binding sites in the CNS.  The results from these                 
              studies should lead to a better understanding of how estrogen                  
              exerts its complex effects on both reproductive and regulatory                 
              systems.  Moreover, antiestrogens, such as tamoxifen, nafoxidine,              
              clomiphene, are widely used for the treatment of estrogen-                     
              dependent breast tumors.  Her work on receptor mediation of                    
              antiestrogen effects may help us understand how these compounds                
              act as growth suppressants in tumor cells.
