Title       : Barbareno Chumash Grammar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1992  
File        : a9011018

Award Number: 9011018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne Mithun mithun@humanitas.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                  The goal of the project is to prepare a clear, functionally               
              based reference grammar of Barbareno Chumash, a language                       
              indigenous to California.  Barbareno Chumash is probably among                 
              the best documented but least known languages of North America.                
              The enormous quantity of manuscript material that exists, most of              
              it unorganized and much of it untranslated, has until now daunted              
              scholars working alone.                                                        
                                                                                             
                   A group will organize the material and enter it into a                    
              computer in a form that can be sorted by a concordance program.                
              It will then be possible to extract all instances of any morpheme              
              in the corpus, in context, with literal and free translations.                 
              Each participant will research specific areas of the language and              
              present results to the rest of the group for discussion and                    
              revision.  During the final year of the project, the studies will              
              be worked into a comprehensive grammar.                                        
                                                                                             
                   Because of the elaborate verb morphology of the language,                 
              which has major ramifications for syntactic and discourse                      
              structure, a detailed, richly exemplified grammar should be of                 
              special importance to linguistic theory.  Because of the much                  
              debated assignment of Chumash to the hypothesized Hokan stock of               
              languages, accessibility of this data will be an important tool                
              for work on deeper genetic relationships among North America                   
              languages.  The grammar should also provide a long-awaited                     
              resource to ethnologists, ethnobiologists, ethnohistorians,                    
              historians, and others interested in the Chumash.
