Title       : An Econometric Analysis of Charitable Giving in the Federal Income Tax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9011198

Award Number: 9011198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Moffitt moffitt@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Triest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The effect of the federal income tax system on charitable                      
              contributions has been the subject of considerable interest.                   
              Several recent changes in federal tax law have affected that                   
              deduction. This project outlines an econometric study of the                   
              effect of the federal income tax on charitable giving which                    
              addresses two specification issues in past work. First, the level              
                                                                                             
              of other deductions has been held constant in earlier studies,                 
              but will be allowed to vary here. In general, the price and                    
              income elasticities of such conditional demand functions are not               
                                                                                             
              the same as those that obtain when other deductions are allowed                
              to be endogenous. For tax policy purposes, the elasticities from               
                                                                                             
              the unconditional demand functions are the most relevant because               
                                                                                             
              a change in the tax price for charitable giving may change the                 
              level of other deductions as well. Although the treatment of                   
              other deductions as endogenous leads to an identification                      
              problem, using charitable donations from non-itemizers (which was              
                                                                                             
              allowed in the early 1980s), will enable separate price                        
              elasticities for charitable giving and other deductions to be                  
                                                                                             
              obtained.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The second specification issue is the endogeneity of the                       
                                                                                             
              itemization decision.  This involves a model incorporating the                 
                                                                                             
              choice of other deductions as well, for the itemization decision               
                                                                                             
              is based upon the level of all deductions. This creates some                   
                                                                                             
              estimation problems - a nonconvex kink in the budget set and,                  
                                                                                             
              conditional on itemization, the tax price of the deductible goods              
                                                                                             
              depends on the sum of the expenditures on these goods. This will               
                                                                                             
              be dealt with by extending the piecewise linear budget constraint              
                                                                                             
              econometric methodology used elsewhere. Estimates from this model              
                                                                                             
              using the 1984 SOI file of federal tax returns will be compared                
                                                                                             
              with those obtained from the simpler model.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              Finally, the parameter estimates will be used to simulate the                  
                                                                                             
              effects of a wide variety of tax policy changes, including the                 
                                                                                             
              effect of the 1986 Tax Reform Act and other possible reforms, on               
                                                                                             
              the level of deductions, the percentage of returns with itemized               
                                                                                             
              deductions and the level of federal tax revenue.
