Title       : RIA: Synthesis and Implementation of Multi-Rate Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9011227

Award Number: 9011227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sayfe Kiaei   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0104000   Information Systems                     
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9286,
Abstract    :
              The growing demand for high speed real-time signal and image processing        
              has led to many new parallel architectures.  Among these systolic arrays       
              is an important class of parallel architectures that has played a              
              significant role in the VLSI implementation of algorithms of these             
              applications.  Since systolic arrays are algorithmic specific, it is           
              essential to develop methods for the synthesis and automatic mapping of        
              algorithms onto these arrays.  Work by other researchers has addressed         
              the synthesis problem based on uniform recurrence equations (URE) or           
              equivalent specifications of algorithms.                                       
                                                                                             
              Local communication is an essential factor for effective realization of        
              systolic arrays.  However, compared to global communication it requires        
              extra delays which reduce the computation time.  Particularly, for many        
              fine-grain operations where the PE has a simple structure the additional       
              delay for the transmission of data becomes restrictive.  Furthermore,          
              many algorithms can not be directly transformed to UREs or may not             
              exhibit the property of locality.  The locality restriction can be             
              solved by using Multi-Rate Arrays (MRA).  These arrays transmit the data       
              in a multi-rate fashion and can be used for many DSP and matrix                
              computations resulting in speed up over systolic arrays.                       
                                                                                             
              In this project we extend previous design methods for systolic arrays          
              to MRAs in several directions.  First, we further develop our recent           
              results on the synthesis of MRAs and obtain a formal procedure for the         
              design automation of MRAs.  Secondly, we investigate the application of        
              MRAs to DSP and image processing algorithms.  This includes a thorough         
              comparison of MRAs with local broadcast (systolic,) bounded-broadcast,         
              and global broadcast arrays in terms of speedup, efficiency,                   
              architecture complexity, number of data paths, and VLSI chip area.
