Title       : Snow Cover as an Indicator of Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1992 
File        : a9011869

Award Number: 9011869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94407              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Although much of the concern about possible global warming has            
              focused on changes in temperatures, some climatologists, geographers,          
              and other atmospheric scientists have noted that substantial changes in        
              the amount, form, and timing of precipitation also may occur.  The             
              extent and duration of snow cover is one measure by which changing             
              precipitation and temperature patterns may be identified, and snow             
              cover is a variable for which many nations have historical data that           
              extends over decades.  Analyses of these historical data are essential         
              to help identify natural variability in snow cover, a pattern that             
              must be distinguished if changes in snowfall resulting from human              
              activities or other factors are to be identified.  This project will           
              integrate into a single, coherent database the daily measurements of           
              snow cover and related variables for roughly 1,000 observation stations        
              in the United States, Soviet Union, Canada, China, and several European        
              nations.  Records in the USA and USSR extend back to the early years of        
              the 20th Century.  These integrated data will be statistically                 
              analyzed to test hypotheses about the spatial and temporal variability         
              of snow cover and to differentiate random variability from long-term           
              trends.                                                                        
                   The most valuable contribution of this project will be the                
              integration of historical data into a single database, which will be           
              available for use by this investigator and by other scientists for a           
              wide range of inquiries into climatic variability and change.  The             
              project also will provide analyses of fundamental variations in snow           
              cover across the Northern Hemisphere during the 20th Century, thereby          
              enhancing general understandings of changing climatic patterns over the        
              last 100 years.
