Title       : A Caltech Micromachining Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9011172

Award Number: 9011172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu-Chong Tai yctai@mems.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. E. Culick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Bower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome Pine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1102,1108,9124,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides funds to help with the establishment and              
              initial operation of a microfabrication facility that will produce             
              semi-conductor devices to be used in neuroscience, microelectronics            
              and related areas of microdevice research.  The neuroscience                   
              devices will be used for both in vitro and in vivo experimentation             
              aimed at the simultaneous monitoring of the activity of an array               
              of nerve cells.  Other types of devices to be fabricated include               
              micro-robots, -sensors, -antennas and pumps.  An important role of             
              the he facility is expected to be the training of students and                 
              advanced investigators who have need of these devices in the                   
              techniques used for microfabrication.                                          
                                                                                             
                   The remarkable progress in the miniaturization of electronic              
              circuit boards has lead to the realization that a variety of other             
              types of micrometer-sized devices can be made.  these include both             
              mechanical and electronic devices.  In particular, the ability to              
              fabricate microchip-like multi-well cell culture dishes, where each            
              well is the size of a single cell, has opened up the possibility               
              of simultaneous recording of the activity of each of many                      
              interconnected nerve cells growing in culture.  This type of                   
              experimentation could lead to significant advances in understanding            
              the operation of networks of nerve cells, an area which has, in                
              recent years, been the subject of much theoretical interest.                   
              Similar devices, which could be implanted directly in the brain,               
              should allow measurement of the activity of many cells in a single             
              region of the brain.  Such experimentation has enormous potential              
              for clarifying our understanding of the functional organization of             
              the brain and of how brain cells integrate and differentiate                   
              sensory input.
