Title       : Four Topics in Law and Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9011910

Award Number: 9011910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61345              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne A. Scotchmer scotch@garnet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant continues support for a very successful research program            
              in law and economics in which the investigator applies economic                
              models to legal issues.  The first topic on patent law and                     
              antitrust policy extends the investigator's prior work on joint R&D            
              ventures involving two or more firms.  A model has been developed              
              illustrating conditions under which joint ventures which can be                
              protected by joint patents will either be optimal or suboptimal                
              incentives for R&D.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The second project studies contingent fees for professional                    
              services.  The analysis offers a new perspective on this fee system            
              regarding why lawyers do not buy cases from clients and collect                
              100% of the reward.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The third project involves looking at the logic behind the rules               
              of evidence as it relates to ex ante deterrence and protecting the             
              rights of innocent parties who may be accused.  The question is                
              asked why, in deciding facts, juries are generally prohibited from             
              considering the accused's criminal record, although judges are not             
              prohibited from considering it in sentencing.                                  
                                                                                             
              The fourth project looks at why the government is so heavily                   
              involved in regulatory testing.  The analysis will explain when                
              and whether multiple tests should be allowed and why testing fees              
              should sometimes exceed their social costs.                                    
                                                                                             
              All of these topics have broad theoretical and practical                       
              implications for both the field of economics and law and social                
              science.
