Title       : Research Conference Proposal: Chemical Process Control IV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9011693

Award Number: 9011693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Harmon Ray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yaman Arkun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cache Corporation
	      P.O.Box 7939
	      Austin, TX  787137939    512/471-7445

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is the fourth in a continuing series of international                     
              conferences on contemporary process control.  The conference                   
              will enjoin engineers and scientists from universities and                     
              industry to provide a forum for assessing both the current                     
              status and future needs and challenges in the field of process                 
              control.  The first three CPC conferences were very successful                 
              in establishing such a constructive dialogue between control                   
              theoreticians and industrial practitioners.                                    
                                                                                             
              The theme of the proposed conference is:  Future Needs and                     
              Challenges in Process Control.  The specific goals of CPC IV                   
              are as follows:  (1) To gain an appreciation of the state of                   
              process control practice in each of the process industries and                 
              to obtain from industry a list of future needs and challenges                  
              for the research community.  (2) To present an overview of the                 
              state of the art in each of the important areas of process                     
              control theory and practice, in a way which is understandable                  
              to the non-specialist and industrial practioner.  (3) To                       
              provide a forum for in-depth discussion between university                     
              researchers and industrial practitioners on the practical                      
              challenges in this field and the extent to which current                       
              research directions are satisfying perceived needs.  (4) To                    
              allow the industrial practitioner a better understanding of                    
              the new tools available from the research community in order                   
              to simulate wider implementation where these are useful.  (5)                  
              To simulate the research community to adjust research                          
              directions through (a) a better understanding of perceived                     
              needs and challenges from the process industry and (b) a                       
              tutorial introduction to new intellectual concepts in other                    
              areas of process control research.
