Title       : Cognitive Processes Affecting Zones of Agreement Between Buyers and Sellers of
               Risky Alternatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9011608

Award Number: 9011608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83149              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerrit Wolf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 1321,9251,
Abstract    :
              The observation of a number of recent studies that compensation                
              demanded to sell goods or entitlements greatly exceeds willingness             
              to pay for them is inconsistent with standard economic theory, and             
              has become a key topic in experimental economics.  These                       
              discrepancies are surprising, because they occur even when the                 
              effects of strategic bargaining and other such economic factors are            
              eliminated.  Instead, those gaps appear to be rooted in the                    
              cognitive psychological processes people use in evaluating                     
              opportunities to buy or sell goods or entitlements.  The proposed              
              work will assess via laboratory experiments how discrepancies                  
              between willingness to pay and compensation demanded for risky                 
              alternatives varies depending on (1) whether opportunity for                   
              learning in an economic market-like setting is provided, (2) the               
              riskiness of the alternatives, (3) how the alternatives are                    
              described or framed, and (4) how willingness to pay and                        
              compensation demanded are elicited from buyers and sellers.                    
              Whereas previous studies have concentrated on whether these gaps               
              are real phenomena, we propose, and provide preliminary data                   
              supporting, a theoretical model based on Kahneman and Tversky's                
              prospect theory which predicts wide variation in gaps depending on             
              factors such as 1 - 4.  These predictions will be tested in                    
              Experiments 1 - 3.  Experiments 4 and 5 will test prescriptive                 
              procedures using multiple perspectives, frames or reference points,            
              and modes of response in an attempt to induce convergence between              
              different measures of economic value, such as willingness to pay               
              and compensation demanded.  If the sizes of these buyer-seller gaps            
              can be reduced by decision support procedures of this sort, the                
              overall quality of buyer - seller "deals" should increase.  More               
              broadly, it is hoped that the proposed work will help to bridge the            
              remarkably disjoint disciplines of experimental economics and                  
              psychology of judgment/decision making.
