Title       : Political Eras and Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1990      
File        : a9011807

Award Number: 9011807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : September 1,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68700              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Stimson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              American politics, it is argued, is representative of the forces of            
              American public opinion.  That representation emerges over time as             
              politicians and other policy actors sense change in national mood, and         
              respond to it.  Public mood is considered to be a vague and general set        
              of orientations toward public policy.  Not support or opposition for           
              particular policies, or particular variations in particular policies,          
              it is considered so general that its effects are seen in each of the           
              domestic policy debates of a particular period.  Systematic movement           
              of such moods produces political eras, times when the public is willing        
              to go along with particular kinds of policy changes, but to restrict           
              others.  The 1960s, for example, is widely considered a time when the          
              public was tolerant toward liberal sorts of policy experimentation             
              across the board, while the (early) 1980s is the reverse case.                 
              These ideas have wide, almost universal, currency in political                 
              commentary, so much so that many would think their truth too obvious           
              for research.  But in political science there is no role at all for            
              moods and eras in prevailing conceptions of public opinion.  There it          
              is usually thought that attitudes toward policy particulars arise from         
              the policy debate itself, are specific reactions to specific questions.        
                                                                                             
              Or in political psychological approaches they arise because they meet          
              needs of the opinion holder.  If moods and eras exist, then because            
              information of this sort is abundant and cheap, it is likely that              
              policy actors would sense them.  It is likely also that acutal policy          
              choices would be affected, that for example, those who sensed                  
              supportive moods for their positions would take stronger positions.            
              This would produce a kind of over-time representation of a quite direct        
              and meaningful sort.  Changes in public preference would lead to               
              changes in policy.  This is a conception of "representation" that is a         
              good fit to democratic theory, but quite different from our usual focus        
              on the concept in geographical terms - - districts and representatives.        
              "Mood" as a purely mass phenomenon has been successfully measured in           
              the past by this investigator.  The key is the analysis of policy              
              preference "marginals" - - the percent who chose one or another                
              response to a question - - over time and issues.  The measure uses the         
              leverage of very large numbers of issues and time points to overcome           
              the inherent shortcomings of the marginals as data and the biases              
              arising from highly selective measurement and reporting.  A methodology        
              is developed for measuring the central tendency of time series of such         
              preferences.  This project moves on to the next tasks at hand for the          
              study of mood representation, (1) exploring whether mood might have            
              more than one dimension (such as "economic" and "social" components -          
              - widely believed to be the case but without supporting evidence), (2)         
              developing measures of public policy outcomes on a left-right scale            
              over time, in order to (3) examine the statistical link, if indeed it          
              exists, between changes over time in public preferences and changes in         
              public policy.
