Title       : The Conservative Resistance in Scientific Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1991    
File        : a9011998

Award Number: 9011998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93130              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Ariew   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              "How many times does the apple have to fall?"  This question was               
              raised by then Representative Bowman who wanted to know why NSF                
              needed to support a new biography of Newton given the many that                
              already existed.  The question assumes that history is a static                
              discipline--that history is simply a gathering of all the "facts"              
              to be set on the page in chronological order.  But the historian               
              is like the scientist--they continually seek to refine and improve             
              upon our understanding of events.  They offer new theories and                 
              gather new evidence to support them.  Eddington, for example,                  
              sought new evidence in the bending of light from star during a                 
              solar eclipse to establish Einstein's theory of gravity over                   
              Newton's. Similarly, historians turn to new kinds of evidence in               
              order to establish new interpretations of how and why historical               
              events came about.  This move to re-examine and re-interpret events            
              has hit at what had long been thought to be firmly established                 
              within the history of science:  the Scientific Revolution.                     
                                                                                             
              The Scientific Revolution of the 17th Century involved the                     
              overthrow of the Aristotelian world system and its replacement by              
              "modern science."  The revolution began with Copernicus and ended              
              with Newton and his theory of universal gravitation.  Yet recent               
              historical scholarship has established that the success of                     
              Copernicanism around the turn of the 17th century was quite                    
              problematic and not explainable on any merely "rational" grounds.              
              Indeed, the Tychonic system, with the planets circling the sun, the            
              sun circling the immobile earth, made better sense than                        
              Copernicanism which so radically contradicted our common-sense                 
              understanding of the physical laws of motion.  But by mid-17th                 
              century, historians and philosophers had assumed that                          
              Aristotelianism was defeated and the triumph of modern physics was             
              clear.  Yet, Professors Ariew and Garber have found that even this             
              victory was nearly as problematic as the victory of Copernicanism.             
              They are examining the exact process of rejection of Aristotelian              
              natural philosophy during the early to mid-17th century.  Paris was            
              then home to a lively and independent intellectual community that              
              included many of the figures most responsible for the rise of the              
              new mechanical philosophy, while at the same time, the University              
              of Paris and numerous smaller colleges were strongholds of                     
              traditional Aristotelian thought.  Their project involves studying             
              intellectual currents both inside and outside the University,                  
              including published books, lecture notes, letters, pamphlets,                  
              broadsides, and engravings.  They hope to illuminate how, with                 
              specifics and in detail, the Aristotelian natural philosophy of the            
              schools was set aside and modern science emerged. The results of               
              the project should enhance our understanding of the complex                    
              relations among various scientific, philosophical and theological              
              doctrines, the intellectual context of early modern science, and               
              the status of scientific claims to authority.
