Title       : Site Response and Soil Liquefaction in San Francisco Due to the Loma Prieta
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1990       
File        : a9011458

Award Number: 9011458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. O'Rourke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry E. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9288,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is part of the NSF/USGS                                           
              initiative within the National Earthquake                                      
              Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP) to                                            
              investigate the effects of the Loma Prieta                                     
              earthquake of 17 October 1989.                                                 
                                                                                             
              San Francisco offers a unique opportunity to                                   
              compare the effects of two earthquakes                                         
              through detailed and comprehensive                                             
              observations which now exist for the 1906 and                                  
              the 1989 earthquakes.  By studying different                                   
              locations within the city, it is possible to                                   
              evaluate how variations in fill thickness and                                  
              density, the thickness and consolidation                                       
              state of underlying soft clay, the water                                       
              table, and the depth to bedrock affect the                                     
              ground surface response and the development                                    
              of soil liquefaction for similar levels of                                     
              bedrock seismic motion.  Moreover, ground                                      
              response coupled with the performance of                                       
              buried lifeline systems provides an                                            
              additional chance to quantify the effect of                                    
              soil-structure interaction on complex                                          
              networks that are critical for emergency                                       
              operations.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              To take advantage of the knowledge gained                                      
              from the 1906 and 1989 earthquakes, this                                       
              project is structured according to a three-                                    
              fold set of objectives: (1) to characterize                                    
              subsurface ground conditions and site                                          
              response at select locations in San Francisco                                  
              - this requires a comprehensive data base on                                   
              soil conditions, as well as the familiarity                                    
              and the site-specific knowledge gained from                                    
              previous investigations and post-earthquake                                    
              reconnaissance in the city, (2) to model                                       
              analytically the site response at select                                       
              locations, and to compare these analytical                                     
              results with field observations and with                                       
              seismic data in order to substantiate and                                      
              refine the analytical models, and (3) to use                                   
              analytical models to predict the effects on                                    
              the city of San Francisco of possible future                                   
              earthquakes that are larger and closer than                                    
              was the Loma Prieta earthquake.                                                
                                                                                             
              This project involves cooperation with the                                     
              U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and San                                          
              Francisco geotechnical firms and city                                          
              agencies.  The USGS is performing soil boring                                  
              at selected locations; geotechnical firms are                                  
              providing soil boring logs (data) and                                          
              geotechnical investigation reports in order                                    
              to expand the available data base on                                           
              subsurface conditions and relevant soil                                        
              properties.  In addition, city agencies, such                                  
              as the San Francisco Fire Department, are                                      
              involved in evaluating how the site response                                   
              characteristics might affect the water                                         
              supply, and how best to design and operate                                     
              the pipeline system so as to minimize the                                      
              effects of locally severe ground shaking and                                   
              liquefaction.
