Title       : ROW: Application of Fluid Dynamics & Geochemistry: The Essence of Processes in
               the Earth's Crust. A Learning Experience in Fluid Flow.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9011034

Award Number: 9011034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57465              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Dutrow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                   It is proposed to incorporate principles of fluid dynamics,               
              heat and mass transfer with knowledge of mineral and aqueous                   
              chemistry.  Ultimately, this will lead to an integrated approach               
              concerning the behavior of minerals and fluids resulting from                  
              changes in state conditions caused by fluid flow, and the                      
              physical manifestation of such processes.  Identification and                  
              quantification of the dominate factors involved in fluid                       
              circulation allows one to predict and describe where the most                  
              vigorous fluid mineral reactions will occur.  Integration of                   
              fluid dynamics will hopefully lead to new innovative methods of                
              exploration and frontiers of discovery in fluid-mineral systems.               
                   The proposed activities are designed to obtain an indepth                 
              working knowledge of dynamic fluid systems, to acquire necessary               
              skills to expand the research program into this area, and to                   
              develop innovative research methods applicable to these systems.               
              Activities will concentrate on processes and mechanisms                        
              associated with fluid motion, emphasis of concepts describing                  
              transport theory, the physics of fluid dynamics, the mathematical              
              tools and constructs required to formalize the problem, and the                
              computational and numerical techniques necessary to obtain and                 
              visualize the results.  Integration of fluid dynamics, with                    
              traditional mineralogic approaches and theoretical methods from                
              aqueous geochemistry and irreversible thermodynamics, will more                
              fully permit the explanation and prediction of chemical                        
              alteration caused by flow of fluids.
