Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Numerical Modeling of Wave Phenomena in
               Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9011076

Award Number: 9011076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fadil Santosa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will study the long-time behavior              
              of wave phenomena in media with periodic microstructure.  In                   
              particular, the research consists of two major lines of inquiry.               
              The first one is the use of analytical methods derived from                    
              multi-scale asymptotics to obtain an effective medium theory that              
              is valid for long times when dispersion effects are important.                 
              The second one is the construction and implementation of                       
              numerical schemes that employ relatively large grids to describe               
              accurately the fine structure of waves as well as their bulk                   
              properties.  Research such as this has applications to many                    
              diverse areas, including seismology, oil exploration and                       
              crystallography.                                                               
                   Wave phenomena are a familiar and significant part of the                 
              natural world.  Over the last century mathematicians and fluid                 
              dynamicists have developed fairly accurate theories that describe              
              the behavior of waves in homogeneous media such as air or water,               
              theories that have been validated through extensive laboratory                 
              experiments.  In contrast to this, our understanding of the                    
              behavior of waves in homogeneous media is very limited, due in                 
              large measure to the difficulty of performing reliable                         
              experiments.  For example, understanding the behavior of                       
              (seismic) waves inside of the earth is crucial to any theory of                
              earthquakes, and yet it is well nigh impossible to set up an                   
              experiment that would allow us to measure such complicated                     
              phenomena.  Thus recourse must be had to mathematical models of                
              waves in inhomogeneous media.  In this proposal the principal                  
              investigator will use analytical and numerical techniques to                   
              describe the propagation of waves in periodic media.
