Title       : Archaeological Investigations in the Middle Senegal Valley, Senegal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9011811

Award Number: 9011811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. McIntosh skmci@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hamady Bocoum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roderick J. McIntosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Susan and              
              Roderick McIntosh and collaborators will begin a long-term study               
              of the recent prehistory of the Middle Senegal Valley, Senegal.                
              They will focus their attention on the most recent two thousand                
              years, and through a combination of site survey, mapping, and                  
              excavation accumulate enough data to reconstruct both cultural                 
              and environmental change over the last two millennia.  Attention               
              will focus on two large sites, Cubalel and Sincu Bara.  At both                
              excavation should yield a wide variety of faunal and floral                    
              remains which will permit reconstruction of subsistence                        
              techniques.  The sites will also yield a variety of cultural                   
              material.  Through combined use of radiocarbon and                             
              archaeomagnetic dating as well as a seriation of ceramic types,                
              it should be possible to establish a cultural chronology.                      
              Because both sites contain deeply stratified middens, they are                 
              well suited to this purpose.  Attention will also focus on                     
              metallurgical materials since preliminary work indicates that                  
              extensive smelting took place in this region.  Finally, sediment               
              cores will aid in the reconstruction of environmental change.                  
                                                                                             
              While much attention has focussed on Egypt and the Near East and               
              the role they played in the rise of civilization, the Sahelian                 
              region of Africa - the broad band just south of the Sahara Desert              
              - has been generally ignored.  However, work by the McIntoshes                 
              and others has indicated that essentially the same processes took              
              place in this area as well.  In their previous work in an                      
              adjacent region, the McIntoshes have traced the rise of large and              
              complex chiefly societies, and they have argued that this                      
              development is primarily indigenous.  This Middle Senegal Valley               
              project will explore a new geographical region and further                     
              examine the mechanisms involved.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will help to               
              fill a glaring geographical blank in the archaeological record.                
              The data collected will be of great interest to a wide range of                
              archaeologists.  Secondly, it will increase our understanding                  
              both of how complex societies develop and the role which sub-                  
              Saharan Africa played.  Because of the integral role which                     
              students will play, the project also contributes to the training               
              of future scientists.
