Title       : Expression and Function of Plasmolipin in Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1991   
File        : a9011859

Award Number: 9011859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Itzhak Fischer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shriver Ctr Mental Retard
	      
	      Waltham, MA  02154    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plasmolipin is a protein located in the membrane of nerve cells                
              in the central nervous system.  In brain, plasmolipin is                       
              developmentally regulated and concentrated in myelin.  In vitro,               
              the isolated protein forms voltage-dependent channels which                    
              allows potassium to cross the membrane.  The concentration of                  
              potassium, inside and outside the cell, is critical for proper                 
              cell function.  The goal of this research is to investigate the                
              cellular and molecular events that control the expression and                  
              function of plasmolipin.  Several cDNA clones encoding                         
              plasmolipin have been isolated and partially sequenced.                        
              Experiments will be performed to complete the sequence in order                
              to determine the topology of plasmolipin in relation to membrane               
              domains and the genetic structure.  Dr. Fischer will study the                 
              molecular mechanisms that regulate plasmolipin and examine the                 
              role of this protein during oligodendrocyte differentiation and                
              during the early events of myelination.  Results from this study               
              will provide information on the function of plasmolipin in                     
              encoding messages in the nervous system.
