Title       : The Role of General Scene Structure in Perceiving and Remembering Pictures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1990     
File        : a9011015

Award Number: 9011015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helene Intraub intraub@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A useful approach to studying the processes that underlie visual               
              cognition is to study the errors that people make.  By examining               
              patterns of errors and the conditions that predictably cause                   
              them, it is possible to infer the principles that guide visual                 
              perception and memory.  Two lines of research will test the                    
              effects of viewers' general knowledge about the structure of                   
              naturalistic scenes on their ability to perceive and remember                  
              pictures.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              One series of experiments will examine a perceptual illusion that              
              occurs during high-speed presentation of pictures (e.g., 9/sec),               
              in which an object from one picture is frequently misperceived as              
              having occurred in the immediately preceding or following display              
              in the sequence.  The relationship of the object to the display                
              in which it actually appears, and to those that surround it, will              
              be manipulated such that the object either will or will not                    
              conform to the observer's knowledge of real-world scenes.  The                 
              research will evaluate the effect of such manipulations on                     
              frequency of misperception.  The other series of experiments will              
              test a memory distortion that occurs when viewers try to remember              
              close-up photographs of objects.  Observers tend to recollect                  
              seeing information that was not present in the photograph, but is              
              likely to have existed just outside the camera's point of view.                
              This suggests that general scene knowledge is important in                     
              understanding pictorial representation and that it alters memory               
              in a predictable and measurable way.                                           
                                                                                             
              This basic research on picture comprehension and memory has                    
              implications for visual communications (e.g., video displays,                  
              control panel design), particulary under conditions in which                   
              errors and brief delays may be crucial to avoid.
