Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations, Continuum Mechanics and
               Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9011854

Award Number: 9011854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55819              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Serrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project will span areas of mathematical                      
              research in partial differential equations to studies on the                   
              mathematical principles underlying of mechanics and                            
              thermodynamics.  Included in this effort will be the analysis of               
              ground states for nonlinear operators.  These are solutions                    
              of second order elliptic partial differential equations of                     
              divergent type which become small at infinity.  The equations not              
              only have physical significance, but also occur naturally in                   
              geometric studies involving mean curvature of surfaces and their               
              generalizations.  Although ground states are known to exist in                 
              many classes of equations, it is not known whether or not any                  
              exist having finite energy.  Work will continue studying this                  
              question.                                                                      
                   On the foundational level, studies will focus on the                      
              principal axioms of classical mechanics relative to the balancing              
              of linear and angular momenta.  The independence and                           
              reasonableness of these axioms will be challenged through the                  
              introduction of a modified axiom system in which neither of the                
              main balance axioms is postulated and in which inertial frames                 
              are not required.  Instead, a point of view in which the                       
              invariance of power or generalized work, or the invariance of                  
              balance of thermodynamic energy, should imply the balance of                   
              momentum, will be taken.                                                       
                   Another line of investigation continues an extensive study                
              into one of the primary open questions of thermodynamics: the                  
              existence and uniqueness of entropy for a given thermodynamical                
              system.  Only in irreversible processes is this unclear - even                 
              existence can be in doubt.  A particular application to this                   
              research would be to that of a compressible Navier-Stokes fluid                
              where entropy is only verifiable under an additional hypothesis                
              of fiberings of the flow.
