Title       : Nonparametric Rank Based Methods for Demand, Welfare, and Production Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9011806

Award Number: 9011806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80442              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Lewbel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The concept of the "rank" of a demand system is used to unify the              
              literature concerning the aggregation and functional structure of              
              demands. The implication of an extended notion of rank for                     
              aggregation, separability, functional form and welfare comparison              
              are derived. These are particularly useful because rank is a                   
              scalar, integer attribute of readily available Engle curve data,               
              yet this number has implications for the income and price                      
              structure of the demands and for the appropriate structure of                  
              models used to estimate and analyze these demands.                             
                                                                                             
              A simple new nonparametric techniques for estimating the rank of               
              demands is derived based on ordinary linear regressions to                     
              construct a matrix that asymptotically has the same rank as the                
              underlying demand system. Applications of other nonparametric                  
              estimators are also proposed. Kernel and average derivative                    
              estimation will be used to nonparametrically estimate                          
              elasticities. They will be combined with rank estimates to                     
              suggest appropriate levels of separability, aggregation and                    
              parametric or semiparametric functional forms.                                 
                                                                                             
              In developing the new techniques for analyzing demand behavior,                
              the methods will be useful in examining cost and welfare                       
              implications for tax, income redistribution and pricing policies               
              and describing the differential impact of such policies on                     
              different demographic groups, including the elderly, single                    
              parents and the poor. Other potential applications include                     
              extensions  to production data to reveal analogous information                 
              about the structure of factor demands and analysis for financial               
              assets, where rank provides a nonparametric estimate of the                    
              degree of mutual fund (portfolio) separation. The principal data               
              sources for the analysis are the Consumer Expenditure Surveys,                 
              with prices obtained from the U.S. National Income and Product                 
              Accounts. For comparison purposes, British data will be used.
