Title       : Search for Enzymes with Long Recognition Sequences, U.S.- Pakistan Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9011091

Award Number: 9011091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Roberts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project provides support for Dr Richard                     
              Roberts of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and Dr. Sheikh                        
              Riazuddin of the Center for Advanced Molecular Biology,                        
              University of Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, to continue                            
              collaborative research on restriction endonucleases.  The                      
              two scientists have been collaborating for about two years                     
              on isolating microbes and searching for the presence of new                    
              Type II enzymes, and determining their sequence specificity.                   
              This project will allow the continuation of this research                      
              for isolation and taxonomical characterization of microbial                    
              strains from different local environment in Pakistan;                          
              screening of bacterial strains for the presence of Type II                     
              restriction endonucleases with special attention to enzymes                    
              with long recognition sequences; and the purification and                      
              characterization of the new restriction enzymes, and those                     
              with new specificities, with recognition of the site of                        
              cleavage.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Scope: This project meets the criteria of the Science in                       
              Developmening Countries Program criteria for research                          
              participation by the U.S. and Pakistani scientists.  It                        
              allows for training of young scientists from Pakistan in one                   
              of the best U.S. laboratories in molecular biology research,                   
              and the application of modern techniques in that field to                      
              research being done in that country.  It also allows for                       
              creating a repository, in Pakistan, of restriction enzymes                     
              which are essential for molecular biology research.  That                      
              capability is important for research in basic and applied                      
              genetic engineering in Pakistan, and it also provides for                      
              increasing the diversity in the available enzymes for                          
              research in the U.S.
