Title       : Dissertation Research: Rock Sourcing of San Stone Artifacts by Neutron
               Activation Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1990     
File        : a9011954

Award Number: 9011954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5276               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarunas Milisauskas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh W. Jarvis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Professor Sarunas Milisauskas, Mr. Hugh                 
              Jarvis, a graduate student at SUNY Buffalo, will conduct field                 
              and laboratory research to collect data for his doctoral                       
              dissertation.  As part of a larger archaeological project, he                  
              will address the question of how late prehistoric hunters and                  
              gatherers adapted to harsh desert-like conditions.  Over a decade              
              of research in the Zeekoe valley of South Africa has provided an               
              excellent data base which maps approximately 16,000 lithic                     
              scatters which are the result of prehistoric activities.  On this              
              basis archaeologists have attempted to reconstruct human use of                
              this landscape and document how it changed over time.  In                      
              particular they wish to know how human groups were organized.                  
                                                                                             
              Mr. Jarvis will examine this question through the analysis of                  
              hornfel, a locally available mineral which was used to make stone              
              tools.  Hornfel outcrops are widespread within the valley and                  
              preliminary work indicates that many are chemically distinct.                  
              Mr. Jarvis will conduct an extensive geological collection                     
              program and use neutron activation analysis to distinguish among               
              sources.  He will then similarly characterize stone tools from a               
              number of archaeological sites.  A comparison of tools to sources              
              will provide a basis to determine how people moved over and                    
              subdivided the landscape and, thus, elucidate social                           
              organization.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of how groups at simple technological levels                 
              adapt to harsh and unpredictable environments.  It will also help              
              to develop a general technique which should prove useful in a                  
              wide variety of archaeological situations.  Finally, it will                   
              assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
