Title       : Human Cone Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9011837

Award Number: 9011837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Tyler cwt@ski.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith-Kettlewell Eye Rsch
	      2318 Fillmore Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941151813    415/345-2000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The human eye detects light by a sheet of specialized                          
              photoreceptor cells and nerve cells called the retina, at the                  
              back of the eye.  Light energy is described in terms of units                  
              called quanta; the conversion of light energy to a neural signal               
              output by the cell is called transduction.  The electrical                     
              response within the photoreceptors is initiated by the fastest                 
              chemical reactions known.  Despite the speed of these reactions,               
              the total response time for the output of these cells is rather                
              slow, to as much as a tenth of a second, because there is a                    
              cascade of biochemical reactions that effectively act to amplify               
              the signal energy.  Two basic kinds of photoreceptors, called                  
              rods and cones, initiate visual signals in the retina which then               
              are sent to the brain by the optic nerve.  The cone system is                  
              usually used for color vision in strong daylight illumination,                 
              while the rod system is very sensitive to low light level but                  
              does not carry color information by itself.  This project                      
              examines the component mechanisms of the cone transduction                     
              process in the human eye, using human responses to obtain                      
              thresholds for seeing stimulus lights of highly controlled                     
              duration and intensity.  Measurements will be made of responses                
              to single flashes from the cone system when it is in a state of                
              dark adaptation, of the number of quanta absorbed at the absolute              
              threshold for different cone types, and of the different time                  
              components in the dark-adapted cone responses.  This novel                     
              approach will generate important new fundamental information on                
              normal human vision that will have impact on further                           
              understanding the biochemistry and physiology of vision in                     
              general.
