Title       : Laser Facility for Biomolecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1992   
File        : a9011268

Award Number: 9011268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas E. Geacintov nicholas.geacintov@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Modern bimolecular research in the time domain requires a broad                
              range of reliable laser based instruments to cover the                         
              wavelengths, pulse energies and time scales necessary for a                    
              comprehensive study.  Typically, these instruments are scattered               
              or not routinely available.  Thus, a means of enhancing and                    
              facilitating such biophysical studies is to bring together the                 
              needed instruments into a central facility where researchers can               
              address research problems in a comprehensive and coherent                      
              fashion.  We are in the process of creating such a facility in                 
              the Chemistry Department at NYU.                                               
                                                                                             
              Partial support is requested for instrumentation to help create a              
              state-of-the-art laser spectroscopy facility, designed for and                 
              dedicated to optical studies of biological macromolecules --                   
              their structures, dynamics and functions.  This instrumentation                
              will be used to investigate a number of problems of current                    
              importance, including:  the role of conformational disorder in                 
              the control of protein function; energy and electron transfer                  
              mechanisms; protein folding and denaturation pathways; the                     
              structure and dynamics of metal binding sites and hydration                    
              layers in proteins and nucleic acids; nucleic acid dynamics; and               
              photophysical and photochemical and photochemical processes in                 
              molecules of biological significance.                                          
                                                                                             
              The requested instrumentation includes three laser systems to                  
              provide time resolution from .15 ps to CW and tunability from 200              
              to 900nm.  Spectrometers, multichannel detection, instrumentation              
              for rapid mixing and cryogenic trapping of samples, will make                  
              available a wide range of experimental options for time resolved               
              and steady state Raman, absorption and fluorescence using these                
              laser sources.  A recent grant from the Kresge Foundation ($250K)              
              will be used to purchase additional equipment to enhance the                   
              versatility and usefulness of the facility.  A condition of this               
              award is that NYU raise a one million dollar endowment to provide              
              for the maintenance of the facility, a campaign that is just                   
              getting under way.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The location and design of the facility are specifically geared                
              to facilitate biological studies.  The facility, which will be                 
              jointly maintained by three of the ten major users, is to be made              
              available for both collaborative and independent projects,                     
              including provision for use by academic and industrial external                
              users.
