Title       : The Loma Prieta Earthquake: An Event Study of Changes in Risk Perceptions and
               the Housing Market*
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1990       
File        : a9011135

Award Number: 9011135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93413              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harinder Singh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Thayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9288,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Loma Prieta Earthquake of 17 October 1989                                  
              represents an exogenous shock to the economic                                  
              markets in the San Francisco Bay area.  As                                     
              such we would expect a set of short                                            
              (transitory, lasting less than 6 months) and                                   
              long (persistent, exceeding one year) term                                     
              impacts to result.  The objective of this                                      
              research is to assess these impacts, to                                        
              measure their initial magnitude and their                                      
              propensity to persist into the future.  Two                                    
              potential impacts are considered: (i) the risk                                 
              perceptions of citizens of the San Francisco                                   
              Bay area; and (ii) the housing market.  The                                    
              study area consists of the counties of                                         
              Alameda, Contra Costa, San Mateo, Santa Cruz,                                  
              Santa Clara, Marin, and San Francisco (areas                                   
              both damaged and undamaged by the earthquake).                                 
                                                                                             
              The outputs of the research will be fourfold.                                  
              First, through analysis of the individual risk                                 
              perceptions, we will achieve a better                                          
              understanding of the risk perception formation                                 
              process.  The impact of an actual event in                                     
              changing perceptions and causing subsequent                                    
              behavioral changes will also be extensively                                    
              studied.  The role of the media and statements                                 
              from public officials will also be assessed.                                   
              Second, any short and/or long term effects on                                  
              the housing market will be identified and                                      
              quantified.  Again, the role of the media and                                  
              public officials will be assessed.  Third, the                                 
              welfare loss (in dollar terms) associated with                                 
              the event and with any misconception of risk                                   
              levels will be quantified.  Finally, the value                                 
              that individuals place on accurate geologic                                    
              information will be determined through                                         
              analysis of the housing market data.  In                                       
              essence, the value of knowing the relevant                                     
              geologic information, either through mapping                                   
              or hazard announcements will be obtained.
