Title       : Neural Steroid Hormone Receptors: Subcellular Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1991   
File        : a9011464

Award Number: 9011464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Blaustein blaustein@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ovarian steroid hormone, estradiol, regulates physiology and               
              behavior by actions in the brain.  Estradiol binds to                          
              intracellular protein receptors found in target neurons within                 
              the specific neural brain regions.   These steroid-receptor                    
              complexes then bind to acceptor sites in the nucleus to alter                  
              gene expression (i.e. induction of RNA and protein synthesis).                 
              It is the believed that the increase and decrease of proteins                  
              resulting from this steroid-receptor interaction is the primary                
              mechanism of action of the hormone.  While many of the                         
              physiological, morphological and behavioral effects induced by                 
              estradiol can be accounted for by this mechanism, recent                       
              immunocytochemical studies have identified steroid hormone                     
              receptors in the extranuclear regions of the target neurons.                   
              This strongly suggests that the hormone also acts through a                    
              nongenomic process.  Dr. Blaustein will identify other possible                
              sites within neurons at which estradiol acts.  Since at the light              
              microscopic level distinct cellular localization can not be                    
              readily identified, he will develop an electron microscopic,                   
              ultrastructural immunocytochemical technique.  Using this                      
              technique, Dr. Blaustein will determine the extranuclear                       
              organelles with which the steroid receptors are associated.                    
              These anatomical studies will significantly enhance our                        
              understanding of the cellular mechanisms of action of this                     
              hormone.  A number of studies have linked estradiol with the                   
              occurrence of various types of cancers.  A better understanding                
              of the mechanisms of action could eventually lead to improved                  
              treatments and possible cures for these life threatening                       
              estrogen-related diseases.
