Title       : Joint US/USSR Workshop on Fundamental Processes in Next Generation Dense Plasmas
               (November 1990: Itkol, USSR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1993      
File        : a9011834

Award Number: 9011834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Morse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Both the United States and the Soviet Union are planning                       
              large-scale dense plasma research facilities at a cost of                      
              over $1 billion each.  These facilities will greatly expand                    
              the range of plasmas that can be produced and will pose a                      
              number of important questions for fundamental research.  As                    
              available plasma energies increase, it becomes interesting                     
              and important for theorists to consider fundamental processes                  
              that can occur and be measured on the correspondingly greater                  
              time and length scales and at the higher achievable energy                     
              densities.  As the only countries now planning such next-                      
              generation facilities, the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have a                        
              major joint interest in this field.                                            
                                                                                             
              This joint workshop, which is being organized by Dr. Richard                   
              Morse of the University of Arizona and Dr. Sergey Anisimov of                  
              the Landau Institute of Theoretical Physics of the Soviet                      
              Academy of Sciences, will be concerned with the theory of                      
              such next-generation dense plasmas.  The state of the                          
              existing theory, and the new theory requirements for                           
              understanding these plasmas, will be considered.  A central                    
              purpose of the workshop is to identify promising U.S.-Soviet                   
              research partnerships in this field and to begin preparation                   
              of competitive proposals for support of long-term collaborative                
              projects.  Because of prior contacts and strong patterns of                    
              complementarity of approaches and capabilities in the U.S.                     
              and Soviet plasma theory communities, it is expected that                      
              joint research in this area would be mutually beneficial.                      
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the                    
              United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary                        
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest                    
              and competence in the field of basic scientific research on                    
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
