Title       : Novel Sources for Titanium Nitride Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9260163

Award Number: 9260163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter P. Kosar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Tech Matls, Inc.
	      7 Commerce Drive
	      Danbury, CT  06810    203/794-1100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1978,9163,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is              
              in the general area of materials chemistry and in the subfield of              
              organometallic chemistry.  The thrust of this activity is to                   
              experimentally test the feasibility of designing novel                         
              unimolecular source reagents that will enable the deposition of                
              titanium nitride (TiN) by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) at                   
              temperatures below 500 degrees C without contamination by                      
              chlorine, carbon, or particulates.  TiN is rapidly becoming an                 
              important material as a barrier layer in very large scale                      
              integration (VLSI) direct random access memories (DRAMs), as an                
              antireflection coating and as a "glue" layer between noble metals              
              and silicon dioxide in both memory and logic devices.  The TiN                 
              CVD precursors identified for evaluation represent a novel                     
              alternative to the present physical vapor deposition technology                
              which, because of the high temperature required, is unsuitable for             
              device fabrication as device features shrink to ultra large scale              
              integration (ULSI) dimensions.  In this size domain, CVD will be               
              the manufacturing method of choice.  Unfortunately, no TiN                     
              precursors presently exist that allow CVD of TiN at low                        
              temperatures without contamination problems.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              In this SBIR Phase I research, Advanced Technology Materials                   
              should demonstrate the feasibility of the synthesis and utility of             
              the proposed new unimolecular CVD source reagents for the low                  
              temperature, contaminant-free production of TiN.  The successful               
              identification of such precursors would allow for their                        
              demonstration in full scale memory device fabrication in Phase II              
              and to be rapidly commercialized in Phase III.
