Title       : An Innovative Design Concept for Noise and Vibration Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9260818

Award Number: 9260818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Walter Rosen walt@bwr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Sciences Corp
	      500 Office Center Dr, Ste 250
	      Ft Washington, PA  190343219    215/542-8400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1445,
Abstract    :
              Material and structural damping is required in many applications               
              wherein suppression of unwanted dynamic displacements can be                   
              critical.  While active control can provide such suppression, the              
              complexity and cost penalties associated with active systems                   
              reduce their attractiveness.  Passive material and structural                  
              damping can provide significant benefits.  The research is aimed               
              at identifying the potentials of an innovative mechanism for                   
              inducing passive damping.                                                      
                                                                                             
              A classical method for inducing damping in a structural element                
              is the use of patches of constrained visco-elastic material                    
              (VEM).  The VEM dissipates energy as it is dynamically stressed.               
              In the conventional approach, both the VEM and the structure                   
              added to induce stresses therein are parasitic additions.  The                 
              innovation addressed is in the method for inducing stress within               
              the constrained VEM while retaining high structural efficiency.                
              By tailoring the elastic properties of composite structural                    
              materials, stress can be induced within the VEM to enhance system              
              damping while maintaining required stiffness properties.  The                  
              innovation also allows for multiple VEM layers within a                        
              structural element allowing for damping over extended frequency                
              and temperature ranges.  The initial phase of the research will                
              address materials for use in truss type structures, but the                    
              innovation can be applied to a range of structural elements                    
              creating opportunities for competitive advances in noise and                   
              vibration control; e.g., for machinery, transportation vehicles,               
              civil structures, etc.
