Title       : Optimal State Estimation of Electrical Power Transmission Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9260228

Award Number: 9260228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Burchett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Power Engineering Assoc
	      61 Harmon Road
	      Scotia, NY  123025400    518/384-0872

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1452,
Abstract    :
              Electric power transmission systems are large                                  
              electrical networks spread over a vast geographic                              
              area that deliver electricity produced by thermal                              
              and hydro-electric generators to the wide variety of                           
              customer loads distributed along the network.                                  
              Because these systems are so large and dispersed, it                           
              is extremely difficult to know how the system is                               
              behaving at any moment in time.  In spite of                                   
              extensive metering and powerful computers, the                                 
              best we can do is estimate the state of the power                              
              system.  Since certain electrical laws must be                                 
              obeyed that constrain and govern its behavior, and                             
              we are seeking the best estimate given an                                      
              abundance of telemetered measurements, we can                                  
              write the State Estimation problem as a very large                             
              optimization problem that seeks to determine the                               
              most likely electrical state of the network given the                          
              data available. Current power system State                                     
              Estimators solve a simplified optimization problem                             
              that ignores certain aspects of a real utility's                               
              practice.  For example, common system devices                                  
              such as transformer taps, phase shifters, or series                            
              capacitors are either treated as fixed variables or                            
              are heuristically accommodated in the optimization                             
              process.  Physically discrete variables and inequality                         
              constraints imposed by physical or operational                                 
              limits are ignored.  Current solution methods are                              
              based on first derivative information and ignore the                           
              important effects of second derivatives which can                              
              have a profound impact on computational                                        
              robustness.  These shortcomings have resulted in an                            
              industry-wide dissatisfaction with the current state-                          
              of-the-art, in spite of significant gains in                                   
              computational speed made by algorithmic research                               
              and faster computers. We propose to construct a                                
              State Estimation model that directly includes                                  
              essential characteristics that are now ignored, with                           
              the premise that a more accurate and robust model                              
              is of greater concern than a faster solution method.                           
              A software prototype for numerical                                             
              experimentation is proposed, which will also serve                             
              as a benchmark debugger for commercial software                                
              development in Phase II.
