Title       : Interactive Content-Based Image Database Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9260189

Award Number: 9260189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt D. Skifstad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Imageware
	      313 N. First Street
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481033301    313/994-7300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6855,
Abstract    :
                   Tools and techniques for content-based organization and                   
              retrieval of electronic images from large databases will provide a             
              greatly needed relief from the ever growing among of visual                    
              information gathered by industries and individuals alike.  Current             
              applications of image information systems do not provide the                   
              functionality necessary to manage image data.  This requires                   
              mechanisms for determining semantic content of the data at storage             
              time, and representation in effective manner for retrieval.                    
                   We propose to develop an interactive content-based image                  
              archiving system in which domain-specific knowledge is explicitly              
              represented separate from domain-independent knowledge.  This                  
              system will be used for creating image databases in different                  
              applications (e.g. animal specimens, art, flora, maps, industrial              
              parts, medical image, experimental results, etc.).  We propose to              
              employ a new layered data model which allows complex structural                
              representations.  This model provides the user with the different              
              levels of interaction, and with the tools for generating semantic              
              entities from image portions, and for defining relation between                
              entities as higher level constructs.  The development of such a                
              tool will lead to a significant improvement in managing visual                 
              electronic information in particular and multi media information in            
              general.  In the first phase of our research, we will identify                 
              requirements of content-based image databases, study the                       
              suitability of current relational and object oriented databases,               
              and study a tasks domain, face database, for implementation.//
