Title       : Energy Filtered Detector for Micro-Diffraction in the Scanning Electron
               Miscroscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9260017

Award Number: 9260017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49756              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Mancuso   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Microscopy Techni
	      50 Prospect Street
	      Rowley, MA  019691805    508/948-5507

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Micro-diffraction based crystallography is essential to materials              
              design and process understanding in key industrial applications,               
              such as micro-electronics, superconductivity, solar energy,                    
              structural composites and metal forming.  The scanning electron                
              microscope (SEM) has the potential for providing high spatial                  
              resolution crystallographic information, but its applicability is              
              severely limited by the low sensitivity of existing techniques.                
              The current methodology cannot be easily used for dose sensitive               
              materials, electrical nonconductors and samples with even small                
              amounts of surface damage.  The difficulty of obtaining micro-                 
              diffraction data is a major drawback in the SEM, which otherwise is            
              very useful in obtaining high resolution topographical and                     
              compositional information and usually requires minimal specimen                
              preparation.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This Phase I program will determine the feasibility of employing an            
              energy filtering detector with high gain to increase the                       
              sensitivity of micro-diffraction in the SEM.  The filter will be               
              applied to backscattered electron patterns that can provide                    
              crystallographic information at very high spatial resolution.  This            
              study will require an amplifying element that is sensitive to low              
              energy electrons, such as a microchannel plate.  The research will             
              test the overall feasibility of this approach as well as the                   
              specific issues of dynamic range and noise level.                              
                                                                                             
              Exploitation of the proposed research would improve the competitive            
              position of domestic industries by enhancing their capability to               
              identify components and define aggregate properties related to                 
              advanced materials and processes.  In addition it would extend the             
              functionality of a large existing base of scanning microscopes used            
              in academic and industrial research.
