Title       : Novel Methods to Produce Nanocrystalline Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1992  
File        : a9260244

Award Number: 9260244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob J. Stiglich sudrshan@matmod.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Modification Inc
	      2721-D Merrilee Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220310113    703/560-1371

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9163,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Nanocrystalline materials are desired in many applications due to              
              their ability to provide superior mechanical properties coupled                
              with improved wear and corrosion resistance.  In this Phase I                  
              effort, the ability to develop a number of nanocrystalline                     
              materials using pulsed reactive electrodes (PRE) either in the form            
              of a rod, wire, or in some cases braided wires submerged in a                  
              reactive or nonreactive dielectric fluid, is demonstrated.  Control            
              over the processing parameters can result in nanometer size powders            
              with tailored size, shape and morphology that can be                           
              characterized.  The technique can be adapted for producing                     
              carbides, nitrides, borides or oxides.  The follow-on Phase II                 
              effort will probably focus on adding reactive gases that flow                  
              alongside the electrode in a specially designed holder and a                   
              technique for consolidation of the nanocrystalline materials into              
              shapes ranging from sheets, using high shear compaction, to plates             
              and other intricate shapes.  Extensive testing of these compacted              
              shapes for strength, corrosion and high temperature behavior is                
              also planned in the Phase II effort.  Methods for scaling up this              
              technique to produce commercial quantities of nano-crystalline                 
              powders for use in numerous applications will be considered.                   
                                                                                             
              Production of nanocrystalline powders can result in a quantum jump             
              in structural materials technology.  Alloys and nanocomposites thus            
              produced should facilitate applications in numerous electrical,                
              magnetic, and packaging applications.  Other uses include                      
              crucibles, nozzles, smart materials, sensors, and several                      
              structural components.
