Title       : Intermolecular Structure and Dynamics in Multicomponent Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1992    
File        : a9001678

Award Number: 9001678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan A. Jones ajones@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Bendler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wen-Yang Wen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger P. Kambour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Inglefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9265,
Abstract    :
              Structure and dynamics of polymer-based glasses are studied below              
              the glass-transition temperature with a combination of                         
              spectroscopy, theory, and polymer science.  This approach                      
              operates at the interface of physical chemistry and material                   
              science to utilize molecular information to account for observed               
              bulk properties.  Nuclear magnetic resonance, the tool utilized                
              in this investigation, probes structure and motion at the level                
              of chemical groups which is then related to the macroscopic or                 
              bulk material properties of the multicomponent glasses.  Local                 
              intermolecular structure in these amorphous materials is                       
              determined by carbon-13 spin diffusion experiments, while                      
              molecular reorientation is monitored with spin relaxation and                  
              line shape experiments.  Rapid development of NMR experiments and              
              instrumentation continues to offer new avenues for the study of                
              solids which will provide a level of insight not attainable a few              
              years ago.  Quantitative interpretational models are developed                 
              which link the spectroscopic data to mechanical and thermal                    
              response as well as such technologically relevant materials                    
              behaviour as plasticization and permeability.  The particular                  
              multicomponent glasses, polycarbonates and their mixtures, are                 
              selected for study as the result of their interesting and                      
              important materials properties.  The interpretational efforts are              
              also tied to the development of theory.  The use of lattice                    
              models to interpret polymer-diluent structure and dynamics as                  
              well as mobilityof sorbed gas is a case in point.  Simulation and              
              modeling are used to assist in the development of physically                   
              sensible interpretational models.
