Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Development of Axon Pathways in the
               Mammalian Visual System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1990 
File        : a9001695

Award Number: 9001695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Torsten N. Wiesel   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Sretavan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1190,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research award supports                           
              cooperative research in developmental neurobiology to be                       
              conducted by Dr. Torsten Wiesel and Dr. David Sretavan of                      
              Rockefeller University and Dr. Ary Ramoa of the Federal                        
              University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The goal of this                         
              research is to understand how precise patterns of axonal                       
              projections, present in the mature mammalian visual system,                    
              are established during development. The experiments will                       
              focus on three areas.  First, is the nature of the cellular                    
              interactions between developing retinal axons and neuro-                       
              epithelial cells at the optic chiasm. Second, is the identity                  
              and spatial-temporal distribution of cell surface molecules                    
              present on both retinal axons and neuroepithelial cells.                       
              Third, is the further development and refinement of an in                      
              vitro culture system to study retinal ganglion cell axon                       
              pathfinding.  Results from this set of studies will not only                   
              lead to a better understanding of how a major axon pathway in                  
              the visual system is formed during embryonic development, but                  
              will also provide insight into how specific axonal projections                 
              may arise in other parts of the central nervous system.                        
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ramoa will bring to this project his expertise on the                      
              embryonic development of mammalian retinal ganglion cells and                  
              will also benefit by learning a powerful research technique                    
              which will be of direct use in his own research in Brazil.                     
              Dr. Ramoa's past research has focused on the development of                    
              mammalian retinal ganglion cells in terms of the maturation                    
              of their morphological features and their electrophysio-                       
              logical properties. While in the U.S., Dr. Ramoa will work with                
              Dr. David Sretavan using hybridoma techniques to generate                      
              monoclonal antibodies directed against molecules present on                    
              developing retinal ganglion cells and the neuroepithelial                      
              cells of the optic chiasm.
