Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Investigation of LateStone Age Sites in
               the Mema Region of Mali
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1990   
File        : a9001668

Award Number: 9001668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. McIntosh skmci@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the guidance of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Ms. Helen Haskell will               
              conduct archaeological survey and excavation in the Mema or "Dead              
              Delta" region of Mali.  The results of this work will form the                 
              basis for her doctoral dissertation.  The Mema, as                             
              geomorphological data indicates, was once a well watered region                
              which coincided with the inland delta of the Niger River.  A                   
              change in the river's course has turned the region to desert.                  
              The small amount of archaeological research which has been done                
              in the region indicates that it contains archaeological sites                  
              which probably span several millennia.  They include at least two              
              which document the transition from a pure hunting and gathering                
              existence to one which incorporated livestock and domesticated                 
              plants.  The goal of Ms. Haskell's research is to shed light on                
              this transition period.  Guiding herself with aerial photographs,              
              Ms. Haskell will conduct a vehicle survey of the region, noting                
              both ancient landforms and scatters of archaeological materials.               
              In conjunction, these data will provide information on                         
              prehistoric landscape use.  She will also conduct test                         
              excavations at two sites and collect pottery, stone tools, and                 
              other cultural remains as well as floral and faunal materials.                 
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  First, it will                 
              fill in what is almost a complete archaeological blank.  It will               
              provide information on how cultures at a very simple level of                  
              technology adapted to a rigorous Saharan environment and,                      
              hopefully, shed light on the introduction of agriculture and                   
              pastoralism to sub-Saharan Africa.  Finally, it will aid in the                
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
