Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1990  
File        : a9001229

Award Number: 9001229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5460               (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mark dmark@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The development of geographic information systems (GISs) as               
              analytic tools has been parallelled by attempts to create media that           
              allow people with varied skills and backgrounds to manipulate and              
              interpret computer-based spatial data.  The construction of more               
              effective general user interfaces has been inhibited, however, by the          
              fact that people structure and deal with geographic relationships in           
              different ways.  Language influences the ways in which people perceive         
              spatial relationships, but little attention has been given by scholars         
              to determining how linguistic differences affect the ways in which             
              people use GISs.  This doctoral dissertation research project will             
              examine different ways in which English-speaking and Spanish-speaking          
              persons describe, structure, and manage spatial relationships.  An oral        
              questionnaire dealing with common spatial relationships will be                
              administered to persons in Spain, Ecuador, and the United States;              
              persons in those nations also will experiment with different types of          
              GIS user interfaces to determine if different formats are more                 
              effective for person speaking different languages.                             
                   This project will provide a valuable test of different GIS user           
              interface formats in different linguistic settings, thereby helping to         
              identify the degree to which linguistic differences must be                    
              accommodated in the development of "user-friendly" GISs.  The study            
              will enhance understandings of the ways in which language helps                
              structure individual understandings of spatial relationships, and it           
              will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to         
              continue to develop independent research skills.
