Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Differential Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1991        
File        : a9001956

Award Number: 9001956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Glazebrook                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugenio N. Calabi calabi@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman R. Gluck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julius L. Shaneson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang Ziller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Five investigators will study related problems involving                  
              various aspects of differential geometry, algebraic varieties,                 
              and dynamical systems.  The first will study variational problems              
              arising from curvature considerations.  The second will study                  
              isospectral deformations, optimal structures on Riemannian                     
              manifolds, and fibrations of spheres by great spheres.  The third              
              will investigate Einstein metrics, isotropic irreducible                       
              Riemannian manifolds, and the isotropy representation of                       
              symmetric spaces.  A topologist will study stratified spaces,                  
              particularly algebraic varieties.  And the fifth will study                    
              hyperbolic geometry in higher dimensions, representations of                   
              braid groups, link groups, and invariant links.                                
                   A central goal of the differential geometers working on this              
              project is to understand spacial curvature.  In particular they                
              will study the relationship between curvature and the overall                  
              shape of the space, or what sorts of functions may exist on the                
              space.  The topologist and dynamical systems theorist will use                 
              their understanding of the shape of the space and allowable                    
              dynamical properties to restrict curvature in various ways.
