Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Behavior of Holomorphic Functions of Several
               Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1992   
File        : a9001883

Award Number: 9001883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar L. Stout   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Mathematical research undertaken in this project follows two              
              related themes, both within the context of functions of several                
              complex variables.  The first is concerned with the question of                
              removable singularities.  There is a significant change in the                 
              phenomenon of singularities as soon as one goes from one to                    
              several variables.  Points or sets where holomorphic functions                 
              may be extended as holomorphic functions are called removable                  
              singularities.  One of the goals of this continuing work is to                 
              characterize removable singularities by means of the algebra of                
              functions defined in neighborhoods of the singularities.  In                   
              examples which have been worked out, when the singular set is                  
              convex with respect to the algebra, it is removable.  A related                
              question to be taken up concerns the characterization of smooth                
              manifolds in the boundary of a domain which are removable.                     
                   The second thrust of the project concerns the boundary                    
              values of holomorphic functions.  Two points of view prevail.                  
              One is to determine whether a smooth function on the boundary                  
              continues holomorphically to the interior, the other is concerned              
              with the question of the extent to which a holomorphic function                
              on the interior extends to the boundary in some reasonable                     
              fashion.  In the former case, work will concentrate on efforts to              
              determine whether functions which can be continued                             
              holomorphically along lower dimensional manifolds, complex lines               
              for example, are holomorphic in the large.                                     
                   Boundary considerations lead naturally to applications of                 
              geometric analysis, while the extension theory is closely tied                 
              with that of solving systems of partial differential equations.
