Title       : U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research on Nucleate Boiling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1990    
File        : a9001983

Award Number: 9001983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14362              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihir Sen mihir.sen.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative work between Professor                   
              Mihir Sen of the University of Notre Dame and Professor                        
              Eduardo Ramos of the Solar Energy Laboratory in Temixco,                       
              Mexico.  The researchers intend to study nucleate boiling                      
              from single-and multiple capillary sites.  Variable heat                       
              flux will be used as a control parameter to analyze the                        
              sequence of bifurcations leading from periodic boiling up to                   
              chaos.  In order to assess the contribution of phase change                    
              to the observed phenomena, a similar study without phase                       
              change, but with the controlled injection of an inert gas,                     
              will also be carried out.  In this case the mass flow rate of                  
              the inert gas will be the relevant bifurcation parameter.  The                 
              bulk of the phase change work will be done in the U.S., while                  
              most of the inert gas studies will be in Mexico.                               
                                                                                             
              One part of the work will consist of extensive observation                     
              and interpretation of an experimental nature.  Another will                    
              be the development of a suitable analytical model for the                      
              processes which can qualitatively explain the observed                         
              phenomena.  Though the cylindrical capillary structure                         
              chosen for study is the simplest geometry from a basic point                   
              of view, results from this study are expected to advance our                   
              fundamental understanding of boiling.  As such the proposed                    
              work has potential application to the design of thermal                        
              equipment operating under boiling conditions and to the                        
              preparation of structured surfaces for enhanced heat transfer.
