Title       : Dissertation Research: Parental Control of Sex Ratio in Haplodiploid Herbivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9001262

Award Number: 9001262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Price Peter.Price@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley C. Tobin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    Many organisms possessing a haplodiploid genetic system                  
              are known to preferentially allocate maleness and femaleness to                
              individual offspring in response to environmental conditions that              
                                                                                             
              differentially confer advantages to either sex. (A haplodiploid                
              species is one in which individuals of one sex--usually                        
              males--are produced from unfertilized eggs, while fertilized eggs              
                                                                                             
              produce individuals of the opposite sex).  For instance,                       
              parasitic wasps will most likely oviposit a female (fertilized)                
              egg in a relatively large high quality prey individual since the               
                                                                                             
              ovipositing female stands to gain more grandoffspring through the              
                                                                                             
              function of large, robust daughters than through the function of               
                                                                                             
              large sons.  In contrast, the female will probably gain more                   
              grandoffspring through the function of small sons than through                 
              small daughters and will thus most likely allocate male                        
              (unfertilized) eggs to small, low quality, hosts.                              
                                                                                             
                   Differential sex allocation of the form just described is                 
                                                                                             
              well-studied in the parasitic wasps.  However, the factors                     
                                                                                             
              affecting sex allocation in haplodiploid herbivores are much less              
                                                                                             
              understood, though these herbivores are very common and quite                  
                                                                                             
              often cause major economic damage (e.g., spider mites and                      
                                                                                             
              sawflies).  In addition, herbivory is probably a primitive state               
                                                                                             
              in many haplodiploid groups and an understanding of gender                     
                                                                                             
              control will allow a better understanding of the evolution of                  
                                                                                             
              herbivory. The proposed research will examine the relationship                 
                                                                                             
              between sex allocation  in haplodiploid herbivores and the                     
                                                                                             
              variable quality of host-plants encountered.  By examining                     
                                                                                             
              diverse groups of haplodiploid herbivores, i.e., sawflies and                  
                                                                                             
              spider mites, in which haplodiploidy arose independently, the                  
                                                                                             
              investigators hope to define the evolutionary generalities that                
                                                                                             
              led to the success of this genetic system.                                     
                                                                                             
                   A further aspect of this research is the relationship of                  
                                                                                             
              population sex ratios to rates of population increase.  By                     
                                                                                             
              determining host-plant factors that result in the production of                
                                                                                             
              relatively greater proportions of females, the investigators will              
                                                                                             
              also begin to determine the host-plant factors responsible for                 
                                                                                             
              periodic outbreaks of haplodiploid herbivores.  In addition to                 
                                                                                             
              survivorship, growth rate and egg production, the relative                     
                                                                                             
              proportion of females in a population is a parameter with                      
                                                                                             
              potentially large consequences for population growth rates.  The               
                                                                                             
              ability to alter the sex ratio of hapodiploid herbivores through               
                                                                                             
              manipulation of their host plants could lead to an additional                  
                                                                                             
              method of controlling many pests in agriculture and forestry.                  
                                                                                             
               ***      //
