Title       : Assessment of Transportation Problems Incurred In the Aftermath of San Francisco
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1989  
File        : a9001851

Award Number: 9001851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1989   
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoine G. Hobeika   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most transportation actions regarding disaster                                 
              conditions cannot be tested or evaluated in a                                  
              laboratory or inferred from normal situations.                                 
              They have to be acquired through real-life                                     
              events which in the case of an earthquake is                                   
              a rare occurrence.  The most significant                                       
              events in the transportation and                                               
              transportation related-field that followed the                                 
              October 17, 1989 San Francisco Bay Area                                        
              earthquake is the collapse of transportation                                   
              facilities, particularly bridges, which caused                                 
              discontinuity in the transportation network.                                   
              These failures impacted several emergency                                      
              management functions such as search and                                        
              rescue, fire fighting and site evacuations.                                    
              They also restricted the movement of people                                    
              and goods among the various communities of the                                 
              Bay Area.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The main focus of this project is to study and                                 
              assess the impacts of transportation system                                    
              failures on emergency management functions and                                 
              to evaluate the development and implementation                                 
              of various traffic diversion strategies                                        
              carried to provide accessibility and mobility                                  
              to the travelers in the affected region.  The                                  
              developed strategies and models will enhance                                   
              the work conducted after the Mexico City                                       
              earthquake in this field, and test its                                         
              applicability to the U.S. environment.                                         
                                                                                             
              The results will assist emergency managers and                                 
              planners in the location and allocation of                                     
              personnel and equipment, in the dispatch of                                    
              emergency vehicles, and in the development of                                  
              traffic diversion strategies that will avoid                                   
              bottlenecks and minimize delays.  They will                                    
              also bring into focus the tremendous                                           
              transportation costs incurred by business as                                   
              well as by individuals as a result of the                                      
              failure of key elements of the transportation                                  
              network.
