Title       : Mossbauer Studies of Nitrite Reductase and Vanadium-containing Nitrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1992      
File        : a9001530

Award Number: 9001530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boi Hanh Huynh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  Living matters are sustained by large-scale cycles of                      
              energy and chemical elements, and one of the most essential                    
              elements in biological materials is nitrogen.  To study the                    
              many different biological processes which govern the nitrogen                  
              status in the biosphere is, therefore, of vital importance.                    
              Nitrogenase and nitrite reductase are two enzymes which                        
              catalyze key steps in the nitrogen cycle.  Nitrogenase                         
              catalyzes the conversion of atmospheric dinitrogen into ammonia                
              (nitrogen fixation) and many microorganisms use it to                          
              assimilate nitrogen into the living system.  Nitrate reductase                 
              reduces nitrite to ammonia and a variety of nitrate-reducing                   
              bacteria, as well as some sulfate reducing bacteria, use it for                
              terminal respiration and dissimilates nitrogen back to the                     
              physical world.  Structural and functional studies of these                    
              enzymes are therefore of fundamental importance and should                     
              provide information pertinent to the understanding of our                      
              living environment.                                                            
                   In this application, Dr. Huynh proposes to perform                        
              Mossbauaer studies of the following enzymes:                                   
                   1.  the vanadium-iron protein of the nitrogenase enzyme                   
              system from Azotobacter vinelandii.                                            
                   2.  the nitrite reductase from Desulfovibrio                              
              desulfuricans.                                                                 
                   Both the vanadium-iron protein and nitrite reductase are                  
              complex enzymes containing multiple iron centers which      can                
              be most effectively studied by Mossbauer spectroscopy.  The                    
              proposed experiments include (i)characterizations of the                       
              native enzymes, (ii)redoxtitration studies, (iii) pH-                          
              dependence investigations and (iv)examinations of substrate-                   
              and ligand-binding effects.  The Mossbauer results will be                     
              correlated with data obtained form other physico-biochemical                   
              methods, including optical and electron paramagnetic resonance                 
              techniques.  Dr. Huynh hopes to fully characterize the iron                    
              centers in these enzymes, to obtain physical and biochemical                   
              properties, to reveal the roles these iron centers play in                     
              their enzymatic functions and to enhance our understanding of                  
              the mechanisms of biological nitrogen fixation and nitrite                     
              reduction.
