Title       : An Investigation of Interhemispheric Differences in Aerosol Physicochemistry in
               the Equatorial Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9001434

Award Number: 9001434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antony D. Clarke tclarke@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   During the past few decades observed increases in                         
              atmospheric concentrations of certain trace species (eg. CO2, O3,              
              CH4, etc.) have resulted in a growing awareness of man's                       
              potential to perturb his environment on a global scale.                        
              Consequently, this decade has seen increased efforts to identify               
              and understand the properties of the remote atmosphere and the                 
              processes relating the sources, transformations and removal of                 
              the constituents that are present.  This kind of investigation                 
              involves measurement of the particle and gas phase species of                  
              interest in conjunction with the environmental and meteorological              
              parameters known to influence their behavior.  Understanding                   
              these processes is essential to assessing the importance of                    
              various issues of current environmental concern.  These include                
              1) the role of clouds on climate, 2) the role of aerosol and                   
              gases in atmospheric radiative transfer and 3) the geochemical                 
              cycling of atmospheric constituents.  Any investigation of these               
              issues requires a knowledge of the relative influence of                       
              anthropogenic, "natural" continental and marine contributions.                 
                   This research project will support the analysis of data                   
              collected from:  1) the recent Central Pacific Atmospheric                     
              Comparison Experiment (CPACE) aboard the NCAR-Electra aircraft                 
              was intended to intercompare and evaluate recently developed                   
              techniques for measuring gas and aerosol species at low                        
              concentrations.  Size-resolved aerosol information will be                     
              combined with the measurements of other CPACE investigators for                
              the characterization of our atmospheric observations and to                    
              complete the proposed evaluation of aerosol inlet losses;  and                 
              2) measurements of aerosol physicochemistry and optical                        
              properties during five equatorial transects currently obtained as              
              part of the Soviet-American Gas and Aerosol Experiment Three                   
              (SAGA III) the equatorial Pacific between Hawaii and Samoa in                  
              spring of 1990.
