Title       : Dissertation Research: Interactions of Controlled Nutrient Enrichment, Plant
               Growth, and Insect Herbivory in Red Mangrove (Rhizophora mangle)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1990       
File        : a9001036

Award Number: 9001036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8589               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Barrows   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ilka C. Feller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Primary productivity of mangroves is an important source of               
              nutrients for adjacent marine systems.  The level of productivity              
              is affected not only by environmental factors but also by other                
              components of the mangrove community.  Nutrient enrichment might               
              have direct impact on aquatic food webs by increasing primary                  
              productivity of mangroves, but enrichment to coastal waters might              
              be mitigated because as much as 20% of mangrove leaf material is               
              removed by herbivores.  The objective of this study is to                      
              determine the effects of nutrient enrichment on primary                        
              productivity of the key mangrove species, Rhizophora mangle, and               
              on rates of insect herbivory in a controlled experiment in which               
              nutrient availability in sediment is manipulated.  The following               
              hypotheses will be tested:                                                     
                                                                                             
              1.   Nutrient enrichment causes increased leaf production and                  
                   terminal branch production, internodal elongation, and                    
                   flowering.                                                                
              2.   Nutritional quality (e.g., CNP ratio, water content) of                   
                   mangrove tissues increases following nutrient enrichment of               
                   the sediment.                                                             
              3.   Nutritional quality of mangrove tissues correlates with                   
                   rates of insect herbivory by both leaf feeders (folivores)                
                   and twig borers (xylovores).                                              
              4.   Secondary use of R. mangle twigs by insects and their kin,                
                   e.g., predators, parasites, twig-nesting ants, etc.,                      
                   increases with rate of primary herbivory.                                 
              5.   Proportions of species in the twig-feeding guild of R.                    
                   mangle change following nutrient enrichment.                              
                                                                                             
              This research will contribute to the knowledge base on mangrove                
              ecology and may provide important information useful in                        
              conservation of mangroves.//
