Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Set Convergence, Convex Analysis, and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1990        
File        : a9001096

Award Number: 9001096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Beer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   Professor Beer has been involved in the study of topologies               
              on the closed convex subsets of a normed linear space.  Such                   
              topologies give rise to topologies on convex functions, with a                 
              function identified with its epigraph, the set of points on or                 
              above its graph.  In the last two years, Professor Beer                        
              introduced a topology compatible with Mosco convergence of                     
              sequences of convex sets, showing that it is stable with respect               
              to duality if and only if the underlying space is reflexive.                   
              Several characterizations of the topology were obtained, and                   
              continuity properties of a variety of operators and functionals                
              on convex sets were studied.  In response to the unsuitability of              
              this Mosco topology in the nonreflexive case, and in view of some              
              prior promising results regarding the norm convergence of linear               
              functionals and their level sets, Professor Beer studied the                   
              topology of uniform convergence of distance functionals on                     
              bounded sets.  Not only is this topology stable with respect to                
              duality without restriction, but it is also the right convergence              
              notion in terms of the stability of solutions of convex                        
              optimization problems.                                                         
                   Professor Beer will continue his studies on convergence of                
              convex sets, with particular attention to connections with Banach              
              space geometry, approximation of multifunctions, and specific                  
              operations and functionals.  He also hopes to become involved in               
              applications of set convergence in evolving research in the                    
              foundations of nonsmooth analysis, e.g., to certain optimization               
              problems.
