Title       : Broadband Matching of Active Devices and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1990     
File        : a9001779

Award Number: 9001779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert J. Carlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Modern communication systems, for examples high speed pulse code               
              transmission systems via satellite, impose a wide frequency band               
              over which pulse amplitude and phase distortion must be contained              
              within acceptable limits to preserve the integrity of the output               
              information.  The system includes many components whose mismatch,              
              e.g. amplifiers with their fixed parasitic elements, contribute to             
              the degradation of wide band response.  Broadband equalizers must              
              be properly inserted along the system to compensate for these                  
              inevitable mismatches that occur over the band so as to maintain               
              low levels of distortion.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research deals with three difficult and important problems in             
              broadband matching which are especially (though not exclusively)               
              applicable to distributed gain-bandwidth (GBW) theory of linear                
              passive and active 2-ports which arises in such applications as FET            
              amplifiers where loss and internal feedback are included.                      
              Heretofore no complete analytic solution of this problem has been              
              presented.  The second considers new broadband matching methods                
              which could give a practical approach to matching loads which are              
              badly mismatched and/or have widely fluctuating input impedances               
              as a function of frequency.  Microwave antennas, microwave to                  
              optical device coupling structures, and microwave FET amplifiers               
              including the parasitic elements due to packaging as well as those             
              of the intrinsic device are typical applications.  The third                   
              problem concerns gain-bandwidth performance and the design of                  
              coupling structures for multi-device distributed amplifiers using              
              realistic models for the active devices.
