Title       : FASEB Research Conference: Cellular and Molecular Genetics to be held at Copper
               Mountain, Colorado, from August 12-17, 1990.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9001224

Award Number: 9001224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Inder M. Verma   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn L. Calame  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant will partially, support a FASEB Summer Research                     
              Conference on Cellular and Molecular Genetics to be held at Copper             
              Mountain, Colorado from August 12-17, 1990.  The major goal of this            
              conference is to bring together an eminent group of cellular                   
              biologists, molecular biologists, neurobiologists, biochemists and             
              geneticists to discuss multidisciplinary approaches to topics which            
              are at the forefront of contemporary biology.  The Conference is               
              deliberately meant to encompass broader areas so that participants             
              in diverse fields, but with common scientific goals, have an                   
              opportunity to interact.  There are nine sessions spread over five             
              days.  There will be a session in the morning and evening and the              
              afternoons would be used either to discuss new technologies or for             
              poster presentations.  The topics deal with: DNA replication,                  
              developmental biology of lower and higher eukaryotes, systems which            
              allow understanding of cellular differentiation, regulation of                 
              transcription, oncogenesis, RNA processing, the cell cycle                     
              regulation, molecular neurobiology and human genetics.                         
              Additionally, there will be sessions dealing with techniques to                
              generate transgenic mice, homologous recombination and physical                
              manipulation of large genomes.  In each scheduled session, the                 
              chairperson has carefully selected three or four principal speakers            
              to introduce the general subject.  The applicants are to include               
              an abstract along with the application.  The number of participants            
              is not to exceed 150.  There is extensive opportunity for                      
              discussion which will facilitate communication to promote                      
              scientific cooperation and collaboration among the participants.***            
               //
