Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Behavior of Holomorphic and Harmonic Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9001712

Award Number: 9001712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick R. Ahern ahern@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The aim of this project is the analysis of classes of                     
              holomorphic functions of several complex variables.  The                       
              regularity of holomorphic functions defined in a domain becomes                
              less definite as the independent variable approaches the boundary              
              of the domain.  This boundary behavior is the main thrust of this              
              activity.                                                                      
                   Boundary properties of functions defined in a disc in one                 
              complex dimension are well understood.  A natural analogue in                  
              several dimensions is the ball.  Even in this case, information                
              is far from complete.  In the study of holomorphic Sobolev and                 
              Besov spaces, it can be shown that functions have unique limits                
              on approach to the boundary provided certain exceptional sets are              
              avoided.  Some progress has been made in characterizing                        
              exceptional sets in terms of their capacity.  Further effort will              
              be devoted to refining these results.  A related line of study                 
              will consider the complex tangential derivative of functions in                
              Lipschitz classes.  It appeared that when the Lipschitz constant               
              is equal to one-half, the tangential derivatives in the class are              
              p-th power integrable for all values of the parameter. This                    
              turned out to be false, leading to a reconsideration of how                    
              functions in this class behave near the boundary.  Work will be                
              done on the question.                                                          
                   A second line of investigation concerns the restriction of                
              holomorphic Sobolev spaces to complex tangential manifolds.                    
              There is ample evidence to suggest that the restricted classes                 
              are exactly the real Besov spaces.  Work will continue on the                  
              problem of determining when a function in such a Besov space can               
              be extended to a holomorphic function of the same type.
