Title       : Dissertation Research: Larval Brooding by the Freshwater Mussel Anodonta
               cataracta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9001345

Award Number: 9001345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald V. Dimock dimock@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The life cycle of freshwater unionid mussels is atypical                  
              among bivalves and involves both a free-living adult and a                     
              parasitic larva, the glochidium.  Following fertilization,                     
              developing embryos are incubated in the water tubes of the                     
              mother's gills where they may remain for several months before                 
              being released into the water column and becoming parasitic on                 
              fish.                                                                          
                   The principal objective of this study is to assess the                    
              morphological and physiological changes that occur within the                  
              gills of brooding female Anodonta cataracta, an abundant                       
              freshwater mussel in North Carolina.  During brooding, two of the              
              mussel's four gills become packed with nearly a million                        
              glochidia, causing the gills to swell to up to thirty times their              
              non-brooding size.  The major goals of the proposed research                   
              include quantifying the morphological changes that occur within                
              the marsupial gills, comparing the pumping and filtration                      
              dynamics of brooding and non-brooding mussels, determining the                 
              effect of brooding on oxygen uptake and oxygen extraction                      
              efficiency of mussels, and assessing the activity of the cilia                 
              responsible for irrigation both the marsupial and non-marsupial                
              gills.  The results will provide a more complete understanding of              
              the reproductive biology of A. cataracta, especially the effect                
              of glochidial brooding and release on the physiology and gill                  
              morphology of adult females.  This information also may have                   
              application for the management and conservation of other                       
              freshwater bivalves including threatened and endangered species.
