Title       : Synthesis and Metabolism of Chlorophylls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1992      
File        : a9001381

Award Number: 9001381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Smith kmsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr.                
              Kevin M. Smith of the Department of Chemistry at the University                
              of California-Davis.  Professor Smith is engaged in a                          
              broad-based and wide-ranging study of the synthesis,                           
              biosynthesis, chemistry, and spectroscopy of chlorophylls and                  
              bacteriochlorophylls.  Chlorophylls are the catalysts in the                   
              vital process of photosynthesis and are involved in light                      
              gathering (antenna systems) as well as in the process of charge                
              separation (in the reaction center).                                           
                                                                                             
              Current work focuses on the investigation of the chemical and                  
              biochemical basis for the methylation of bacteriochlorophyll-c                 
              and -d pigments which causes shifts in the cell absorption                     
              maxima, enabling the bacterium to adapt to conditions of low                   
              light.  Esterifying alcohols on bacteriochlorophylls-c and -d                  
              molecules will be correlated with age of culture and extent of                 
              alkylation.  Biosynthetic studies will also be undertaken;                     
              these involve biosynthesis of bacteriochlorophylls-c and -d,                   
              using isotopically enriched (carbon-13 and carbon-14)                          
              precursors to determine the branchpoint from chlorophyll-a                     
              biosynthesis and the latter stages in bacteriochlorophyll-a                    
              biosynthesis.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              A chemical synthesis of chlorophyll-a and its 4-vinyl analog,                  
              conversion of the former into the latter, and a biomimetic                     
              ring-cleavage of chlorophyll derivatives for chemical synthesis                
              of certain photochemically active active bilins (e.g.                          
              phytochrome, which regulates plant growth and development) will                
              be studied.  Finally, chiral chlorophyll derivatives will                      
              facilitate synthesis of chiral N-alkylporphyrin ferrochelatase                 
              inhibitors, and chemical and electrochemical cyclizations of                   
              tetrapyrroles to give porphyrins will be investigated.
