Title       : Dissertation Research: Influence of Feeding Style on Herbivore Impacts: A
               Comparison of Leaf and Sap Feeding Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1990     
File        : a9001108

Award Number: 9001108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Root   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gretchen A. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Although insect herbivores are a diverse group and attack plants               
              in a variety of ways, few studies have compared the impacts of                 
              different types of insect feeding on a host species.  This                     
              research will examine how an insect's feeding style affects its                
              impact by comparing three insects that feed on goldenrod                       
              (Solidago altissima): a leaf chewing beetle (Trirhabda sp.), a                 
              phloem feeding aphid (Uroleucon caligatum), and a xylem tapping                
              spittlebug (Philaenus spumarius).  Plants will be grown in pots                
              and insects will be placed on them at densities that span the                  
              range of actual insect densities observed in our long-term                     
              censuses of goldenrod insects.  Impacts on both reproductive and               
              vegetative growth will be investigated.  Effects on fitness will               
              be evaluated by measuring fecundity, mean seed weights, rhizome                
              weights, and nitrogen content of seeds and rhizomes.  Plant                    
              allocation to buds, leaves, stems, and roots will be determined,               
              as will leaf area and leaf nitrogen levels.  A second objective                
              is to see how herbivore impacts vary with the nutrient status of               
              the host plant.  Plants will be grown at two levels of soil                    
              fertility to see how impacts on plant fitness are effected.  It                
              is not currently possible to predict which types of insect                     
              feeding will be most damaging to plants, and this study will help              
              to fill that gap.
