Title       : Structure and Chemical Interactions at Model Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9001270

Award Number: 9001270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266200             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Allara dla3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Chemical Interactions and structural features of organic groups                
              in polymer interfaces will be studied in detail by a combination               
              of synthesis of thin-film model interface structures and                       
              application of several spectroscopic techniques.  The most                     
              significant interactions of interest are weak, chemically                      
              specific bonds, particularly Bronsted acid-base interactions                   
              involving functional groups such as carboxylic acid, amide,                    
              amine, hydroxyl, ester, and ketone.  Model organic/organic                     
              interfaces will be constructed that place polymer overlayers of                
              monolayer thicknesses in contact with a planar substrate                       
              functionalized with organized arrays of polar organic groups of                
              well-defined orientations.  Polymer overlayers will be formed by               
              equilibrium-like solution deposition.  Characterization of the                 
              molecular structures and chemical interactions will be monitored               
              primarily (but not exclusively) by infrared vibrational                        
              spectroscopy, optical spectroscopic ellipsometry, and quartz                   
              crystal microgravimmetry.  The data will be quantitatively                     
              analyzed for the number of interactions between groups at the                  
              interface, the orientations and conformations of the groups and                
              the polymer backbone units, the overall morphology of the film                 
              (density variations and topography) and the thermodynamics of the              
              adsorption process.  Conclusions will be drawn accordingly as to               
              correlations between the initial substrate surface, polymer chain              
              structure, and the final interfacial structures.  In the long                  
              term, such work should contribute to accurate prediction of                    
              interfacial behavior and properties of adsorbed polymer films,                 
              and should provide well-defined systems for tests theory.
