Title       : PRF/J: The Adaptive Significance of Kin Association Behavior in Anuran Tadpoles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1990     
File        : a9001828

Award Number: 9001828
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58800              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Pfennig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   Organisms as diverse as plants and primates respond                       
              differentially toward conspecifics according to their genetic                  
              relatedness.  Differential treatment of kin is critical to                     
              current theories of the evolution of altruism and mate choice.                 
              Yet, in surprisingly few systems have investigators identified                 
              the selective factors responsible for the evolutionary                         
              maintenance of kin-biased behavior.  For anuran tadpoles, the                  
              predominant view is that associating with relatives is kin-                    
              selected because these relatives thereby accrue benefits through               
              increased growth or predation avoidance.  Recent work, however,                
              suggests that kin associations may reflect selection to associate              
              with the natal site (philopatry), and perhaps not with kin per                 
              se.  A series of field and laboratory experiments will be                      
              proposed, aimed at elucidating the adaptive significance of                    
              aggregation behavior in tadpoles.  Specifically, this study                    
              proposes to determine whether 1) DNA fingerprinting reveals                    
              evidence of philopatry, 2) aggregation formation is advantageous,              
              and 3) aggregation formation is context-dependent.  The latter                 
              two issues will be addressed by conducting field experiments in                
              natural ponds.  This study will clarify the selective factors                  
              favoring kin association behavior in tadpoles and, by                          
              implication, in certain other gregarious organisms.  Examination               
              of context-dependent behavior provides opportunity to evaluate                 
              the role of assessment in evolutionary biology.
