Title       : Experimental and Modelling Studies of Laser-Direct Write Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1992    
File        : a9001872

Award Number: 9001872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331358             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klavs F. Jensen kfjensen@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The fabrication of integrated circuits involves the creation                   
              of patterned, multilayer, thin film structures composed of                     
              insulators, semiconductors, and conductors.  Typically, these                  
              structures are constructed by using photolithographic                          
              techniques in conjunction with additional processing steps,                    
              including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), etching, doping,                    
              etc.  Some of these steps (e.g., wet etching) lack sufficient                  
              resolution for high density devices, while others (e.g., high                  
              temperatures in CVD) subject the wafer to extreme conditions                   
              that may damage underlying structures.  Furthermore,                           
              patterning of thin films by lithography involves several                       
              complex processing steps (e.g. spin-on bake, expose, develop,                  
              etch, photo-resist strip) which increase the chance of                         
              defects.  This has led researchers in the semiconductor                        
              industry to investigate laser processing of microelectronic                    
              devices.  The repair of mask sets by depositing or etching a                   
              feature and customizing of electronic packages as other                        
              applications where laser processing is expected to have a                      
              considerable impact.  Research in laser processing has                         
              resulted in an array of novel micro-chemical processing                        
              techniques.  This PI's research program focuses on laser                       
              induced deposition.  The process of scanning a laser beam                      
              across a substrate, causing reactants in either the gas,                       
              liquid or solid phase to react and deposit on the substrate is                 
              commonly referred to as laser direct-writing.                                  
                                                                                             
              This research project is a combined experimental and modelling                 
              study of the fundamental mechanisms underlying nonlinear                       
              morphological effects in direct laser writing of metal and                     
              semiconductor lines from spun-on metalorganic layers as well                   
              as by CVD.  The experimental system consists of a microscope                   
              for focusing radiation from an argon laser onto a substrate.                   
              An x-y translation stage moves the substrate relative to the                   
              laser beam so that lines may be written.  The nonlinear                        
              behavior to be investigated includes multiplicity phenomena,                   
              periodic patterns, and volcano-shaped deposits.  These effects                 
              are observed over a wide range of operating conditions in a                    
              large number of applications including the deposition of gold                  
              from organogold films, silicon from silane, and yttrium-                       
              barium-copper-oxygen superconductors from spun-on metalorganic                 
              films.  The overall goals of this coordinated experimental and                 
              modelling research program are to understand the underlying                    
              fundamental processes and to develop predictive models that                    
              may be used to prevent or control the nonlinear behavior.                      
              This will be critical to the further development of laser                      
              direct-write systems that will have to face new applications                   
              and meet increasingly stringent specifications on feature size                 
              in order to satisfy the needs of future microelectronics and                   
              micromechanical processing.
