Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Dynamic Characteristics of Coastal Lagoons:
               Lagoa de Araruara, Rio de Janeiro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1990  
File        : a9001583

Award Number: 9001583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjorn Kjerfve bjorn@.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1610,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports cooperative research in physical                           
              oceanography to be conducted by Bjorn Kjerfve of the University                
              of South Carolina in collaboration with Bastiaan Knoppers of                   
              the Universidade Federal Fluminense in Niteroi, Brazil.  The                   
              work will consist of the measurement of the dynamic                            
              characteristics of the largest coastal lagoon along the                        
              Fluminense coastline.  It is vital to establish a base line                    
              for lagoon dynamics before planned intense development                         
              begins.  This lagoon is hypersaline, being choked off from                     
              the ocean (unlike estuaries where there is a mixing zone).                     
              Characteristics to be measured include salinity structure,                     
              sedimentation rates (runoff), wind effects, nutrient                           
              concentration, temperatures and evaporation rates and tidal                    
              dynamics.  These data will be compared to those taken in                       
              other fresh and brackish water lagoons in which previous                       
              oceanographic and ecological studies have been carried out.                    
                                                                                             
              There are coastal lagoons around the world, notably in New                     
              England and the Gulf coast of the U.S. Not all of them are in                  
              arid climates but climatic variability affects hydrological                    
              and ecological processes and the study of this hypersaline                     
              example will extend the range of such effects.  It will also                   
              add to the extensive biological, chemical, geological and                      
              geographical work in progress as well as investigations in                     
              health, sociology and economics studies underway on these                      
              lagoons.  Modelling and the use of this data will help                         
              develop predictive capability for linear and nonlinear                         
              processes in lagoon systems.  Kjerfve's experience in                          
              hydrology and ecology will complement those of the Brazilian                   
              multidisciplinary team and in particular the biogeochemical                    
              work of Knoppers. Students will participate in the work in                     
              Brazil and some will follow this field work with Ph.D.                         
              studies in the U.S.
