Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Manifolds and Meromorphic Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1991  
File        : a9001365

Award Number: 9001365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Shiffman shiffman@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research centering on                 
              topics in the theory of several complex variables.  The work                   
              involves studies of complex manifolds, representing the geometric              
              point of view, together with analytic investigations into value                
              distributions and continuity properties of complex functions.                  
                   One primary focus concerns what is known as the Hartogs                   
              phenomenon whereby a holomorphic function of several variables                 
              defined in a region surrounding a domain (such as in a complex                 
              annulus) continues as a holomorphic function to the inner region.              
              Work will be done in extending the idea in two directions.  The                
              first is to determine the extent to which a separate analyticity               
              implies joint, while the second is concerned with the Hartogs                  
              phenomenon as it relates to mapping into complex manifolds.                    
              Although many manifolds reflect this property, some do not.  The               
              outstanding problem remains one of giving conditions on the                    
              target manifolds so that the extension property holds for all                  
              mappings into the manifold.                                                    
                   Value distribution theory is concerned with the extent to                 
              which holomorphic functions defined in the space of several                    
              complex variables can omit or assume given values.  The                        
              measurement of such affinities involves generalizations of the                 
              classical Nevanlinna theory which was developed for functions of               
              a single variable during the first decades of this century.  For               
              nonconstant functions, their affinity for any value is almost                  
              always the same as for any other.  The exceptions represent the                
              deficiencies of the function - the measure of the set of                       
              deficiencies will be of primary concern during this                            
              investigation.
