Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: The Formation of Supported Bimetallic Clusters
               with Emphasis on the Effect of Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1990      
File        : a9001353

Award Number: 9001353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : July 15,  1990       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Gonzalez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will support Professor Richard D. Gonzalez of the                   
              University of Illinois at Chicago Circle in collaboration with                 
              Professor Ricardo Gomez of the Metropolitan University of Mexico               
              at Iztapalapa.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Studies recently completed suggest that metal-precursor-support                
              interactions are important in determining the resulting surface                
              composition of supported multimetallic catalysts.  In particular,              
              the presence of a mobile surface metal-precursor results in the                
              surface enrichment of that metal in the resulting bimetallic                   
              catalyst.  The investigators aim to identify the structure of                  
              these precursor-surface complexes using diffuse U.V. reflectance               
              spectroscopy.  The strength of the metal-support interactions                  
              will be measured through the use of quantitative differential                  
              scanning calorimetry and the elemental composition of the resulting            
              bimetallic particles will be obtained through the use of dispersive            
              x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS).  EDXS will also be used to study                    
              interparticle metal phase relationships.                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will be carried out simultaneously at the                
              University of Illinois at Chicago and the Metropolitan University              
              of Mexico at Iztapalapa.  The in-situ diffuse U.V. reflectance                 
              studies, the microcalorimetric DSC studies and the catalyst charac-            
              terization studies, including the surface composition measurements,            
              will be carried out at the University of Illinois.  The catalytic              
              probe reactions and major portion of the EDXS studies will be                  
              performed in Mexico.
