Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Galois Covers and Arithmetic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9001669

Award Number: 9001669
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gary Cornell                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin Wunderlich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Security Agency
	      9800 Savage Road
	      Fort George G. Meade, MD  207556643    /   -

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the research in algebraic geometry and                
              number theory of Professor David Harbater of the University of                 
              Pennsylvania. Dr. Harbater has proposed to continue his study of               
              Galois covers of arithmetic varieties and of arithmetic                        
              intersection theory. He will work to construct Galois covers over              
              the rational line having special type of Galois group and                      
              ramification, and in his intersection-theoretic work, he plans to              
              use a horizontal pairing that he has recently defined in order to              
              study arithmetic surfaces and to enlarge the Arakelov divisor                  
              group and study the fine structure at infinity.                                
                   This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic                     
              geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic                  
              geometry and number theory. In its original formulation,                       
              algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the                
              plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number                    
              theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as                    
              divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects,               
              seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from                
              the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual                 
              influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic                       
              algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern                      
              mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own              
              borders.
