Title       : Physics of Two-Dimensional Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9986688

Award Number: 9986688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir J. Goldman goldman@insti.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project is concerned with quantum mechanical properties of
              condensed matter as exhibited by two-dimensional electron gas systems in
              compound semiconductor materials. Two- and the lower-dimensional electron
              systems manifest some of the most fundamental many-body quantum physics of
              strongly correlated electrons, such as the integer and fractional quantum Hall
              effects and the associated one-dimensional edge states, Wigner crystallization,
              and the single particle tunneling phenomena in quantum dots and antidots. The
              properties of the collective ground states of  two-dimensional electrons and
              the size-quantized systems of few electrons, their excitations, chiral edge
              state dynamics, and the quantum phase transitions will be studied
              experimentally at very low temperatures and very high magnetic fields via the
              techniques of magnetotransport, thermal activation, nonlinear transport,
              tunneling, resonant and single particle tunneling. The results will be of great
              interest in the formulation and confirmation of advanced many-body quantum
              theory. The experimental techniques developed in the study of the semiconductor
              heterostructure samples have an impact on technology via realization of new
              electronic devices whose fabrication and operation is based on similar
              materials and techniques. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature
              and involves training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students who
              will be excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government and
              education.
%%%
This research project is concerned with the quantum mechanical
              properties of condensed matter probed via the simple and well characterized
              system of two-dimensional (2D) electrons.  One- and zero-D samples are made
              using modern semiconductor fabrication techniques.  Two- and the lower-D
              electron systems exhibit behavior such as the integer and fractional quantum
              Hall effects and the associated 1D edge states, and the single particle quantum
              tunneling in 0D quantum dots and antidots. The properties of these electron
              systems and their dynamics will be studied experimentally at very low
              temperatures and very high magnetic fields. The experimental techniques
              developed in the study of the semiconductor samples have an impact on
              technology via realization of new electronic devices whose fabrication and
              operation is based on similar materials and techniques. This research project
              is interdisciplinary in nature and involves training of undergraduate, graduate
              and postdoctoral students who will be excellently trained to enter positions in
              industry, government and education.


