Title       : Inductive Equilibrium Selection in Games with Separatrix Crossing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9986379

Award Number: 9986379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale O. Stahl stahl@eco.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Due to the poor empirical success of deductive equilibrium selection theories in
              predicting the outcomes of games, focus has shifted to equilibrium selection
              theories that rely on dynamics--also known as inductive selection theories. 
              Inductive selection theories rely mainly on adaptive dynamics-dynamics based on
              the principle that players learn and adapt, so that "successful" strategies
              increase in frequency whereas "unsuccessful" strategies decrease in frequency. 
              Different theories of dynamics differ in the measure of "success," the level of
              sophistication players are assumed to possess, the modeling of errors in
              choice, attention by players to the strategy space, the role that aspirations
              play, and the extent of imitation versus experimentation by players.  In this
              research, a representative range of learning theories will be investigated
              including a simple logit dynamic model, a theory of aspiration and imitation, a
              model of reinforcement learning, a model of experience-weighted attraction
              learning, and a model of rule-learning.

It is rare to find, in the recent
              stream of work on probabilistic choice learning dynamics, models that make
              radically different predictions (with parameter estimates from similar games). 
              Hence, different learning models have been compared based on how well they fit
              the path of play.  The measures of fit are based on either mean square error or
              likelihood, and suffer from a variety of shortcomings.  Since the ultimate
              measure of success is how well different models predict final outcomes, it is
              necessary to find a simple game where the success in prediction of final
              outcomes radically differs among different models.  This is most likely to
              occur when a best--response separatrix is crossed.  Furthermore, issues such as
              aspiration and experimentation can better be addressed in such settings.

We
              will focus on the comparisons of inductive selection theories in games with
              multiple Nash equilibria that exhibit separatrix crossings, and we will
              empirically test whether extended dynamic theories that incorporate
              characterization of initial conditions can serve as a reliable theory of
              equilibrium selection.  The performance of the leading learning theories will
              be compared both in-sample and out-of-sample.  The major products will be (i)
              data from a series of experiments conducted to test the composite theory of
              initial conditions and leaning dynamics, and (ii) publications of those test
              results revealing which theory is the best robust predictor of behavior (under
              traditional criteria such as likelihood and MSE as well as under the less
              common yet more informative rate of success in prediction of final outcome) and
              how substantial the differences are.

This proposal will support one graduate
              student, providing him with valuable training in the frontiers of game theory,
              advanced statistical methods and experimental methods.  In addition,
              undergraduate students frequently become involved due to exposure to
              experiments and have written Honors papers inspired by their experiences.  Game
              theoretic approaches have proved valuable in the analysis of a wide range of
              real world situations from business to politics to defense.  Consequently, a
              major improvement in the predictive power of game theoretic models will have
              wide ranging impacts on society.

