Title       : Molecular Genetic Characterization of Pathways Involved in Establishing Abaxial
               Cell Fate in Arabidopsis Carpels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9986054

Award Number: 9986054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bowman jlbowman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bowman
9986054

While significant progress has been made in the understanding
              of the molecular mechanisms by which organ identity is specified in developing
              flowers, much less is known about the mechanisms of cell fate specification
              within individual organs. A molecular genetic approach was chosen to elucidate
              how cell fate is specified in the carpel, initially focusing on the role of
              CRABS CLAW. It has recently been shown that CRABS CLAW is required for the
              specification of abaxial cell fate in the carpels. This conclusion was based on
              genetic analyses of both loss- and gain-of-function alleles of CRABS CLAW as
              well as comparisons with closely related gene family members.

The
              development of adaxial tissues in abaxial positions in the carpel requires
              two
conditions: first, the loss of abaxial cell fate, and second, the loss of
              suppression of genes promoting meristematic growth. The second condition must
              be met in order to allow the development of placental meristems on the abaxial
              surfaces of the carpel. This proposal is focused on two genes, CRABS CLAW and
              KANADI, that appear to act independently in a partially redundant manner to
              promote the specification of abaxial cell fate in the medial regions of the
              carpel. While single mutants in either gene do not display a loss of polar
              differentiation in the carpel, in crabs claw kanadi double mutants mirror image
              duplications of adaxial tissues develop in abaxial positions of the carpel.

              
The overall aims of this proposal are to identify and characterize genes
              and
phytohormones that play a role in either specification of abaxial cell
              fate or suppression and/or activation of meristematic potential

