Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9986892

Award Number: 9986892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Kotowski koto@oakton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Garcia  (Principal Investigator former)
              R. Kipp Hassell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakton Community College
	      1600 East Golf Road
	      Des Plaines, IL  600161234    312/635-1600

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This institution's Divisions of Student Affairs, Mathematics and Technologies,
              and Student Financial Assistance have joined together to enhance educational
              opportunities for low-income, academically talented students. College faculty
              and Alumni Relations Office will work with local high school counselors to
              identify potential candidates who are incoming students and full-time students
              attending computer science, computer technology, engineering, engineering
              technology or mathematics courses (CSEMS). Candidates will be drawn from among
              the incoming freshman, currently enrolled students, and graduates from
              certificate programs. Outreach, recruitment, and selection activities will be
              timed so that students receive announcements of their financial award prior to
              the start of the semester. The Office of Student Financial Assistance with work
              with the Office of Enrollment Management to develop a candidate pool of
              potential scholarship recipients. A team composed of the Dean of Mathematics
              and Technologies (PI), the Dean of Students (co-PI) and three faculty chairs
              from CSEMS disciplines will form the Selection Committee and will interview the
              candidates from the recommended list. Final selection will be based on a
              consensus of the 30 candidates who can receive maximum benefit from an NSF
              scholarship award. The Selection Committee will consider such factors as
              commitment to a career in the CSEMS field, academic ability, barriers affecting
              educational progress, and the potential to enhance diversity (to the extent
              permitted by law) within the CSEMS field.

Institutional cooperation will
              help to promote student satisfaction and foster academic excellence and
              retention. Student development faculty will work closely with students to help
              with educational and career planning, and other issues affecting personal and
              academic goals. In addition to making full use of the College's programs,
              services and personnel, students will benefit from participation in a "Student
              Success Club," on-campus work experience as tutors of other CSEMS students,
              transfer assistance, and the close ties the College has with local business and
              industry. CSEMS faculty will help students learn to apply classroom knowledge
              in the workplace setting through internship opportunities..

This project,
              entitled NSF Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics and Related
              Technologies Scholarship Program, will enhance institutional efforts to make
              higher education accessible to all. Because nearly half of the nation's college
              students are enrolled in community colleges, and many attend part-time so that
              they can work to pay for their education, the financial assistance available
              through this project can have a significant effect on student retention,
              graduation and transfer rates.


