Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Communication and Candidate
               Strategy in U.S. Senate Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9986453

Award Number: 9986453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. MacKuen MacKuen@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research project involves a content analysis of U.S.
              senate campaigns from a sample of states for the period 1992-1998.  The data
              obtained are used to investigate the influence of the political context on
              candidate's communication and campaign strategy.  A time series model is used
              to capture the dynamic nature of campaigns that results from the interaction
              between opponents and from candidates'sequential allocation of limited campaign
              resources.

Thirteen states from each election year during the period are
              included in the study and campaign content measures are derived from a content
              analysis of local newspaper coverage of campaigns.  All stories that cover the
              campaign between September 1st and election day are coded.  Local newspaper
              coverage of the campaigns is obtained from the full-text sources available on
              Lexis/Nexis.

The investigation provides a systematic study of information
              present in messages that candidates choose to communicate with voters.  This
              research promises to explicate the factors that influence the content of
              campaign communication.  The model outlined in the research affords the
              opportunity to develop a typology of campaigns that suggests when the normative
              expectation of issue-oriented campaigning will be fulfilled, and also
              identifies the conditions that produce an emphasis on partisan cues, character
              traits, and matters of job performance.


