Title       : Collaborative Research: Racial and Performance Models of African-American
               Mayoral Approval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9986162

Award Number: 9986162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80639              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huey L. Perry hperrysubr@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern University
	      P O Box 9614
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708139614    504/771-4500

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This investigate compares a Performance Model to a Racial Model in explaining
              approval of black mayors.  The Performance Model emphasizes citizen evaluations
              of conditions in the city and the mayor's perceived effectiveness in dealing
              with urban problems.  The investigators have a wealth of research confirming
              that evaluations of conditions in the nation influence presidential popularity
              and a fair amount drawing the same conclusion for states and governors.  Is
              this model generalizable to the next level of executive offices in the U.S.? 
              The Racial Model, on the other hand, stipulates that approval of a black mayor
              is based primarily on racial identification or racism.  Most of the research on
              black mayors emphasizes this racial model and focuses on racial polarization in
              their elections

The theoretical implication of this research is the
              applicability of the performance model of approval to black public officials. 
              Several large majority minority cities have had black mayors for more than two
              decades, making a minority executive somewhat institutionalized in these
              settings.  If these mayors are still evaluated in primarily racial terms, as
              opposed to performance, it is a pessimistic conclusion for urban race
              relations, regionalism and urban revival, as well as a factor which complicates
              governance for black mayors.  On the other hand, if performance has become the
              yardstick for evaluating black mayors, it indicates that urban residents are
              becoming less sensitive to race in evaluating minority officials.  Furthermore,
              there may be differences in the criteria that black and white citizens use to
              evaluate a black mayor; that is, the model of approval may differ from blacks
              to whites, and these differences can create further difficulties in
              governing.

These models are tested  using large scale sample surveys in six
              cities which are divided into multigenerational black mayor cities and first
              generation black mayor cities.  Multi-generation black mayor cities are cities
              which have had at least two African Americans to serve as mayor.  The cities
              included in this category are Atlanta, New Orleans, and Detroit.  First
              generation black mayor cities are cities in which an African American is
              serving as the first black mayor of the city.  The cities included in this
              category are Denver, Jackson, Mississippi, and San Francisco.  The use of two
              categories of cities based on length of mayoral service provides scientific
              variation in the black mayoral leadership variable.

These data will be of
              substantial value to other scholars interested in this topic.


