Title       : Expression, Function and Plasticity of NMDA Receptor Subunits on Magnocellular
               Neuroendocrine Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9986161

Award Number: 9986161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margarita C. Curras-Collazo margarita.curras@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One major goal of this proposal is to further characterize the subunits that
              makeup the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor complex on neuroendocrine cells
              in the brain. These neurons control body water (osmoregulation) by producing
              hormones such as vasopressin and oxytocin. These neuroendocrine cells are
              located in the supraoptic (SON) and paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the
              hypothalamus. The composition of NMDAR2 subunits, in particular, is thought to
              underlie differences in the function of NMDA receptors. The proposed studies
              will examine the molecular expression of NMDAR2 subunits in neuroendocrine
              cells using state-of-the-art molecular techniques as well as pharmacological
              and antisense technology. In addition, the experiments have been designed to
              examine the functional contribution of NMDAR2 subunits to NMDA receptors on
              neuroendocrine cells. An examination of the structure of NMDA receptors in the
              SON and PVN, which may display all five of the NMDA receptor subunits, will
              provide information on one of the most potentially unique NMDA receptor
              subtypes in the brain. 
One longterm objective of this research is to yield an
              understanding of the role of NMDA receptor subunits in osmoregulation. To begin
              to address this issue we will examine the effect of osmotic activation of SON
              and PVN neuroendocrine cells on their expression of selected NMDA receptor
              subunits. Our previous research findings indicate that these cells display
              dramatic changes in NMDAR1 and NMDAR2B subunit levels during dehydration. The
              proposed experiments will investigate the cellular components showing subunit
              changes, regional specificity and reversibility upon rehydration. Finally, we
              will explore the possibility that NMDAR2B-containing receptors on
              neuroendocrine cells can be biochemically altered and that physiological
              signals such as dehydration can provide the signal for regulation. 
	Basic
              principles revealed by the proposed studies will provide essential information
              about the properties of NMDA receptor subtypes in the neuroendocrine nuclei of
              the brain.  Effects of osmotic signals on the expression of NMDA receptor
              subunits may provide clues about the role of NMDA receptors in fluid
              homeostasis and other neuroendocrine functions.  In addition, our findings will
              contribute new insights into regulatory mechanisms important in central nervous
              system function. 
 
