Title       : Interactions of an Entomopoxvirus, its Parasitic Wasp Symbiont and their Insect
               Host: Viral Morphogenesis and Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9986076

Award Number: 9986076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline O. Lawrence pol@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The Caribbean fruit fly Anastrepha suspensa, like its Mediterranean fruit
              fly (Ceratitis capitata) relative, is an agricultural pest.  The parasitic
              wasp, Diachasmimorpha longicaudata (Dl) is used worldwide as a biological
              control agent against these fruit flies.  Dr. Lawrence discovered that female
              wasps inject an entomopoxvirus (EPV) into fruit fly larval hosts with their
              eggs, the combination of which causes host mortality.  Since EPVs are utilized
              as microbial control agents against insect pests, DlEPV itself is a likely
              anti-fruit fly agent.  However, it has not been characterized or is its
              relationship to other EPVs understood.  The objectives of this research are to:
              (1A). sequence the gene of four putative proteins (DNA ligase and polymerase,
              RNA polymerase and refampicin resistant proteins which are important in virus
              replication and development) found in the DlEPV genome and compare them with
              those of known poxviruses (PVs) and EPVs; (1B). determine whether genes of
              known PVs and EPVs which encode proteins essential for viral infection and
              maturation have homologs in the DlEPV genome, (2A). determine whether certain
              DlEPV genes are expressed only within the wasp and others only in the fruit
              fly; and (2B). sequence selected genes that are differentially expressed in
              host versus wasp.  The results will provide fundamental molecular data on the
              genome components of this unusual EPV, the first reported from a parasitic
              wasp, and establish its relationship to other EPVs.  The presence of genes
              governing infectivity and those differentially expressed in host versus wasp
              would provide insights into the virus' ability to be non-pathogenic to wasps
              but infective and pathogenic to fruit files.  The data will also lay the
              groundwork for the possible use of DlEPV as a vector to introduce lethal genes
              into fruit fly genomes

