Title       : Plasticity of Neural Integrator Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9986022

Award Number: 9986022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370577             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Tank   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy Major  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H.Sebastian Seung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lucent Tech Bell Lab
	      Crawfords Corner Road
	      Holmdel, NJ  07733    /   -

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary: Plasticity of Neural Integrator Dynamics

 The oculomotor
              neural integrator converts brief input signals for rapid eye movements into
              sustained patterns of neural activity that maintain tension in eye muscles to
              hold the eye at a fixed angular position. The leading candidate mechanism for
              the production of this sustained activity is re-excitation of neurons through
              recurrent feedback loops, a mechanism that requires precise tuning of the
              amount of positive feedback for proper operation.  Normally, visual signals
              produce the appropriate amount of tuning by changing the properties of the
              sustained activity in the neural integrator. Experimentally, the plasticity
              will be artificially controlled  by a training paradigm consisting of a visual
              pattern rotating with an angular velocity dynamically controlled in real time
              by eye position.  Optimal training protocols will be established and changes in
              the properties of neurons in the neural integrator will be quantitatively
              measured. These data will be used to incorporate learning rules into
              theoretical recurrent neural network models of the neural integrator.  The
              conversion of a transient input into a sustained neural output is a form of
              short term memory that is widely observed in the nervous system. Thus better
              understanding of the role tuning mechanisms contribute to neural integrator
              function should have broader significance in neurobiology. 


