Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986966

Award Number: 9986966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148500             (Estimated)
Investigator: June White whitejune@spcollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Skala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha R. Adkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley E. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore L. Maguder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Petersburg College
	      P O BOX 13489
	      Saint Petersburg, FL  337333489    813/546-0021

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Build Information Technology Resources project is achieveing five main
              objectives:
1. Expand and improve leaning opportunities for students enrolled
              in CSEM.
2.  Increase retention of CSEM students to associate degree
              achievement. 
3. Improve placement of CSEM students in baccalaureate transfer
              education programs and in related employment. 
4. Expand partnerships between
              College of DuPage and the employment sector to include mentoring. 
5.
              Implement recruitment strategies for groups underrepresented in CSEM.
              

Through the CSEM project, students areain information about CSEM careers;
              will receive mentoring and other support services to succeed in studying math,
              computer science and engineering; and will receive financial aid. All
              scholarship students will benefit from mentoring by faculty and representatives
              of business and industry, peer tutoring, academic and career counseling, and
              support services such as childcare for children while parents attend school.
              Anticipated outcomes to be accomplished are: (1) Increased self-confidence and
              motivation to pursue a CSEM education and career, (2) Improved performance in
              academic coursework and related employment opportunities; (3) Increased use of
              support services. Retention in the program; (4) Increased retention rate for
              CSEM scholarship students; (5) Increased transfer and employment placement
              rates; (6) Institutional capacity to develop a pool of professional mentors for
              CSEM students; (7) Increased enrollment of underrepresented groups in
              CSEM.

The target audience is (1) high achieving high school students who
              begin in calculus; (2) marginal high school students who demonstrate an
              exceptional interest in the science or engineering fields; (3) adult learners
              who are already enrolled in programs at the college; and (4) returning adult
              students who have been away from mathematics study for several years. Students
              will be selected from multiple sources of referral both internally within the
              College, and externally through local high schools and organizations. A faculty
              and staff panel will interview potential candidates for the program. Students
              who require remediation will have a special program established to accelerate
              their learning; however, once they enter the program, all students will be
              expected to maintain high academic standards. The College expects to enroll
              forty students in the CESMS program. Scholarship recipients will be expected to
              provide peer tutoring to other students entering the program. 

