Title       : Symposium J: Advanced Materials and Techniques for Nanolithography, Boston MA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9986520

Award Number: 9986520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Pachavis pachavis@mrs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Gonsalves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Res Society
	      506 Keystone Drive
	      Warrendale, PA  150867573    412/779-3003

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A symposium will be held in December, 1999 on Advanced Materials and Techniques
              for Nanolithography at the Fall MRS meeting in Boston. The symposium focuses on
              the material science aspect of lithographic processes including the development
              of advanced resists and more generally of smart materials. Lithography
              optimization potential through greater materials science understanding is
              comparatively very high and should help in breaking the sub-100 nm critical
              dimension in microelectronics. This crossdisciplinary symposium is aimed at
              bringing together experts working in all areas of nanolithography as well as
              material science researchers expert in new materials design.
The symposium
              seeks to attract participants from industry, academia, and government
              laboratories, to help these communities learn from each other.  It provides a
              stimulating environment for students planning a career in electronic materials,
              a field of research that is exciting, and is important to the national economy.
              Support from NSF will be used to partially compensate young scientists (junior
              faculty, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) for travel and
              accommodation expenses. The symposium is expected to provide an effective forum
              for discussion of critical scientific issues in advanced nanolithography. 
              Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future directions, it is
              expected that new ties will be established between universities, research
              institutions, and industry.  
%%%
Nanolithography and electronic/photonic
              materials have far reaching economic potential since applications range broadly
              across computing, communications, and information processing. An evaluation of
              the progress and status of this field along with current assessments of the
              most important developments will be of great value to the understanding and
              enhanced utilization of advanced materials in applications beneficial to
              society. ***
 


