Title       : Collaborative Research: The Clustering of U.S. Business Enterprises in the 1990s
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a9986561

Award Number: 9986561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69869              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart H. Sweeney sweeney@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will utilize confidential enterprise-level data for the contiguous
              U.S. and point process modeling techniques to document basic trends in
              clustering of U.S. businesses between 1989 and 1999 (by sector, degree of
              technology intensity, size, etc.).  The project will investigate whether
              enterprises cluster to take advantage of key externalities postulated in the
              scientific and policy literatures.  In addition to a suite of descriptive
              spatial analysis techniques, the study uses two complementary methodologies,
              D-functions and spatial duration models, that employ case-control designs to
              isolate spillover effects from other factors influencing clustering.  The study
              will explore whether clustering related to spillovers, at least in some
              industries or groups of industries, appears to be strengthening or weakening
              during the 1990s.

A growing number of federal, state, and local economic
              development policy initiatives are premised on, or attempt to leverage,
              specific advantages enterprises gain from locating in close spatial proximity. 
              Such policy initiatives include industry clusters, technology transfer, and
              business network programs.  At the same time, other public policies and
              programs anticipate that, in the information age, telecommunications
              technologies make the geographic concentration of business establishments less
              necessary.  The scientific and theoretical literature is undecided on whether
              geographic concentration is a less important strategic consideration for
              businesses today than in earlier industrial eras.  This project will inform
              scientific and policy debates by providing important baseline empirical
              information about clustering in different U.S. sectors during the 1990s.

