Title       : Flow-Induced Alignment of Dispersed Particles: Closure Model for Particle-Fluid
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2000     
File        : a9986878

Award Number: 9986878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Petty petty@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andre Benard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The objective of this project is to develop a closure model for the
              orientation of particles in a fluid.  Model predictions of low-order
              statistical properties, characteristic of the microstructure of suspensions,
              are often based on a moment equation for the particle orientation dyadic
              (second-order moment).  The solution to this equation requires a closure model
              for the particle orientation tetradic (fourth-order moment) associated with
              particle/fluid interactions.  This theoretical work will address a new closure
              theory for the orientation tetradic that retains the six-fold symmetry and the
              six-fold projection properties of the exact orientation tetradic. This
              fundamental research will focus on finding closure approximations of higher
              order tensors in terms of lower order tensors.  The new representation for
              particle/fluid interactions will be validated for a class of simple flows
              (shear and extensional) by comparing second-order moment predictions with the
              exact behavior of the second-order moment derived from the particle orientation
              distribution function governed by a convective-diffusive type equation.  There
              has been renewed interest in this field for property determination of materials
              that exhibit a microstructure.  Standard industrial flow simulators now
              incorporate tensor descriptions of particle orientations, and this research may
              be useful in making those simulations more accurate and efficient. 

