Title       : Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9986658

Award Number: 9986658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hoff hoff@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986658
Hoff

This is a proposal to study various questions relating to the
              existence, 
stability, regularity, and large-time behavior of solutions of
              certain partial 
differential equations arising in the theory of viscous,
              compressible fluid 
flow. Previous work on the existence of discontinuous
              solutions of the 
Navier-Stokes equations in three space dimensions will be
              extended to 
finite regions, requiring new insight into the production of
              compressible 
vorticity at boundaries. A rigorous analysis of the propagation
              of 
singularities and the regularity of discontinuity surfaces in solutions of
              
these equations will be given. A continuous-dependence theory will be
              
developed, sufficient to provide a framework in which numerical 
procedures
              for approximating solutions can be studied. The dimension of 
the attractor
              for the Navier-Stokes equations in one space dimension will 
be estimated in
              terms of the size of the applied force and scale-invariants 
of the system.
              Finally, previous work on the multidimensional stability of 
large-amplitude
              viscous shocks for scalar conservation laws will be 
extended to the more
              applicable case of systems.

The proposer will study various mathematical
              questions concerning 
important models of compressible fluids and materials. 
              These models 
arise in a broad range of applications, including supersonic
              flight, dynamic 
meteorology, semiconductor theory, and the design and use of
              viscoelastic 
materials.  While the main goal in constructing these models is
              to achieve 
a predictive capability, they are far too complicated to be
              "solved" in any 
explicit sense. On the other hand, adequate approximate
              solutions can 
frequently be generated by computer methods.  The intelligent
              design of 
such methods depends crucially, however, on a rigorous
              understanding of 
why solutions do exist, in what sense, and in what ways they
              are sensitive 
to noise in the data. The primary goal of this project is
              therefore to provide 
such a rigorous mathematical analysis for these
              models.

