Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986968

Award Number: 9986968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85126              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacie S. Nunes nuness@matrix.newpaltz.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Halpern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY New Paltz
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      New Paltz, NY  12561    845/257-3282

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this program is to decrease the time to degree and improve the
              performance of financially disadvantaged computer science students by providing
              scholarships that reduce their need to work while in school. Computer science
              majors who qualify for Federal Pell Grants, have demonstrated the ability to
              succeed academically and have progressed sufficiently through the degree
              requirements to be able to complete all requirements within the two year award
              period will be eligible to receive $1,250 scholarship each semester during that
              period. Eligible students will submit applications for review by an Advisory
              Council. The Council will select students to receive awards, review eligibility
              each semester and oversee program activities in support of the goal. Students
              will have access to counseling and enrichment through the program as well as
              assistance in obtaining academic support through well established avenues as
              needed. They will also receive encouragement and assistance in obtaining
              internship and research positions during the award period to help maintain a
              focus on career. The computer science program currently has approximately 100
              full time majors and 26 students will receive scholarship support throughout
              the period of the award. The proportion of under-represented minority students
              is significantly higher in the cohort currently eligible for these grants (50%)
              than in the program as a whole (26%). By encouraging and supporting these
              students to graduation this program will contribute to national and regional
              efforts to increase the number of computer science graduates generally and to
              increase the number of underrepresented minority students receiving degrees in
              this field.
