Title       : 2000 Protons and Membrane Reactions Conference; February 20 - 25, 2000, Ventura,
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9986187

Award Number: 9986187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Fillingame   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Gordon Research Conference on "Protons and Membrane Reactions" is held every
              3 years in February.  The conference was initiated with an emphasis on
              chemiosmotic theory and competing theories of proton transport across
              membranes.  It has evolved to not only emphasize proton transport in a variety
              of biological systems, but also the transport of other ions and issues of ion
              specificity.  It is a unique conference in the general area of bioenergetics,
              biomembranes and transport with emphasis at the interface between the physical
              chemistry of ion (proton) transport and the biochemistry of membrane transport
              proteins.  The exchange of ideas has helped to make the physical chemists more
              biological and vice versa.   In 2000 the meeting will integrate considerations
              of: the principles of membrane protein structure and protein-lipid
              interactions; the solved structures of channel proteins and new methods for
              kinetically tracing channels within proteins; the physical chemistry and theory
              of proton movement within proteins; the mechanisms of proton and sodium
              movement through the rotary membrane motor of ATP synthase; mechanistic
              comparisons of the rotary motors in ATP synthase and bacterial flagella; the
              mechanism of proton pumping in bacteriorhodopsin and related rhodopsins in the
              context of high resolution X-ray structures; the chemistry and physics of
              electron-coupled proton movement in reaction centers and bc1 complex; and
              pathways of proton, sodium, water and substrate movement in secondary carriers.
               The program is broad to promote cross-fertilization. The meeting has
              historically attracted scientists from the US and abroad, and presents a unique
              opportunity for young investigators to meet and exchange ideas with these
              senior foreign and US scientists and has help reinforce the need for
              integration of physiochemical and biological approaches to research.  Funds
              will help support junior independent investigators, postdoctoral and graduate
              students to attend.


