Title       : Structural Investigation of Molecularly Engineering Polymers Prepared by
               Enzymatic Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2000   
File        : a9986644

Award Number: 9986644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok L. Cholli Ashok_Cholli@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sukant K. Tripathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The key objective of the proposed research is to understand the basic mechanisms
              of the oxidative enzymatic polymerization of electroactive polymers using
              multi-nuclei solution and solid state NMR spectroscopy.  This approach involves
              a simple, one-pot, environmentally compatible reaction that leads to the
              synthesis of a new class of water soluble, electrically and photonically active
              polymers.  This nobel biocatalytic approach provides, obviates the experimental
              difficulties previously encountered with traditional chemical reactions and now
              affords exciting new opportunities to understand these fundamental oxidative
              mechanisms.  NMR spectroscopy will be used extensively in this program both as
              a probe to understand these oxidative coupling mechanisms and as a tool to
              optimize the reactions such that the electrical and optical properties of the
              resulting polymers may be enhanced.  The main focus of this effort will involve
              two sub areas of investigation using both multi-nuclei solution and solid-state
              NMR techniques:  (a) Oxidative coupling mechanisms for phenols and substituted
              phenols, and (b)  Reaction mechanisms of enzymatic polymerization for
              polyaniline and the role of polyanionic or polycationic templates on enzymatic
              polymerization.  This study will significantly advance the basic understanding
              of the mechanisms and nature of enzymatic oxidative coupling and as a result
              allow for the controlled optimization of the reactions.  It is expected that
              this new insight will led to the ability to molecularly engineer a wide variety
              of novel electroactive polymers that should find wide commercial
              application.

This biocatalytic approach to polymer synthesis is
              environmentally friendly and offers an effective alternative approach to the
              synthesis of electroactive polymers.  The processing of these
              enzymatically-synthesized polymers can also be carried out in an
              environmentally benign manner given their water solubility.  Advancement of
              research in this area thus will help to reduce the use of hazardous chemicals
              both during the synthetic steps and processing.  A deeper understanding of the
              molecular basis of the enzymatic synthesis may lead to potential technological
              innovations beneficial to the society.

