Title       : RUI: Ecophysiology of gelatinous zooplankton in hypoxic estuaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9986680

Award Number: 9986680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik V. Thuesen thuesene@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Estuaries are typically sites of natural hypoxia in summer for several reasons:
              lower freshwater inflows decrease turnover times, stratification increases, and
              increased surface primary production sinks to the bottom where it is
              remineralized thereby using up oxygen. Increased human population growth around
              the Puget Sound has increased the degree of hypoxia in the near-bottom depths
              of the estuary through increased nutrient influx and resulting eutrophication.
              Researchers in Chesapeake Bay have found that gelatinous zooplankton are able
              to survive in hypoxic bottom waters while their zooplankton prey (copepods and
              fish larvae) cannot tolerate such low levels of oxygen. This means that prey
              are concentrated in shallower zones while gelatinous predators can take
              advantage of the benefits of vertical migration. Therefore, increased hypoxia
              in estuaries due to human disturbances appears to alter pelagic food web
              structure by increasing the importance of gelatinous predators.

This project
              will investigate the mechanisms that allow gelatinous zooplankton to survive at
              low oxygen levels.  Previous research on the metabolic physiology of medusae,
              ctenophores, chaetognaths and other pelagic worms in midwater oxygen minimum
              layers has led the Investigator to propose several mechanisms whereby simple
              animals that do not have oxygen binding proteins or well developed circulatory
              systems may survive in low oxygen environments. Gelatinous zooplankters
              transferred from high-oxygen water to water depleted in oxygen leak oxygen into
              a closed chamber (Thuesen & Childress, unpublished; Thuesen & Lee,
              unpublished), and this project will describe and quantify the oxygen storage
              capabilities of mesoglea in the context of providing oxygen to gelatinous
              zooplankters during forays into hypoxic estuarine waters. This project will
              also investigate potential glycolytic adaptations in estuarine gelatinous
              zooplankton, including ctenophores, hydromedusae and scyphomedusae. The goals
              of this research are to (1) determine the oxygen regulatory abilities of
              gelatinous zooplankton; (2) measure the rate of oxygen release from mesoglea as
              a function of oxygen concentration in the surrounding water and determine if
              oxygen release is regulated by the organism; (3) determine the ratios of
              "oxygen storage potential" to metabolically active tissue through biochemical
              measurements and develop indices of hypoxia tolerance in gelatinous zooplankton
              to predict the abilities that different species may have for hypoxia survival;
              and (4) determine the role that anaerobic metabolism may have in the hypoxia
              tolerance of gelatinous zooplankton.

The studies proposed here will
              complement studies on gelatinous zooplankton in hypoxic regions of the
              Chesapeake Bay through collaborations with scientists at the University of
              Maryland and the Estuarine Research Center of the Academy of Natural Sciences
              that will allow studies with specimens collected from hypoxic zones of the
              Chesapeake Bay. The proposed research will further our knowledge on the impact
              of hypoxia on Puget Sound food webs through collaborations with the Washington
              State Department of Ecology Marine Water Quality Monitoring Team. Students at
              The Evergreen State College will benefit through participation in this research
              through proposed RUI activities.

