Title       : PPD: Computer Science Program for Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9986689

Award Number: 9986689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Francioni jfrancioni@winona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winona State University
	      8th and Johnson Streets
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/457-5000

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The intent of this project is to develop a barrier-free computer science
              program that is accessible to students with disabilities.  Computer Science is
              a popular major choice for high school students with disabilities planning to
              go to college.  The number of Computer Science majors at the college level has
              increased significantly, but few students with disabilities are among these
              computer science majors.  A number of barriers exist for these students in a
              traditional computer science curriculum.  Three of the major barriers are: 
              Little assistive technology is available to aid students in learning to
              program, the main focus of the first two years in a computer science
              curriculum.  The science and mathematics courses of a computer science
              curriculum are usually not set up to use existing assistive technology that is
              specifically designed for these kinds of classes.  The traditional ways that
              most computer science courses are taught make heavy use of visual images and
              abstractions that cannot be easily interpreted by students with visual
              disabilities and some learning disabilities.
     We will begin by focusing
              our tool development on students with visual disabilities.  The assistive
              computer equipment for the project, however, will also support students with
              limited mobility disabilities. The project will also tangentially support
              students with hearing and some learning disabilities since the activities and
              tools to be developed will offer alternative representations of information.
 
                 Three major goals have been identified for the project:
          i.  Build
              a high quality, barrier-free, computer science degree program for the southeast
              region of Minnesota that can serve as a model for other computer science
              programs in the country.  It will be important for this first program to be of
              high quality so there is no question that graduates of the program are any less
              qualified than other computer scientists, and it can serve as a valid model for
              other programs in the country.
          ii.  Develop awareness among
              Minnesota high school students with disabilities, as well as their counselors,
              teachers, and parents, of the opportunity to major in computer science in
              college.  It will be necessary to actively recruit students into the program in
              the beginning.  As these students successfully move through the program,
              however, majoring in Computer Science will be able to be seen as a realistic
              possibility for future high school students with disabilities.
         iii. 
              Increase awareness, for all students and faculty in the programs, of barriers
              faced in computing by people with disabilities.  As computer scientists become
              more aware of these barriers, they will be better able to design future
              software programs that are accessible from the start.


