Title       : US-South Africa Cooperative Research: Ant Diversity and Conservation Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9986272

Award Number: 9986272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39675              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Fisher bfisher@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1066,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9986272

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
              between Dr. Brian Fisher, of the Department of Entomology at the California
              Academy of Sciences, and Drs. Hamish Robertson and Simon Van Noort, of the Life
              Sciences Division at the South African Museum in Cape Town, South
              Africa.

South Africa has many diverse ecoregions, which contain a rich
              multitude of endemic plant and animal species.  Information on overall
              diversity and patterns of species turnover for most vertebrates and floral
              groups within the ecoregions are well known, but little data is available on
              the invertebrates.  Ants are one of the most ecologically and numerically
              dominant families of invertebrates found in almost all terrestrial regions of
              the world, and they are a key taxon for surveying and interpreting
              biodiversity.  Dr. Fisher will conduct baseline biodiversity surveys of ants in
              nature conservation areas located in four of the most biologically diverse
              ecoregions in South Africa.  A comparison of these data with data on other
              floral and faunal groups will provide a valuable basis for studying how species
              composition and diversity changes with physiography, and will also enhance our
              understanding about intertaxon differences in diversity patterns.  The South
              African collaborator has a related project, supported by the World Bank, to
              evaluate ant diversity in agricultural zones.  Dr. Fisher's study will provide
              baseline diversity data for a comparison of species turnover patterns between
              agricultural areas and nature conservation areas for use in evaluating the role
              that conservation farming practices have in preserving the biodiversity of ants
              and other invertebrates in the four ecoregions.  The results will expand the
              current knowledge on the diversity and biogeography of ants in South Africa,
              and establish the regional and global importance of conserving biodiversity on
              farms. 

The Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Environmental Biology are jointly providing funding for this project.

