Title       : RUI: Mechanism and Function of Subunit Interactions in Oligomeric Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9986278

Award Number: 9986278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellis Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9986278
Bell
Abstract:
The exquisite control of the levels of metabolites
              within the cell involves a combination of both long-term adaptation involving
              control of gene expression and short-term regulation involving either the
              covalent modification of an enzyme, frequently by phosphorylation, or the
              binding of an allosteric regulatory ligand. The effectiveness of allosteric
              regulation is amplified in oligomeric enzymes by subunit interactions leading
              to cooperative interactions between regulatory ligands or between substrate
              binding events and catalysis. While several allosteric models have been
              presented to explain the roles that allosteric effects can play in the
              regulation of activity, the work proposed will investigate the requirement for
              subunit interactions in the normal catalytic cycle of  an oligomeric enzyme,
              referred to as "reciprocating subunits". The major aims of the work are to
              understand the role that subunit interactions play in the regulation [both
              homotropic and heterotropic] and activity of four important enzymes, Malate
              Dehydrogenase, Fumarase, 3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase and Glutamate
              dehydrogenase, all of whose 3-dimensional structures are available. This work
              will provide direct evidence for or against the existence of a reciprocating
              subunit mechanism with these four enzymes. We will also test our hypothesis
              that reciprocating subunit mechanisms may also play an integral role in
              regulation of these enzymes, and will test whether our proposed mechanism where
              heterotropic regulators of either the K-type or the V-type effect
              subunit-subunit interactions to elicit their effects is appropriate for these
              enzymes. This work will involve the construction of a series of
              hetero-oligomers containing combinations of "normal" and modified sites to
              thoroughly test the roles that ligand induced changes across subunit interfaces
              play in the regular activity of these enzymes. Furthermore, working in
              conjunction with several crystallography labs, we will be able to obtain
              detailed structural information as to the mechanism of the subunit interactions
              involved in the activity and regulation of these enzymes. 



