Title       : Party and Coalition Unity in Legislative Voting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9986219

Award Number: 9986219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Carey jmcarey@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The extent to which members of the same party or coalition vote together in the
              legislature, and the conditions under which party or coalition voting unity
              break down, are of interest to academics who study democratic institutions, as
              well as to politicians, journalists, interest groups and to citizens generally.
               Legislative voting unity affects the stability of parliamentary governments,
              the ability of parties to construct credible platforms and deliver on campaign
              promises, and therefore the accountability of elected officials.  Understanding
              of the sources and effects of voting unity has been blocked by technical and
              methodological obstacles that limit availability of cross-national data on
              legislative voting and have hampered comparative analysis.  In recent years,
              the adoption of electronic voting mechanisms by many legislatures has led to
              the vast proliferation of available raw data.  

In this investigation, the
              researcher identifies a range of hypotheses generated by the literature on
              comparative legislatures and coalition theory that can be tested using
              cross-national data on recorded legislative votes.  The investigator describes
              a new index of voting unity that facilitates comparative analysis of
              legislative voting.  He also uses the Internet to reduce the costs of
              disseminating and encourage sharing of legislative voting data.

Although
              technological barriers have declined, collecting and organizing cross-national
              data on legislative voting remains labor-intensive.  The investigator gathers
              legislative voting data from a number of mostly Latin American countries where
              he has established contacts among academic and legislative sources.  Together
              with data that are already available on legislative web sites, and those
              collected by researchers with area expertise on other countries, these data
              form the nucleus of a large cross-national database on legislative
              behavior.

The data enable the investigator to analyze the institutional
              sources of cohesive legislative parties and coalitions, and the potential
              tension between such unity and the preferences of individual politicians.  The
              hypotheses outlined in the research focus on a wide range of factors believe to
              affect party and coalition unity, including constitutional structure, electoral
              rules, legislative procedure, party system fragmentation and ideological
              polarization, bargaining within coalitions, electoral constraints, and
              political career structures.  Evaluating the effects of these factors on voting
              unity will advance our understanding of politicians' motivations, the extent to
              which they are bound by institutional constraints, and the relative influence
              of these factors over public policy decisions.  An additional benefit of this
              project is the construction of a web-based clearing house of comparable
              cross-national data on legislative voting, which will be valuable not only to
              other academics working in this field, but also to journalists, politicians,
              NGOs, and anyone interested in the accountability of elected officials.

