Title       : Signal Integration in Individual Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a9986263

Award Number: 9986263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dejan Zecevic zec@biomed.med.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Nerve cells (neurons) process information for the brain using electrochemical
              signaling mechanisms that can be studied by biophysical methods.  A nerve cell
              has a membrane with complex electrical properties, so that different sites on
              the membrane have different sensitivity, particularly where there are
              functional junctions called synapses with other cells.  Local responses to
              subthreshold electrical potential signals are important because they are inputs
              that are integrated by the cell to produce the output 'action potential', which
              the nerve cell uses to propagate information over distance.  This project will
              develop a novel technique combing intracellular voltage-sensitive dyes with
              optical imaging utilizing a high-performance low-noise charge-coupled-device
              (CCD) camera. The new higher sensitivity will allow monitoring of multiple
              smaller, subthreshold signals at local sites on the membrane. The preparation
              is in a crustacean with single large identifiable neurons, which offer an
              excellent model to develop this system. Interactions and propagation of
              transient local electrical signals and action potentials will be recorded at
              multiple sites, to analyze spatial and temporal dynamics of subthreshold
              synaptic signals from neuronal processes.  Results will be incorporated into a
              computational model of the detailed functional organization of this giant
              cell.
    This project will have an impact in developing extremely useful new
              technology for cellular physiology as well as neurophysiology, and results will
              be important for understanding the computational properties of nerve cells. 
              The project also will support training of one postdoctoral fellow.

