Title       : Testing the Inflation Bias Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9986671

Award Number: 9986671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Varadarajan V. Chari chari002@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes three kinds of projects in monetary economics and
              macroeconomics all of which bear on the design of monetary institutions.  The
              first project  asks why many countries have gone through prolonged periods of
              costly, high inflation, as well as prolonged periods of low inflation and what
              can be done to prevent high inflation episodes from occurring again. One
              hypothesis is that there is a time inconsistency problem in monetary policy
              which induces an inflation bias: inflation rates without commitment are higher
              than they are under commitment. If this hypothesis is correct, it is important
              to redesign monetary institutions towards obtaining greater commitment. 
I
              propose to test the inflation bias hypothesis by developing quantitative,
              general equilibrium monetary models in which monetary policy is set
              sequentially by optimizing, benevolent policy makers. I ask to what extent such
              models can account for the dynamics of macroeconomic variables like inflation,
              output and employment in the data.  In two standard monetary models, a
              conventional cash-credit goods model and a limited participation model, there
              is no inflation bias for a large range of parameter values. In both models, the
              benefit of higher than expected growth in the money supply is a rise in output
              and the costs are distortions in relative prices. The monetary authority
              optimally balances the benefit and costs and it turns out that the costs of
              inflation outweigh the benefits. One deficiency of these models is that they do
              not reproduce the dynamics of observed money demand. This deficiency led to the
              construction of the endogenous cash-credit goods model, which introduces a
              financial intermediation technology to endogenize the distinction between cash
              and credit goods. This model seems more promising in that it is consistent with
              a key feature of the data: there are prolonged periods of high inflation and
              prolonged periods of low inflation, it also seems capable of accounting for the
              observed dynamics of inflation, output, employment and other variables.
	The
              second project studies free rider problems and strategic delegation in monetary
              Unions. I seek to find out if a monetary union will induce strategic behavior
              by sovereign governments and whether or not member countries strategically
              manipulate the process of monetary policy decision making by selecting
              particular types of delegates.  The answers depend critically on the extent to
              which monetary authorities can commit themselves to future actions. I show that
              in a large class of models, without commitment, strategic behavior produces
              inefficient outcomes so that it can be desirable to impose constraints on the
              policies of member governments as in the Maastricht Treaty governing the
              European Monetary Union. With commitment, such constraints are
              undesirable.
	The third project studies informational cascades and financial
              crises with the object of develop models of herd behavior which may account for
              observations like the volatile capital flows into and out of developing
              countries. I extend existing models of herd behavior to allow for endogenous
              timing of risky investment decisions. I show that herds are more likely to
              occur. I then embed this model in an international setup and show that the
              model generates more volatile capital flows into and out of developing nations
              than between developed nations.


