Title       : Synthesis and Spectroscopy of Ordered Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a9986693

Award Number: 9986693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Yen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project the static and dynamic properties of the optically excited
              states of activated luminescent crystalline materials will be investigated. 
              The project encompasses three main aspects: 1) completion of studies of
              cooperative processes in the excited state of ion pairs which lead to
              luminescence upconversion and photon avalanching; 2) investigation of the
              optical and transport properties of the high lying energy states of activator
              centers and their interactions with the conduction band of the host; and 3) a
              search for a localization/delocalization (Anderson) transition of the
              excitations residing in the high lying states of the materials.  Students will
              participate in this project and will be trained in all aspects of experimental
              research on light emitting diodes and thus be prepared to enter the
              scientific/technical workforce.
%%%
This project deals with investigations of
              the optical properties of materials that luminesce, or emit light.  Substances
              of this type are important to variety of technologies ranging from solid state
              lasers to optical displays.  The aim of these investigations is to obtain a
              better and more fundamental understanding of the physical processes which
              determine  the performance characteristics and efficiencies of these materials.
               Such knowledge is the basis for the design and tailoring of materials to suit
              specific technical and physical needs and requirements. These investigations
              will be carried out with the assistance of graduate and undergraduate students.
               The students will gain experience in an important area of forefront
              experimental and theoretical materials science. This will enable them to be
              productive members of the scientific/technical workforce.


