Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986961

Award Number: 9986961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Ahrens jahrens@pstcc.cc.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pellissippi State Tech CC
	      10915 Hardin Valley Road
	      Knoxville, TN  379321412    615/694-6695

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Pellissippi State Technical Community College is providing support for eighty
              (80) talented, low-income students to pursue degrees in compute  science,
              engineering technology, and mathematics. Scholars are recruited by face-to-face
              contact with counselors, teachers, and principals in feeder high schools and
              with PSTCC faculty, counselors, and enrolled students.  Scholars are selected
              based on application process, eligibility criteria, and SMM team
              recommendations to the Selection Committee: PI, Chairperson; Directors of the
              Foundation, Grants Office,  Admissions, Community Relations; and the
              Business/Industry Mentoring Coordinator. 

The goal of this project is to
              increase the numbers of students pursuing targeted degrees, to increase
              awareness among students of career opportunities in these fields, and to
              increase the skilled worker pool for these disciplines to meet local workforce
              needs.

 The outcomes of the project include: 

$  Improved education in
              targeted disciplines demonstrated by scholars grade point averages.
$ 
              Increased retention for scholars to complete degrees in targeted disciplines.
              
$  Improved professional development of scholars demonstrated by skills
              achieved for entry-level job placement and retention and/or  successful
              transfer and retention at 4-yea institutions. 
$  Strengthened partnerships
              between education and business and industry through the mentoring support
              component with scholars. 

Scholars are expected to participate in the
              infrastructure of support which will include PSTCC support services; project
              designed workshops; professional mentoring partnership; work- related programs
              like tech prep, school-to-work, and cooperative education programs; and
              academic achievement in targeted disciplines/majors. 

By providing an
              enriched learning environment, professional mentoring support, and career
              awareness with professional development assistance scholars are guided to stay
              in school and achieve critically needed skills needed by the local workforce.
              


