Title       : SGER: Manipulation of gene expression in honey bees with RNAi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9986758

Award Number: 9986758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene E. Robinson generobi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the advent of technologies spawned by the Human Genome Project, the
              behavioral sciences are poised to make revolutionary advances.  However, one
              problem that currently prevents the behavioral community from embracing
              genomics is that techniques of manipulating gene expression are only possible
              for a few species.  Treatment with double-stranded (ds) RNA is providing to be
              a very effective techinique for interfering with gene expression in C. elegans
              and D. melanogaster.  The 'RNAi' effect is highly specific and is stronger
and
              more consistent than treatment with antisense oligonucelotides.  Dr. Robinson
              seeks to extend the use of RNAi to the honey bee, a model organism in
              sociobiology that lacks technology for germ-line transformation.  Dr. Robinson
              will test the hypothese that dsRNA from the period (per) gene suppreses per
              mRNA and causes changes in two behavioral processes:  locomotor behavior
              circadiean rhythms in the laboratory, and division of labor, i.e., the
              transition from working in the hive to foraging, in the field.  The bee per
              system is an ideal test case for progmatic reasons related to the molecular and
              behavioral assays available in my laboratory and the observation from
              Drosophila that per is not a lethal gene.  Testing the effect of RNAi on the
              bee per system also is compelling for two scientific reasons.  First, it will
              provide insight into the striking and previously unimagined changes in per mRNA
              levels in the bee brain that occur in association with division of labor. 
              Second, it will provide a powerful demonstration of the versatiality of the
              RNAi technique.  If RNAi does not suppress per mRNA in bees, this result also
              will be of high impact, because it will provide the first cautionary note in
              the literature that RNAi may not be the panacea that we all hope it will be. 
