Title       : NANOSCALE: Elastin Nanobiosensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9986477

Award Number: 9986477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashutosh Chilkoti chilkoti@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to create a protein-based molecular sensor
              within the cell by inserting the "software"-- a synthetic gene, which encodes
              for the sensor -- into the "hardware" of the cell.  Upon
turning the gene on,
              the cell will produce functional sensor molecules, which will report upon an
              intracellular parameter of interest.  The sensor consists of two, integrated
              components: an environmentally-responsive, elastin-like polypeptide (ELP),
              which can be designed via its amino acid
sequence to be acutely sensitive to
              intracellular parameters, such as temperature, pH or ionic strength.  Upon a
              change in the intracellular parameter, the ELP contracts and its end-to-end
              distance decreases by ~50%.
The second component is a reporter, which converts
              this nanometer scale contraction of the ELP into a readout signal: a change in
              fluorescence.  This is achieved by fluorescence resonance energy transfer
              (FRET) between -blue fluorescent protein (BFP)- the donor fluorophore, and -
              green fluorescent protein (GFP) - the acceptor fluorophore, each of which are
              fused at the gene level to opposite ends of the ELP.  The central
hypothesis
              of this proposal is that collapse of the ELP, in response to the altered
              concentration of an intracellular parameter of interest, will alter the
              distance between the donor (BFP) and acceptor (GFP) fluorophore, leading to
              enhanced FRET, and will thereby provide a detectable fluorescence signal.  Two
              different physiological sensors will be fabricated and tested: a pH sensor,
              which incorporates ionizable residues in the ELP sequence, and a
              phosphorylation sensor, which contains a peptide substrate within the ELP. 
              Altered pH or kinase concentration will isothermally induce the inverse
              transition, leading to fluorescence readout due to altered FRET.  These
              prototype sensors will find application in
fundamental cell and tumor biology
              studies, as well as in biotechnology applications, such as real-time,
              intracellular monitoring of industrial bioprocesses.

