Title       : The Relationship Between Dietary Lipid Composition and the Winter Survival of
               Hibernating Mammals.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9986620

Award Number: 9986620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Frank frank@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4651

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Many mammals use torpor to survive seasonally cold environments or food
              shortages.  The ecological and physiological limitations that favored the
              evolution of torpor in some groups of mammals while preventing this strategy
              from appearing in other groups are not known.  One constraint that may at least
              partially account for the evolutionary patterns observed for mammalian torpor
              is the nutritional composition of the diet.  Recent laboratory studies with 8
              rodent species and 2 marsupials have revealed that the level of unsaturated
              fatty acids in the diet determines mammalian torpor patterns.  It has also been
              shown that high levels of oleic acid (a monounsaturated fatty acid) are also
              required in the diet for proper hibernation.  Recent experiments in my
              laboratory have also revealed that increasing the amount of a-tocopherol
              (Vitamin E) in the diet to 24 mg/g inhibits torpor.  Mammals can synthesize
              monounsaturated fatty acids, but they are incapable of synthesizing either
              polyunsaturated fatty acids or tocopherols.  
    These findings indicate that
              two important factors that may influence the torpor patterns and consequently
              the over-winter survival of free-ranging hibernators may be the range of diet
              fatty acids compositions and tocopherol contents available to them prior to
              torpor.  There have been no studies to date examining how natural variations in
              diet fatty acid and/or tocopherol content affects the over-winter survival of
              free-ranging hibernators.  No studies examining physiological basis for either
              the influence of diet fatty acids or tocopherol levels on hibernation patterns
              have been conducted.  The goals of this proposed project are to determine: 1)
              the effects of natural variations in diet fatty acid and tocopherol
              compositions on the over-winter survival of a free-ranging hibernator, 2) the
              physiological basis for the influence of dietary fatty acids as well as
              tocopherols on torpor patterns, and, 3) the differential effects of various
              fatty acid and tocopherol types on mammalian torpor. 
    The effects of
              natural variations in diet fatty acid and tocopherol compositions on torpor
              patterns and subsequent over-winter survival will be determined in a field
              study involving golden-mantled ground squirrels (Spermophilus lateralis) in the
              White Mountain of California.  The fatty acid and tocopherol compositions of
              the fall diets and subsequent over-winter survival for 300 (100/year)
              free-ranging S. lateralis in the White Mountains of California will be measured
              over a three year period.  The physiological basis for the effects dietary
              fatty acid and tocopherol compositions on torpor patterns will be determined in
              laboratory experiments.  This project represents the first study ever conducted
              to examine the relationship between diet fatty acid/tocopherol composition and
              the over-winter survival of a free-ranging hibernator.  It also represents the
              first experiments designed to investigate physiological basis for the influence
              of dietary fatty acids and tocopherols on torpor.

