Title       : Components of Larval Transport: Larval Behavior and Variability in Physical
               Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9986627

Award Number: 9986627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesus G. Pineda jpineda@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan-Manuel Lopez-Mariscal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A major question in marine ecology is the source of recruits in shallow-water
              open populations, a question that involves identification of the larval
              transport process. This project will work on three components of larval
              transport: larval behavior, larval accumulation in transporting fronts, and the
              effects of low-frequency modulation on larval transport. It will focus on
              internal tidal bores, which first produce outcropping of the thermocline and
              the offshore migration of near-shore surface water. Then, a few hours later,
              the flow reverses, the dense cold water migrates off-shore, and warm water
              returns to the shore-lead by a warm bore front. For resolving the be-havioral
              and accumulation questions, an adaptive sampling scheme will be used, where
              sampling is initiated when internal tidal bores are remotely detected with a
              telemetry system.  The behavioral hypothesis that accu-mulation in fronts with
              convergent currents result from larvae swimming actively against the
              down-welling currents will be tested. The hypothesis predicts that lar-vae that
              accumulate in transporting fronts with convergent and downwelling currents
              should ori-ent against the downwelling flow. This will be tested by observing
              horizontal convergent and downwelling currents in fronts with moored ar-rays of
              temperature loggers and Doppler current meters, and by observing in situ larval
              orientation in convergent fronts and outside the fronts. Larval orientation
              will be observed with a high-resolution Video Plankton Recorder, the VPR. For
              the frontal accumulation process, the idea that the origin of frontal larvae is
              offshore of the propagating internal bore warm fronts (e.g. as op-posed to
              onshore origin) will be tested. This hypothesis predicts that larval
              concentration offshore of the fronts is much larger than the larval
              concentration onshore of the fronts, and that the current speed behind the
              front u is faster than the rate of advance (propaga-tion speed) of the front c.
              This will be tested by sampling larval concentration across the fronts, by
              observing the front's phase speed and circulation, and by conducting
              experiments re-leasing drifters around the fronts. For the low- frequency
              forcing, two related ideas will be investigated. First, the intensity of larval
              transport by inter-nal tidal bores depends on the raising and out-cropping of
              the thermocline by remote or local wind driven upwelling, will be tested with
              daily barnacle settlement measurements, time se-ries of temperature at three
              depths, currents ob-served with a Doppler current meter, and intense larval
              sampling during upwelling events. The sec-ond hypothesis, low-frequency
              variabil-ity in larval transport and temperature field at La Jolla, California
              is related to northward propa-gating events from the Baja California coast,
              will be tested with daily barnacle settlement moni-toring in La Jolla, AVHRR
              sea-surface temperature satellite data, and time series of wind, tempera-ture,
              and pressure in La Jolla and three locations South of La Jolla.
