Title       : iMASH: Adaptive Middleware and Networking Support for the Nomadic Healer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9986679

Award Number: 9986679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1340720            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajive Bagrodia rajive@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Songwu Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lixia Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Gerla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Valentino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The researchers envision that within the next few years mobile and wireless
              access to the Internet will very likely become the norm, rather than the
              exception as is seen today. This proposal describes the plans to develop and
              deploy iMASH, a network system that supports anytime, anywhere, on any platform
              access to the electronic patient records database for healthcare providers. The
              objective is to provide the capability for real-time, multimedia communication,
              so that a physician may access, on the move, the patients record and other
              relevant information as filtered by the physician's user profile, and may
              migrate ongoing application sessions seamlessly to different platforms that
              range from a high performance diagnostic workstation in the physician's office
              to hand held PDAs in the examination room. While the proposed techniques are
              general and extend to a range of mobile applications, the specific target of
              this project is healthcare applications. To this end, the researchers will
              develop a clinical testbed, which will serve as a laboratory for developing,
              testing, and evaluating advanced information technology in the context of
              patient care.  The testbed will provide the user requirements to drive the
              iMASH architecture design, and will permit direct, realistic validation of the
              research results.
     The researchers expect to make the following
              contributions from this research and development effort:
     1)  Development
              of a middleware infrastructure that provides support for anytime, anywhere, on
              any platform access to the Internet
     2)  A suite of wireless networking
              protocols and algorithms that provide quality of service support in a mobile,
              heterogeneous networking environment
     3)  A deployment of iMASH within the
              UCLA Medial School and a controlled study to evaluate its effectiveness in
              reducing healthcare costs and improving physician effectiveness
     4)  A
              system emulation capability that can be used to evaluate the performance and
              scalability of the middleware services and protocols across multiple dimensions
              including number of users, number of devices, types of applications, and
              geographical area. The emulator will be used to 'test drive' novel protocols
              and applications prior to deployment on the physical testbed.
     The
              researchers have assembled a strong research and development team to undertake
              the iMASH effort. The team possesses the necessary expertise in the related
              areas of networking (Zhang, Gerla), wireless communications (Gerla, Lu),
              parallel and distributed systems (Bagrodia, Gerla), performance evaluation
              (Bagrodia), computerized medicine (Valentino, McCoy), clinical evaluation of
              technological innovations in improving heath care (Fiske), and campus computing
              and communication technology (Solomon).
     A longer term goal of this effort
              is to deploy iMASH-like technology widely within the UCLA campus to support
              ubiquitous multimedia access for students and faculty, and to support wireless
              distance education. To enable appropriate technology transition, the team also
              includes two key members from the university administration: the CIO for the
              medical school (McCoy) and the Associate Vice-chancellor of Administrative
              Services with line responsibility over campus telecommunications (Solomon). The
              UCLA Hospital has recently embarked on a historical reconstruction with a $1
              billion endowment. An integral part of the reconstruction is availability of
              complete wireless connectivity within the hospital. The UCLA campus is also
              engaged in a project to upgrade the network connectivity throughout the campus
              with the aim of providing a minimum of 10Mbps bandwidth from desktop to desktop
              within any two locations on campus. Planning is underway to further enhance
              this capability with wireless connectivity. These two technology initiatives
              provide a unique opportunity to insert the iMASH technology in widespread use
              within the UCLA campus, and subsequently to other locations.

