Title       : X-ray Determination of Proteins and Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a9986266

Award Number: 9986266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $795000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Rossmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9986266
Rossmann, M.


X-ray diffraction and cryo-electron microscopy
              (cryo-EM) techniques will be used to analyze the assembly and uncoating
              intermediates of various viruses.  The emphasis will be on the dsDNA tailed
              bacterial phages phi29 and T4 and the ssDNA icosahedral bacterial Microviridae
              phiX174 and alpha3.  The objectives will be to determine not only the
              structures, but also the molecular mechanisms by which the assembly
              intermediates, including the DNA packaging process, are stabilized and then
              triggered for the subsequent steps in the viral morphogenesis. Similarly, the
              structural intermediates of viral disassembly during cellular infection will be
              examined.  Cryo-EM will be used to determine the low resolution structures of
              the major assembly intermediates, the mature virus, and the DNA-emptied virus
              of phi29. 
X-ray crystallography will be used to determine the structures of
              most, if not all, of the 9 gene products that are required for the formation of
              the mature virus. This will allow the fitting of individual atomic resolution
              structures into the lower resolution EM densities.  X-ray diffraction is being
              used to study components of the T4 phage baseplate.  This baseplate, to which
              both the long and short tail fibers are attached, undergoes major
              conformational changes that initiate the recognition of cell surface receptors,
              the tail contraction, and the expulsion of the DNA from the viral head into the
              host cell.  The available knowledge of the overall structure of this phage and
              its baseplate will be extended by cryo-EM.  X-ray diffraction had been used
              earlier to study the mature phiX174 particle and an empty procapsid assembly
              byproduct.  However, cryo-EM had to be used to capture the unstable, true
              procapsid assembly precursor. Currently, these studies are being repeated with
              the homologous phage alpha3.  It is suspected that chimeric viruses of phiX174
              and alpha3 may stabilize some of the assembly intermediates to permit
              crystallographic studies.

The goal of the structural studies of viruses is
              to understand the molecular mechanisms of viral assembly and disassembly on
              cell infection.  The assembly of a macromolecular structure proceeds along an
              ordered pathway and is accomplished by the switching of proteins between
              discrete conformations as they are added to the nascent assembly.  Scaffolding
              proteins often play a catalytic role in the assembly process, rather like
              molecular chaperones. X-ray diffraction and cryo-electron microscopy techniques
              will be used to analyze the assembly and disassembly processes.

