Title       : Anion Exchange in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9986617

Award Number: 9986617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Maloney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns OxlT, an unusual transport protein found in the
              Gram-negative anaerobe, Oxalobacter formigenes.  OxlT catalyzes the exchange of
              external divalent oxalate for internal monovalent formate.  This electrogenic
              exchange, along with proton consumption during intracellular decarboxylation,
              constitutes a virtual proton pump that generates a proton-motive force allowing
              O. formigenes to extract energy from oxalate.  Such proton-motive metabolic
              cycles are widely spread in microbiology, and to understand these events at a
              molecular level this project will focus on OxlT, the antiport protein at the
              center of this process in O. formigenes.  Antibody against the OxlT N-terminus
              is available, the gene is cloned, and fully functional protein is purified
              after heterologous expression in Escherichia coli.  Therefore, tools are
              available to study structure-function relationships for OxlT in two important
              areas:  (1) A major experimental goal will be the determination of helix-helix
              proximity, using single-cysteine and double-cysteine variants as reagents in
              disufide trapping and cysteine-based cross-linking.  In parallel, infrared
              spectroscopy will be used to ask whether there are changes in helix orientation
              accompanying the binding of substrate.  (2) The more ambitious work will focus
              on 2-dimensional crystallography of OxlT.  In this case, the goal is to
              capitalize on the remarkable stability of the OxlT-substrate complex, as well
              as the genetic tractability of OxlT, to enable formation of 2D crystals for
              analysis by electron microscopy.  Preliminary trials show formation of fragile
              tubes of molecular dimension, and further effort over the next few years should
              be informative.
  
The way in which small molecules move across cell
              membranes is central to many aspects of biology, including biotechnology and
              plant biology.  As examples, consider the acquisition of sugar by the red blood
              cell, or the origin of drug resistance in microorganisms, or the adaptation to
              high salinity by plants.  All these events are mediated by proteins within the
              Major Facilitator Superfamily, a vast collection of evolutionarily related
              transporters that includes OxlT as one of its better-characterized members. 
              Study of OxlT may therefore help characterize the fundamental properties of
              this important group.  This is especially true of the projected
              crystallographic work, since no member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily has
              been visualized at this level of resolution before.  Understanding how such
              transporters are arranged within the membrane would greatly accelerate future
              studies that can serve the public interest by the design of novel inhibitors,
              activators, and substrates of these important proteins.



