Title       : Protein Targeting to Neuronal LDCVs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a9986657

Award Number: 9986657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Salton stephen.salton@mssm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deanna L. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Proteins must be directed to different places within a cell, particularly in
              nerve cells (neurons), where long processes like the axon can extend far from
              the cell body.  This protein 'traffic' is thought to be done by packaging
              proteins into distinct vesicles, which then are targeted to the correct
              destination.  Virtually nothing is known about this process.  Two principal
              types of vesicles are the large dense-core vesicles (LDCVs) containing
              neuropeptides or monoamines, and small clear vesicles (SCVs) that contain
              neurotransmitters like gultamate and gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA). Neurons
              and neuroendocrine cells both must correctly sort peptide precursors into
              LDCVs, away from the neurotransmitter-containing SCVs that release and reload
              their contents through very different mechansims.  This project uses molecular
              and immunocytochemical approaches to identify polypeptide sequences that target
              VGF to LDCVs and to characterize the novel sorting mechanism or receptor
              molecule involved.  
   Results will be important for defining the fundamental
              mechanisms that underly the sorting of proteins into distinct vesicle
              populations, ultimately transporting them to specific regions in highly
              polarized neurons, and to regions related to regulative or constitutive
              secretory pathways in these complex cells.  Graduate training is included in
              this project.

