Title       : SBIR Phase II: Fiber-Optic Magnetic-Field Sensor System Employing
               Highly-Efficient Photonic Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a9986120

Award Number: 9986120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Behzad Moslehi bm@ifos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Fiber Optic Sy
	      650 Vaqueros Avenue, A
	      Sunnyvale, CA  940853543    408/328-8610

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project expands the
              magnetic-field sensor system developed in Phase I into an optimized system
              containing an array of multiplexed two-dimensional sensors using mode-routing
              architecture for industrial process control systems, including
              physical-vapor-deposition (PVD) reactors containing magnetic orientation
              devices which are used in the manufacture of magnetic storage disks and
              recording heads.  The uniformity  and orientation of these magnetic fields need
              to be measured and controlled with high accuracy.  In Phase I, IFOS
              demonstrated devices that virtually eliminate power losses that are
              characteristic of other known fiber-optic magnetic sensor arrays.  IFOS has
              fabricated novel photonic mode-routing components, built a feasibility system
              prototype with new sensing materials and ultra-high-resolution demultiplexing,
              and conducted preliminary tests.  IFOS, in collaboration with a federal
              laboratory, identified another appllication involving cryogenic systems to
              avoid thermal-leakage problems of electronic sensors.  The IFOS solution
              enables achievement of the necessary accuracy and cost goals.  The Phase II
              objective is to design and construct an optimized 5-point vectorial
              magnetic-field-sensor system for PVD reactor installation, as well as a
              2-sensor system for cryogenic applications.  IFOS' strategic partners will
              provide Phase-II and Phase-III-kind and cash contributions. 
 
Commercial
              applications include measurement of magnetic orientation and confinement fields
              for PVD systems, cryogenic systems, electric power utilities, hydrogen fusion
              chambers and linear acccelerators.  Improving PVD industrial process control,
              will yield higher sensitivity and reliability.  It will enable storage
              densities exceeding 60 Gbit/inch2 on rigid media.  This is a significant market
              opportunity identified by IFOS and its strategic partner, the market leader for
              data-storage PVD systems.  Other applications exist in the measurement of
              leakage current and line sag in high-voltage transmission towers, and complex
              stresses in automotive, aerospace, and civil structures.   The technology will
              have an impact in a wide variety of optical fiber sensor systems and optical
              components and subsystems, such as magnetically-actuated tunable optical
              filters and switches, add-drop multiplexers as well as mode-routing components.
               IFOS magnetic sensor systems are immune to electromagnetic interference,
              elecrically and chemically passive, compact, light weight and suitable for use
              in explosive environments

