Title       : Analysis of Spt16-Pob3 in Promoting Replication and Transcription in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a9986142

Award Number: 9986142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Formosa Formosa@medschool.med.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Formosa

The Spt16 and Pob3 proteins from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
              form a stable, abundant, nuclear heterodimer.  Homologs of these proteins have
              been found in all eukaryotes tested, and have been purified as stable
              heterodimers from human and frog sources.  One of these conserved heterodimers,
              the human FACT complex, enhances the ability of RNA polymerase II to progress
              past template sites associated with nucleosomes, suggesting that Spt16-Pob3 is
              a chromatin-specific transcription elongation factor.  Another homolog, the
              frog DUF complex, is needed for normal DNA replication in oocyte extracts,
              suggesting that Spt16-Pob3 is a DNA replication factor.  Data from the yeast
              system support both of these models, and point to chromatin as the common point
              of action.  Mutations in SPT16 lead to global changes in transcription similar
              to the changes caused by some histone mutations, and display interactions with
              putative chromatin factors.  The Spt16-Pob3 dimer binds to DNA Polymerase a,
              and interacts genetically with several replication proteins.  While the role of
              chromatin in modulating transcription has been widely studied, neither the
              mechanism by which Spt16-Pob3 affects chromatin nor the role played by
              chromatin in DNA replication have been firmly established.  The goal of this
              research is to further analyze the activity of the Spt16 and Pob3 proteins in
              DNA replication as well as in transcription.  Yeasts with mutations in SPT16
              and POB3 will be studied to determine whether DNA replication is aberrant by
              examining replication intermediates directly and by testing genetically for
              interactions with replication factors and DNA damage checkpoints.  Localization
              of Spt16-Pob3 to promoters and replication origins will be tested to see if
              this varies in an informative way with the activation of these sites.  The
              progression of replication forks in the mutants will be measured to assess
              whether Spt16-Pob3 contributes to the ability of DNA polymerases to act on
              chromatin in vivo as FACT does with RNA polymerase in vitro.  These experiments
              will allow dissection of models concerning the function of Spt16-Pob3 in both
              replication and transcription.  Other factors that act with Spt16-Pob3 will be
              sought using both genetic and physical methods.  High copy suppressors and
              extragenic enhancer mutants will be identified in collaboration with a set of
              High School students.  This will provide information regarding factors that
              interact with Spt16-Pob3, and will also provide a non-trivial research
              experience for a broad group of students.  Affinity chromatography will also be
              performed with purified Spt16-Pob3 to identify physical interactions.

	DNA
              molecules contain instructions for building cells.  Using this
information
              requires making temporary working copies of the instructions as
RNA molecules
              in a process called transcription.  DNA copies of the cell's DNA
must be also
              be made periodically so that each daughter cell can have a set of
the
              instructions.  This is called replication.  While very different in
detail,
              transcription and replication both act on the cell's DNA molecules and
so have
              many common needs.  For example, the DNA inside of cells is bound
tightly by
              proteins to form a complex called chromatin.  The enzymes that must
copy the
              DNA, either into RNA or DNA, must at least temporarily disturb the
binding of
              the chromatin proteins.  While this process has been partially
studied for
              transcription, it has not been well-characterized for replication
and might
              use many of the same factors.  The research supported by this grant
has
              identified two proteins, called Spt16 and Pob3, that are found in
              all
eukaryotes tested.  These proteins appear to act together to assist
              both
replication and transcription enzymes in the process of untangling DNA
              from
chromatin during the copying processes.  The project will now focus
              on
learning how these proteins work.  Cells with damaged versions of the
              two
proteins will be examined to see if transcription and replication
              occur
normally.  Additional genetic changes that either make these mutated
              cells
function more normally, or that make them less capable of
              maintaining
themselves, will be sought to provide clues about the function of
              the factors.
 This will be done along with a group of High School students to
              help them
learn not only about transcription and replication factors, but
              about how
science is a process used to find answers to questions.  This
              research
therefore addresses questions about the fundamental mechanisms of
              replication
and transcription, and also provides an educational experience to
              a broader
group.

