Title       : Constructing Race
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9986128

Award Number: 9986128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185111             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Eberhardt jle@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Gabrieli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People are much better at recognizing faces of their own race than faces of
              other races.  This "race effect" is largely understood as being driven by
              perceptual expertise. People are better at recognizing own-race faces because
              they have more exposure to them and more practice at identifying them in
              comparison to other-race faces. Recently, neuroscience researchers have begun
              to link face perception, expertise, and recognition memory to specific regions
              of the brain.  In this project, a series of studies will examine the hypothesis
              that the own-race advantage is correlated with differential neural activity in
              two key areas of the brain: the fusiform face area and the medial temporal
              lobe. It is known that responses to faces are linked to neural activation in
              the fusiform face area, and that recognition memory is linked to activation in
              the medial temporal lobe. This project will explore the extent to which
              own-race faces activate the fusiform face area and the medial temporal lobe in
              comparison to other-race faces. It is expected that other-race faces will not
              recruit the fusiform face area or the medial temporal lobe to the same degree
              as own-race faces. Additionally, this differential recruitment is expected to
              be correlated with sub-optimal recognition performance for other-race faces. A
              focus on the specific role race plays in face perception can lead to a greater
              general understanding of face perception and its relationship to other forms of
              cognitive and neuropsychological functioning. Most importantly, a focus on race
              will illuminate the extent to which social categories can shape and direct
              visual processing and memory.

