Title       : Spatial Taming and Trapping of Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9986027

Award Number: 9986027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $533000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dudley R. Herschbach herschbach@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dudley Herschbach is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to
              develop an apparatus for manipulating and trapping molecules with very low
              translational energies.  This will be accomplished by molecular beam expansion
              cooling of gases exiting from the periphery of a high speed contra-rotating
              rotor such that the rotortip motion cancels out the expansion velocity.  There
              is also the option of increasing the velocity above thermal by co-rotating the
              rotor.  The basic viability was established using Xe and the technique is being
              developed and extends to other gases (O2, Cl2, HCl and CO).  Five developments
              being made are to: 1) improve the rotor construction and eliminate design
              weaknesses; 2) increase the pressure for the supersonic expansion to achieve
              lower temperatures; 3) improve the vacuum to reduce slow molecule scattering;
              4) develop techniques for collecting the slow molecules and 5) use a pulsed gas
              nozzle to improve the uni-directional nature of the supersonic beam.  In
              parallel with these developments, there are a) studies of chemistry at low
              temperatures, specifically that of OH, b) use of inhomogeneous static and laser
              fields to scatter or focus the slow particles and c) demonstrations of the de
              Broglie nature of the slow particles by molecular diffraction.

The studies
              are developing a device in which molecules can be cooled down to very low
              temperatures, as low as one degree above absolute zero of temperature.  At
              these temperatures, the molecules have speeds of a few tens of meters per
              second and have wavelengths large compared with their size.  This entirely
              changes the nature of the reactive collisions between molecules, opening up a
              new realm of chemical behavior.  The device is such that the speed of the
              molecules can be increased continuously, enabling the effect of energy on the
              process to be determined and the change-over to conventional behavior to be
              observed.
