Title       : Integrating Academic Support and Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986890

Award Number: 9986890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219992             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Ferguson dferguson@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K. Wendy Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam Rafailovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The program will provide a comprehensive support and scholarship program for
              low-income bachelors and masters degree candidates. Included will be:
              
Two-year scholarships for 40 students; 34 undergraduates completing their
              bachelors degrees and 6 graduates completing their masters degrees. Students
              will be in computer science, information systems, applied mathematics,
              electrical and mechanical engineering and materials science. 
A network of
              services through existing programs and organizations that includes: recruitment
              and outreach, family involvement, tutoring, advisement, mentoring, research and
              internship placements, summer enrichment programs, career exploration
              opportunities, workplace preparedness and job placement. 
The CSEMS program
              interfaces with a wide variety of campus organizations and programs including
              partnerships with industry. 
The goal and objectives of the program are to
              increase the number of low income students getting bachelors and masters
              degrees in computer science, engineering and mathematics by: 
Developing a
              selection and monitoring system that targets students most in need with special
              priority for underrepresented minorities, women, students with disabilities,
              and transfer students. 
Developing a community of CSEMS scholars by providing
              a network of support services to ensure academic success and degree completion.
              
Emphasizing research and internship opportunities to build academic skills
              and job readiness. 
Developing recruitment and retention strategies
              specifically geared to students transferring from community colleges.
              
Developing an evaluation process to ensure program and student success.
