Title       : Globalization, Productivity, and Growth: Aggregate and Plant-Level Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9986426

Award Number: 9986426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Eaton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel S. Kortum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the Second World War countries have become increasingly open, both to
              foreign-made goods and to foreign technologies.  The proposed research
              investigates how globalization affects productivity and growth, both at the
              aggregate and plant level.  It aims to answer a number of open questions: What
              does increased openness imply for innovation and growth?   To what extent will
              reductions in trade barriers lead to factory shutdowns and how much do
              surviving firms grow as they exploit greater export opportunities?   To what
              extent does trade in machinery promote the diffusion of technology?  What role
              do the capital goods exports of major innovating countries, such as the United
              States and Japan, play in the growth of developing countries?
The analytic
              framework for addressing these questions relates trade patterns to
              technological and geographical factors.  Technologies evolve as countries
              innovate, creating greater differences in efficiency among countries, and, as
              ideas diffuse, eroding these differences.  Countries that perform more R&D face
              less international competition since more of the technologies they use are
              still unknown to others. Firms in these countries consequently have greater
              market power.
Previous empirical work on these issues has been based largely
              on aggregate measures or has not used a consistent analytic framework.  But
              aggregate data alone are not rich enough to provide insight into the effects of
              economic policies on individual firms.  A feature of the framework here is its
              ability to combine aggregate and factory level data.
	The proposed work has
              three components. First, the investigators will develop a multi-country model
              of innovation, diffusion, trade, and growth.  Second, they will fit the model
              to aggregate data on trade flows, research effort, and productivity around the
              world, and to factory level data from the United States and France. Third, they
              will use the resulting framework as a quantitative tool to answer questions
              about the aggregate and firm-level effects of globalization.

