Title       : Computer Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986747

Award Number: 9986747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Duvall duvallp@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Lea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Grace E. Kissling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (31), (21) The Department of Mathematical Sciences at the university is
              awarding approximately 44 scholarships each semester for four semesters to
              low-income academically talented students in undergraduate or graduate programs
              in Computer Science or Mathematics to promote full-time enrollment and degree
              achievement for students in these fields. 75+-5% of the scholarships will be
              awarded to juniors, seniors and graduate students (expected to finish their
              degrees within the grant period). 25+- 5% of the scholarships will be awarded
              to freshmen and sophomores (primarily under-represented populations), to
              improve retention and increase diversity in the department.

 The program
              academic support infrastructure includes: peer and faculty mentors;
              undergraduate research programs; three monthly meetings of scholars each
              semester (where students learn about careers, graduate education, resume
              writing and interviewing skills); a list-serve for communication among
              scholars; an introductory social event (funded by the department) for scholars,
              peer and faculty mentors, and Industrial Advisory Committee participants;
              announcement of scholars' names to our student e-mail mailing lists, alumni
              newsletter, and hometown newspaper; and award of a certificate. Scholars are
              referred to tutors and/or workshops on study skills if departmental tracking
              indicates they need these services. 

The five outcomes expected from the
              project are: (1) improved education for scholars through activities of the
              academic support infrastructure; (2) increased retention of students to degree
              achievement; (3) improved professional development and employment or pursuit of
              graduate education of participants, through the activities of the academic
              support infrastructure and with the assistance of the department's Industrial
              Advisory Committee members and the university's Career Services Center; (4)
              strengthened relationships between the department and related employment
              sectors, through the assistance and cooperation of the Industrial Advisory
              Committee in this project; and (5) discovery of effective techniques for
              retaining students in computer science and mathematics, particularly
              under-represented populations, leading to department-wide improvement of
              teaching and support programs and increased diversity. 

Five types of data
              are collected to evaluate the outcomes listed above. Appropriate statistical
              tests for the significance of results are performed. 
1. Questionnaires filled
              out by participants evaluate the effectiveness and usefulness of all academic
              infrastructure activities. These data allow the evaluation of improved
              education, increased retention, professional development, and effective
              intervention techniques for under-represented groups. The results are used both
              to improve the activities and to evaluate their effectiveness overall. 
2.
              Participation in undergraduate research programs by scholarship recipients are
              tracked to discern increases. These data allow the evaluation of improved
              education. 
3. Student retention in the program is measured (as drop rates)
              pre- and post-intervention through academic support infrastructure activities
              to evaluate changes in retention. 
4. Graduates are tracked to determine
              employment and/or engagement in further higher education. 
5. Demographic
              statistics on students are collected to discern increases in diversity. 

