Title       : Worker Allocation Decisions in Organizations Based on Individual Learning and
               Forgetting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9986385

Award Number: 9986385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40154              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Nembhard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Do workers complement one another, one's strength aligning with
              another's
weakness and vice versa? The implications of this question are
              substantial
when considering the learning characteristics of a company's
              workforce. For
some industrial tasks, slow learning produces greater
              productivity in the
long run, and fast learning greater short-run
              productivity. This research
project will address the above question and
              determine whether workers
complement one another with respect to improving
              overall productivity in
the workplace. With the emerging movement of business
              and industry toward
shorter market lifecycles, more aggressive cross-training,
              flexible
manufacturing, and quick-response manufacturing, worker learning
              and
forgetting behavior has a heightened impact on company performance.
              This
research will identify and evaluate policies for assigning workers to
              tasks
based on such individual characteristics in order to improve efficiency
              and
possibly even worker morale. For additional information, visit the
              web-site
of the Productivity Measurement and Improvement (PM&I), a Laboratory
              of the
Department of Industrial Engineering at the University
              of
Wisconsin-Madison: http://dipsy.ie.wisc.edu/. 

