Title       : The Prehispanic 'Fossilized' Canal Systems of the Tehuacan Valley, Puebla,
               Mexico: Their Distribution, Chronology, and Environmental Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9986718

Award Number: 9986718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103754             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Neely neely@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. James Neely and collaborators will
              reconstruct the prehistoric canal system located in the Tehuacan Valley,
              central Mexico. Archaeologists who wish to understand the processes which led
              to complex societies have focused on water management systems because of the
              significant role they played. In many regions of the world where early
              civilizations emerged, rainfall was not sufficient to permit large scale
              dependable agriculture and to meet subsistence needs extensive canal systems
              were constructed. Such large, labor intensive projects, require many people to
              work together in a coordinated fashion. Major systems require extensive
              planning, and decisions about allocation of land and water necessitate some
              form of central control. Therefore archaeologists believe that in many places
              canal irrigation is closely linked to the development of large scale societies
              and centralized systems of government and economics. A series of early states
              and empires, including the Aztec, developed in central highland Mexico and
              archaeologists have known for decades that canal systems were present. However
              canals are extremely difficult to date and therefore it is hard to correlate
              changes in irrigation and social development.

Dr. Neely and his colleagues
              have identified an extraordinary system of "fossilized" canals with the
              potential to obviate this difficulty. They have been incredibly well preserved
              due to the deposition of minerals (travertines comprised primarily of calcium
              carbonate) that were contained in the waters that passed through their
              channels. Thus the canal systems are preserved in stone that is in some places
              over 2.0 meters thick. These systems, constructed over an estimated 2700 year
              period were apparently renovated and extended through time. The travertine
              preserves a record of its construction sequence and provides a sensitive
              measure of the demand for agricultural production of the people who made and
              used them. Dr. Neely and colleagues will map the canals and selectively extract
              samples of travertine present as stratified layers in the canal cross-sections.
              Uranium-series dating and stable isotope analyses will be conducted and
              organics removed for radiocarbon dating. Associated pollen, phytoliths and
              diatoms will be recovered for paleoenvironmental reconstruction. Related
              archival studies will search out documents pertaining to late Prehispanic and
              early Colonial land and water use and tenure. On this basis it will be possible
              to construct a chronology of canal construction, subsequent expansions and
              improvements and the eventual demise of the systems. Vegetational ecology and
              insights into the cultivated and non-cultivated plants from fields adjacent to
              the canals will also be obtained.

