Title       : Montana Teachers Investigate Ecology: MT-TIE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9986862

Award Number: 9986862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Brewer cabrewer@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Blank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa R. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine L. Caton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Kuschel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9986862
BREWER

This project will provide ecological research training and
              experience to teachers of grades 6-12 in Montana.  After an initial two-week
              orientation workshop, ten teams of teacher-pairs will team up with a research
              scientist mentor and undergraduate students for a 40-day research fellowship
              (20 teachers per year).  Scientist mentors will be drawn from the University of
              Montana, the US Forest Service, and the Montana Natural History Center, which
              will formalize a partnership between local schools and these agencies. 
              Teachers will participate in a series of four two-day follow-up workshops
              during the academic year to develop ecological inquiries for their own students
              based on their summer research experiences. Undergraduate ecological interns,
              the project staff, and the mentor scientists will support teachers in their
              efforts throughout the school year.  This project will enable teachers to
              develop problem-solving skills, confidence in inquiry-based teaching and
              learning, improved scientific literacy, and a greater long-term interest in
              science by using ecological investigations focused on topics and issues of
              local interest. Teaching practices that focus on "learning by doing" and
              inquiry instruction will be promoted, the development of local ecological
              research sites during and beyond the project will be supported.  The project
              will instill scientific ways of thinking and understanding in participating
              teachers and their students through the development of authentic research
              experiences in their schoolyards and adjacent habitats. 


