Title       : Research Apprenticeship, Community Service and Academic Enhancement Training for
               LSU Engineering and Mathematics Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a9986857

Award Number: 9986857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Su-Seng Pang mepang@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Isiah M. Warner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryle L. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julius P. Langlinais  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo S. Ferreyra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph W. Pike  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (59), (21) The College of Engineering and two departments, Mathematics and
              Experimental Statistics, are increasing the opportunities for academically
              talented students who are willing, but financially unable to reach their
              fullest potential. This is being achieved through a student/faculty
              partnership, with a comprehensive monitoring system, under the sponsorship of
              the NSF/CSEMS program. About one-fifth of the undergraduate students attending
              the university during the Fall-1998 (5,537 of 24,773) were eligible to receive
              a Pell Grant. 

The objectives of this project are: (1) to improve the
              education of students in engineering and mathematics, (2) to increase the
              retention of students to degree attainment, (3) to increase the number of
              undergraduates, including minorities and women, receiving baccalaureate degrees
              in engineering and mathematics, as well as master's degrees in mathematics; (4)
              to improve the professional development and employment and further higher
              education placement of participating students, and (5) to strengthen
              partnerships between institutions of higher education and related employment
              sectors. The students that are selected will benefit by joining the academic
              enhancement activities of two unique ongoing NSF/REU programs. The CSEMS
              scholars will not be required to conduct research but will be offered the
              opportunity to do so. This project is resulting in students being well-prepared
              and technically competent engineers and mathematicians. 

The 32 students
              selected each year will participate in research projects of their choice in
              engineering or mathematics. About half of the 32 students selected CSEMS are
              minorities and/or and women. The students are co-advised by academic mentors..
              The engineering students are juniors and seniors, and the mathematics students
              are a mix of undergraduate and graduate students. About 25% (4-8) of the
              students are from the mathematics and experimental statistics departments.
              Moreover, the addition of graduate students to current projects provides
              first-hand insight to the undergraduate about graduate studies. 

Since
              mathematics is one of the building blocks for engineers, closer interaction
              between students and faculty increases the levels of understanding for both.
              This project expands the learning community and provides an exciting way to
              enhance students' academic, social and personal success at the university. The
              investigators believe that this educational program is a successful national
              model to assist students in gaining the educational skills needed for industry
              and graduate studies through various sponsored activities including: 1)
              Retention, 2) Professional Development, 3) Graduate School, and 4)
              Dissemination.

