Title       : An Engineering Research Center In Wireless Integrated Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9986866

Award Number: 9986866
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19238135           (Estimated)
Investigator: Kensall D. Wise wise@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Khalil Najafi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Wireless Integrated Microsystems is
              focused on miniature low-cost integrated microsystems capable of measuring or
              controlling a variety of physical parameters, interpreting the data, and
              communicating with a host system over a bi-directional wireless link.  The ERC
              is targeted at the intersection of micropower electronics, wireless
              communications, and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).  The resulting
              devices are expected to become pervasive in society during the next two
              decades, with applications ranging from environmental monitoring (weather,
              global warming, air and water quality) to improved health care (wearable and
              implantable biomedical systems).  The ERC brings together faculty from the
              University of Michigan, Michigan State University, Michigan Technology
              University, with expertise in VLSI design and computer architecture, wireless
              communications, packaging, medicine, and MEMS.  The Center is supported by the
              State of Michigan and over twenty companies having vital interest in these
              areas.
The four research thrusts of the ERC focus on micropower circuits,
              wireless interfaces, sensors and microinstruments, and micropackaging.  The
              work will extend existing micropower circuit techniques and sensor-driven
              controller architectures, develop single-chip communication transceivers based
              on micromechanical structures and MEMS microesonators, explore a variety of
              self-testing microinstruments (including chemical, mechanical, and thermal
              devices), and develop hermetic wafer-level packaging using deposited thin films
              and fused vacuum cavities.  The goal is to develop systems that are rapidly
              configurable, reconfigurable, and self-testing.  Work in these four thrust
              areas will be coordinated by focusing on two application testbed systems:  an
              rf-powered implantable microsystem (initially a cochlear prosthesis for the
              profoundly deaf, with subsequent extension to devices for treating epilepsy and
              Parkinson's disease), and a battery-powered environmental monitoring system
              capable of gas analysis as well as the measurement of barometric pressure,
              temperature, humidity, and other variables.  These testbeds are intended to
              emphasize the challenges that will be found in microsystems
              generally.
Industrial programs, including technology transfer and jobs
              creation, are important components of the ERC and will be addressed through
              joint efforts, personnel exchanges, and prototype fabrication.  The
              multidisciplinary nature of microsystems makes them ideal tools for exploring
              innovative approaches to engineering education, including electives that cut
              across traditional disciplinary boundaries.  The ability to mix students with
              different backgrounds in team-oriented research is critical in the training of
              future engineers.  The educational thrusts in this ERC extend from high school
              through the graduate level.  In high school, working with science coordinators
              and teachers, MEMS will be used to illustrate important principles and
              encourage students to pursue exciting careers in engineering.  This will
              include special efforts with underrepresented minority students.  In the
              undergraduate and graduate programs, multi-university multidisciplinary
              distance learning and virtual-laboratory experiences will be employed in the
              development of new course sequences in MEMS and microsystems.  Finally, the ERC
              will explore the broader societal implications of these microsystems and their
              associated technology.
This award provides $2.5 million for the first year of
              NSF support to the ERC through a fice-year cooperative agreement, which is
              renewable in year three and six.    
