Title       : CSEMS: Computer Science, Engineering,and Mathematics Scholarships at the
               University of Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986889

Award Number: 9986889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Y. Velez velez@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Umashankar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Mercer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Shoemaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria-Teresa Velez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The CSEMS scholarship program that is being proposed will provide the
              participating students with two valuable resources. First of all, the CSEMS
              scholarship program allows the student to focus more on their educational
              environment. Secondly, this environment will be greatly improved by the active
              participation of the PIs. Students will be connected to the
              career/advising/mentoring services of this university through their designated
              CSEMS scholarship advisors. Each one of the five PIs on this grant will work
              with a small group of scholarship recipients to ensure that the students are
              making progress towards their career goals and that they are taking advantage
              of the career services that are already in place. 

Students who are
              completing their degrees are at a point of transition and the PIs recognize the
              importance of providing timely information to the students to aid them in
              making important decisions. The PIs will work with the students to investigate
              career options, including placement into graduate or professional schools or
              entering the workforce. 

The University of Arizona is much more than simply
              a Research I university. It has shown itself to be vitally interested in
              undergraduate and graduate education. The CSEMS scholars, working with their
              assigned PI, will be able to take advantage of the research experience of the
              faculty to increase their career goals. The many educational opportunities will
              further enhance their experience and prepare them for an exciting technological
              career. 

