Title       : Soft X-Ray Nanotomography of Cryo Specimens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a9986819

Award Number: 9986819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $662000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris J. Jacobsen jacobsen@xray1.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janos Kirz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9986819
Chris J. Jacobsen
SUNY Stony Brook
Soft X-ray
              Nanotomography of Cryo Specimens

     High resolution imaging has led to
              dramatic advances in understanding the molecular machinery of cells.  Visible
              light microscopy can be used to observe molecular traffic in living cells at a
              resolution of a twentieth to a hundredth of a cell diameter.  Electron
              microscopy can be used to observe the location of antibody-tagged labels in
              tissue sections at a size scale corresponding to several protein
              macromolecules.  X-ray crystallography can be used to study individual proteins
              or viruses at close to atomic resolution.  Amongst these powerful approaches,
              soft x-ray microscopy provides new opportunities for imaging whole, wet cells. 
              Samples suitable for soft x-ray microscopy can be 10-50 times thicker than
              electron microscopy samples.  The soft x-ray microscope can obtain a resolution
              of 3-10 times that of visible light microscopy, and offers the possibility of
              observing the different bonding states of organic molecules.  To fully exploit
              this potential, methods for tomographic imaging of frozen hydrated cells are
              required.

     With support from the National Science Foundation, a
              transmission x-ray microscope that is able to image frozen hydrated biological
              specimens has been developed.  The first results from this microscope have
              yielded a 100x100x250 nm image of a fibroblast cell.  This image was obtained
              by rotating the specimen through the depth of focus of a zone plate lens.  This
              award will make it possible to extend the resolution of this approach.  To
              achieve this higher resolution, it is necessary to circumvent the intrinsic
              limit of the depth of focus of high resolution, high numerical aperture optics.
               This will be done by adopting well-developed methods of diffraction tomography
              to record a hologram at each tomographic tilt and obtain a three dimensional
              reconstruction by backpropagation.  Experimentally, this award will fund the
              development of a high tilt cryogenic transfer specimen holder in a motorized
              goniometer system.  The holograms obtained will be magnified onto a CCD camera
              using a Fresnel zone plate.  By using this approach, it will be possible to
              obtaining tomographic datasets of 5 to 10 micrometer thick frozen hydrated
              specimens at the resolution limit of available zone plates: 30 nm at present,
              and 10-20 nm in the future. 

     Development of this instrumentation will
              provide biologists with intermediate resolution information on the three
              dimensional organization of structures in a cell that are difficult to
              fluorescently label.  These images will provide new insights into cell
              function.  This award will also support the training of physics students in
              biological imaging.  



