Title       : Exploratory Research on Biosystems at the Nanoscale: Kinesin-Powered
               Micro-Chemo-Mechanical Systems (MCMS).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9986206

Award Number: 9986206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201379             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Stewart rstewart@ee.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1084,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              One of the fundamental processes occurring in biological cells is directed
              active transport.  Numerous cellular components must be processed, packaged,
              sorted, and delivered to specific locations at specific times within cells. 
              This essential moving about of the cell's components is carried out, in large
              part, by kinesin motor proteins and the microtubule cytoskeleton, which
              function as an intracellular railroad system-a railroad with nanometer-scale
              locomotives running on nanometer-scale tracks.  The long-term objective of the
              proposed research is to take the molecular machinery of this sub-cellular
              railroad out of the cell and integrate it into micron-scale devices with moving
              parts driven by kinesin motors-MicroChemoMechanical Systems (MCMS).  The
              specific objectives are:  (1) To explore new methods to "lay the tracks" for
              kinesin motors.  The kinesin engines will only go where there are appropriate
              gauge tracks.  Precise positioning of the microtubule tracks will be essential
              for developing kinesin-based MCMS.  (2) Kinesin-powered microchips.  Methods to
              specifically and selectively couple kinesin to the materials commonly used in
              microfabrication will be developed and adapted to moving microfabricated
              machine parts like levers, or gears, or rotors.  This will be the first step
              toward coupling kinesin generated forces to a useful action in an MCMS.  (3) 
              Construction of a prototype MCMS.  From moving silicon microparts, the pieces
              will be assembled into a prototype MCMS - a kinesin-powered
              micro-generator.

The ability to take the cellular machinery of active
              transport out of the cell and integrate it into microstructures - into MCMS -
              could lead to profound changes in several areas of engineering.  "Bottom up"
              engineering, using nanometer parts and machines from Biology to build up
              microdevices, could ultimately breech the barriers of shrinking conventional
              macrodevices to micro-dimensions, at least for some applications. 
              Kinesin-powered microgenerators, or micropumps, as well as devices with
              kinesin-actuated gates, valves, mirrors, or switches can be imagined.


