Title       : An Experimental Investigation of Behavior in Referenda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a9986407

Award Number: 9986407
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine S. Carson Kate.Carson@usafa.af.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USAFA
	      HQ USAF Academy
	      USAF Academy, CO  80840    719/333-4195

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	Surveys are often used to determine the benefits from public programs such as
              cleaning up the environment.  Many of these surveys employ referendum questions
              such as, "If the cost of preserving this resource would result in an increase
              in your taxes of $X per year, would you vote for the program?"  In recent
              years, there has been a great deal of debate regarding the validity of the use
              of referendum surveys to estimate these benefits.  One issue is whether
              respondents' answers to referendum questions reflect their true valuation of
              the good or program in question.  Recent theoretical work describes
              individuals' optimal responses to different types of survey questions.  These
              results demonstrate that it is not always optimal for subjects to respond
              truthfully to referendum survey questions.  These results also demonstrate that
              there are some types of surveys for which it is not possible to determine an
              optimal response because the surveys do not provide any incentives to the
              respondents.  Unfortunately, these types of surveys are often the types used to
              determine the benefits from public projects.  In order to interpret the results
              of these surveys, it is necessary to know if subjects respond truthfully or
              not.

	This research will use the tools of experimental economics to test the
              theoretical results described above to determine if individuals behave in
              accordance with the theory.  Experimental economics is the use of simulated
              markets to observe the responses of individuals to pure economic incentives
              without the noise that occurs in the real world.    The experiments for this
              research will test the theory about two different types of referendum surveys,
              single referendum and double referendum surveys.  The experiments will also
              test versions of single and double referendum surveys that provide no economic
              incentives.  A comparison the results of experimental surveys that provide no
              economic incentives to the results of those that do will provide insight into
              how to interpret field survey results and design better surveys.

