Title       : Systematic Metallaborane Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9986880

Award Number: 9986880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Fehlner fehlner.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Dr. Thomas P. Fehlner, Department of Chemistry, University of Notre Dame,  is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
              Chemistry Division for the synthesis of new clusters containing both main-group
              and transition-metal atoms. The project has several goals. Metal facilitated
              monoborane condensation reactions will be developed as routes to functionalized
              boranes and carboranes and these ligands will be used to prepare analogs of
              metal-allyl complexes. In this regard the borane fragment will be used as a
              complex ancillary ligand and its ability to influence organic chemistry at the
              metal center will be evaluated. Lanthanide-boron and transition metal-aluminum
              complexes will be prepared by metal halide reactions with monoboranes. The
              reactions of these species with small molecules will be investigated, with one
              objective being metal supported B-H reductions driven by dihydrogen. 

The
              chemistry of the transition metals when combined with carbon containing
              substituents is the basis of the vast field of organometallic chemistry.
              Research in this area has led to many advances in pure and   applied chemistry.
              This project aims to open a related area in which transition metals are
              combined with units containing boron. Preliminary   results indicate that these
               "metallaboranes" will possess an extensive   chemistry that in some ways
              resembles organometallic chemistry, but in other ways is very different. In
              this investigation new combinations of boranes and transition metals will be
              prepared and their chemistry   investigated. The new compounds will express the
              unique aspects of their electronic structures in new kinds of reaction
              chemistry.

