Title       : Using Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships to Build
               Information Technology Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9986956

Award Number: 9986956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Cappetta cappetta@cdnet.cod.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Du Page
	      425 22nd Street
	      Glen Ellyn, IL  601376599    /   -

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              College of DuPage is achieving five principal objectives for its project, Using
              NSF CSEM Scholarships to Build Information Technology Resources: 
1. Expand
              and improve leaning opportunities for students enrolled in CSEM.
2.  Increase
              retention of CSEM students to associate degree achievement. 
3. Improve
              placement of CSEM students in baccalaureate transfer education programs and in
              related employment. 
4.  Expand partnerships between College of DuPage and the
              employment sector to include mentoring. 
5.  Implement recruitment strategies
              for groups underrepresented in CSEM. 

Through the CSEM project, students are
              gaining information about CSEM careers; are receiving mentoring and other
              support services to succeed in studying math, computer science and engineering;
              and are receiving financial aid. All scholarship students are benefiting from
              mentoring by faculty and representatives of business and industry, peer
              tutoring, academic and career counseling, and support services such as
              childcare for children while parents attend school. Outcomes being accomplished
              are: (1) Increased self-confidence and motivation to pursue a CSEM education
              and career, (2) Improved performance in academic coursework and related
              employment opportunities; (3) Increased use of support services. Retention in
              the program; (4) Increased retention rate for CSEM scholarship students; (5)
              Increased transfer and employment placement rates; (6) Institutional capacity
              to develop a pool of professional mentors for CSEM students; (7) Increased
              enrollment of underrepresented groups in CSEM.

The target audience is (1)
              high achieving high school students who begin in calculus; (2) marginal high
              school students who demonstrate an exceptional interest in the science or
              engineering fields; (3) adult learners who are already enrolled in programs at
              the college; and (4) returning adult students who have been away from
              mathematics study for several years. Students are selected from multiple
              sources of referral both internally within the College, and externally through
              local high schools and organizations. A faculty and staff panel interview
              potential candidates for the program. Students who require remediation take a
              special program established to accelerate their learning; however, once they
              enter the program, all students are expected to maintain high academic
              standards. The College expects to enroll forty students in the CESMS program.
              Scholarship recipients are expected to provide peer tutoring to other students
              entering the program. 


