Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986741

Award Number: 9986741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Cobb steve.cobb@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen S. Garland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Eldredge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Claiborne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (31), (59), (21) The university offers a variety of associate,
              baccalaureate, and masters degrees in computer science, engineering,
              engineering technology, and mathematics. These disciplines are housed in four
              independent departments, each having unique, well-defined, and academically
              challenging programs of study. The departments are: Computer Science and
              Information Systems; Physics and Engineering Physics; Industrial and
              Engineering Technology; and Mathematics and Statistics. Each department is
              successful in producing well-educated graduates and placement trends are
              exceptional. However, each department desires to increase the number of
              incoming students into their programs, and to retain those students until they
              have earned their respective degrees. The vast majority of departmental and
              institutional scholarship monies are used as recruiting incentives and are
              earmarked for incoming freshmen in the baccalaureate programs. Scholarship
              support is lacking and desperately needed for students pursuing associate
              degrees, graduate degrees, and upper level students who are deserving but find
              themselves in financial hardship in finishing their programs of study. All the
              departments listed above report a high percentage of upper-level students who
              enroll in full-time study, yet work a significant number of hours at off-campus
              employment in order to pay for their education. This financial pressure leads
              to more time away from study, which often causes poor academic performance,
              subsequently leading to frustration, discouragement, and often the abandonment
              of the student's academic pursuits. 

This project establishes a scholarship
              program for deserving students who have a demonstrated financial need. Using an
              innovative approach to publicizing the availability of these funds, faculty
              "Road Scholar" teams visit regional high schools and community colleges in
              order to increase the visibility of the university's technical degree programs.
              Thus the project addresses both the recruitment and the retention issues which
              are prominent in science, math, and engineering curricula. The economic
              conditions extant in the region make this program particularly beneficial to
              regional students. The resulting increases in the number of graduates with
              technical degrees promotes a well-educated, technically-prepared workforce
              which supports ongoing state efforts in economic development. 

