Title       : Chemical Ecology of Swallowtail Butterflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9986250

Award Number: 9986250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul P. Feeny ppf1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to discover how chemical
similarities
              and differences among plants have influenced associations
between plants and
              the insects that feed on them.  Most plant-feeding
insects are specialists,
              feeding and laying their eggs on only a few plant
species.  They find and
              identify their particular food plants largely by
smelling characteristic odors
              produced by the plants or by tasting
characteristic mixtures of chemical
              compounds in the plant tissues or on
the plant surfaces.  Indeed, plant
              species that are attacked by a
particular species of insect typically share
              one or more kinds of unusual
chemical compounds.  This suggests that the
              ability of insects to add new
plant species to their diet is facilitated by
              the shared occurrence of
particular compounds.
	The swallowtail butterflies
              (family Papilionidae) are used as a
model system in this research because
              their classification and larval food
plants are especially well known.  During
              the next three years, the PIs plan to
concentrate on the black swallowtail
              (Papilio polyxenes) and to determine
why females of this species almost never
              lay their eggs on plants outside
the carrot family (Apiaceae) and yet accept a
              wide range of different
species within this family.  At least in part, females
              identify plants on
which to lay their eggs by detecting stimulant compounds
              with taste
receptors on their feet and by odor receptors in their antennae. 
              Several
of these stimulant compounds have already been identified.  The PIs
              will
complete the identification of these stimulants for the black
              swallowtail
in three common host species, namely carrot, wild parsnip, and
              poison
hemlock.  The PIs will then determine whether the mixtures of
              stimulants share
compounds in common or whether each plant is recognized by a
              different set
of stimulant compounds.  Preferences of individual black
              swallowtail
females among the three food-plant species will be compared
              with
preferences for stimulant extracts to determine whether these are
              primarily
responsible for host preference among different species.  The PIs
              will measure
variation in the preferences of individual females and raise
              their progeny
so that the PIs can compare the corresponding preferences of
              their female
offspring.  These experiments will tell us whether variation
              among females
results, at least in part, from inherited differences in
              responses to
chemical cues.
	Despite recent progress, mostly in Europe and
              Japan, remarkably
little is known of the chemical mixtures by which insects
              recognize their
host plants, let alone of the genetics underlying the relevant
              sensory
mechanisms.  This research should contribute to the basic
              knowledge
required for the wise deployment of new crop varieties whose
              chemistry has
been modified by genetic engineering.
