Title       : NANOSCALE: Structural Changes in Fibronectin Binding Domains upon Adsorption to
               Well-Defined Surface Chemistries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9986549

Award Number: 9986549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andres J. Garcia andres.garcia@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Latour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cell adhesion to proteins adsorbed onto material surfaces is critical to
              numerous biomedical and biotechnological applications, including biomaterials,
              tissue engineering, and in vitro cell culture systems.  Cell attachment to
              extracellular proteins is primarily mediated by the integrin family of cell
              surface receptors.  Integrins bind to specific amino acid sequences in
              extracellular matrix components.  For example, integrin a5b1 binds to the PHSRN
              and RGD domains in fibronectin (Fn).  This interaction is controlled by the
              relative structural orientation of these two domains, which are 3-4 nm apart. 
              Each domain independently contributes little to binding, but in combination,
              they synergistically bind to the receptor to produce significant increases in
              adhesion.  Moreover, upon adsorption to surfaces, Fn undergoes structural
              changes that modify a5b1 binding, suggesting changes in the relative
              orientation of these binding domains.

This project focuses on modeling the
              adsorption of a well-characterized fragment of Fn (FnIII7-10), which contains
              the PHSRN and RGD binding sites, onto self-assembled monolayers of alkanethiols
              presenting well-defined surface chemistries (CH3, NH2, COOH, and OH). 
              Specifically, innovative experimental and computational approaches are
              integrated to model changes in the relative orientation of the PHSRN and RGD
              domains and the relationship between these structural changes and integrin
              binding.  First, the conformation of adsorbed FnIII7-10 will be characterized
              using monoclonal antibodies and structural and thermodynamic information
              obtained from molecular simulations.  The functional binding of integrin a5b1
              to adsorbed FnIII7-10, characterized by adhesion strength and relative binding
              affinity, will then be analyzed and correlated to the structural parameters. 
              By integrating experimental and computational approaches, this analysis will
              provide a mechanistic understanding of protein-surface interactions and the
              role of adsorption-induced structural changes in protein function.  Finally,
              the proposed research will provide an analytical framework that is applicable
              to other protein/surface 

