Title       : NANOSCALE: Nanoscale Optical Biomedical Hybrid Detection System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9986614

Award Number: 9986614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent B. Pizziconi vincent.pizziconi@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                            The objective of this proposal is to assess the feasibility of
              exploiting the unique optical properties of sub-microscopic photosynthetic
              structures known as chlorosomes for potential use in novel
              light-converting
and light-detecting device applications. In natural form,
              chlorosomes serve as light-collecting antennas in some photosynthetic
              microorganisms which efficiently convert this energy into a form useful for the
              microorganism.  In applied form, we will attempt to marry engineering and
              biology to take advantage of their unique molecular architecture and their
              efficient energy transfer processes for use in novel 'biohybrid' device
              applications where enhanced light-detection, and energy conversion and storage
              is desired.
	In this project, the photosynthesis team proposes to isolate and
              characterize chlorosome sub-units, in particular their ability to
              self-assemble, a property that may serve as the basis of novel
              enabling
nanotechnologies that allow the design and fabrication of
              molecular-based optical materials, devices and systems. The bioengineering
              group proposes to assess the feasibility of designing an optical biomolecular
              hybrid device that incorporates chlorosome assemblies interfaced in programmed
              ways to selected light detectors and transducers to demonstrate the potential
              for enhanced device performance from using biohybrid approaches.  The potential
              impact of the project is threefold. It can (a) contribute to the fundamental
              knowledge of the complex process of photosynthesis, (b) potentially lead to
              novel devices and systems that have a number of practical applications in areas
              such as microelectronics, biotechnology, medicine, and (c) further the NSF goal
              of integrating research and education, particularly across science and
              engineering
disciplinary boundaries.

