Title       : CAREER: The Interstellar Disk-Halo Connection in Edge-on Galaxies - Bringing
               Research to a Large Audience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9986113

Award Number: 9986113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Rand rjr@phys.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9986113
Rand
In recent years it has been realized that the Interstellar
              Medium (ISM) and galaxy evolution depend pivotally on the cycling of gas
              between a galaxy's disk and halo. Recent discoveries of huge, vertically
              extended coherent structures in the ISM are called superbubbles and chimneys.  
              The results from observations of thick layers of diffuse gas have enabled
              scientists to begin to form a picture of how stars energize and shape the ISM,
              and how, through these processes, the diffuse gas affects the future evolution
              of a galaxy. This "disk-halo connection" is therefore critical for star
              formation feedback on the ISM, chemical evolution, and possibly the escape of
              gas from galaxies and the production of large gaseous halos responsible for QSO
              metal absorption line systems.

A feature of the ISM, which is now giving us
              a strong handle on the disk-halo connection, is the Diffuse Ionized Gas (DIG).
              In the Milky Way Galaxy, this vertically extended medium is known as the
              Reynolds layer. While it is generally accepted that the great thickness of the
              Reynolds layer is probably due to processes such as chimneys, we still have
              only a rudimentary understanding of (a) the extent of the layer and variations
              thereof, (b) sources of ionization and heating, (c) the kinematics of the gas
              far from the plane, and (d) the relation of other thick gaseous layers to the
              Reynolds layer and the disk-halo connection.   For several reasons, many ISM
              issues are better addressed through studies of external galaxies, which provide
              a synoptic view of the emission. The relatively new area of DIG in edge-on
              spirals, where recent efforts have been focused, has given us a powerful tool
              for understanding the disk-halo connection and the ISM in general. Through
              imaging of edge on galaxies we are now beginning to obtain information on the
              structure of DIG layers and their relation to other thick gaseous layers and
              star formation activity. The DIG is found to be an excellent tracer of
              candidate chimneys. Spectroscopy of DIG layers is now being used to study the
              ionization, heating, kinematics and vertical extent at faint levels of this
              phase. Hence, such observations have great potential to address the four issues
              listed above. The goal of this research effort is to expand greatly these DIG
              observations using sensitive spectroscopy and new imaging possibilities, and to
              carry out searches for neutral hydrogen (HI) and cosmic ray halos. In this way
              it is hoped to learn about how the disk-halo connection operates in detail, as
              input into our larger understanding of galaxy evolution.

Information on the
              research that is being carried out will be brought to a large audience as part
              of an effort to improve scientific awareness and literacy.  An innovative
              project at the University of New Mexico (UNM), called LodeStar, combines
              education and outreach with information on current forefront research. LodeStar
              will soon open an Astronomy Science Center in Albuquerque, thus providing the
              infrastructure for bringing research results to the public. Through a theme
              called "Galaxies Across the Electromagnetic Spectrum", the interpretations and
              explanations of the results of this research, and results from the UNM
              astronomy group in general, will be used to develop programs to educate the
              general public and K-12 school classes about the physics of galaxies, the
              methods of astronomy, and the importance of astronomical research in their own
              State.  Crucially, ethnic groups underrepresented in science, but with a strong
              presence in New Mexico, will be reached through these efforts.  Thus the
              awareness of opportunities to study science at all levels will be increased.  
              Other roles for LodeStar will be developed which will lead to effective public
              outreach projects. 
***

