Title       : Patterning of the Embryonic Germ Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a9986007

Award Number: 9986007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence D. Etkin lde@mdanderson.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental problem in developmental biology concerns the mechanism by
              which
the maternal program regulates early embryogenesis.  Recent studies
              have
demonstrated that several maternal factors such as Tcf-3, VegT, and
              Xenopus
nuclear factor 7 (xnf7), a gene that we are studying, play important
              roles in
the specification, patterning,  and differentiation of the embryonic
              germ
layers.  The effect of these maternal factors is evident at the
              late
blastula-early gastrula stage by the region specific activation of
              zygotic gene
expression such that the embryo is divided into a variety of
              subdomains.  The
most dorsal region forms the Spemann organizer which
              expresses a large variety
of transcription and secreted factors. These are
              expressed in overlapping
domains that  divide the organizer into the head and
              trunk organizer regions. In
addition specific groups of genes are expressed in
              the ventral region.  One of
the key problems is to understand the mechanism by
              which the maternal genetic
program regulates the pattern of expression of both
              the organizer and ventral
specific genes.  Based on our recent data from this
              laboratory we hypothesize
that xnf7 is one of several important maternal
              factors responsible for the
global patterning of the embryo into
              dorsal/ventral domains and for patterning
of the organizer in the dorsal most
              aspect.  Our goal during this next grant
period is to further define the
              precise mechanisms and molecular pathway through
which xnf7 functions and to
              use xnf7 as a tool to gain insights into the general
mechanisms of embryonic
              patterning and the specifics of how the organizer forms
and is patterned. This
              will be accomplished by identifying potential xnf7 target
genes;  identifying
              nuclear partners of xnf7; and determining the role of xnf7
in patterning
              endoderm and ectoderm.


