Title       : Quantum Disorder and Spin-Gaps In Models and Real Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9986948

Award Number: 9986948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajiv R. Singh singh@solid.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant has been awarded to support the work of Singh, a senior
              researcher/scholar at UC Davis.  Singh has become well known for his work on
              frustrated magnets.  Since the frustrated magnets do not order until very low
              temperatures, there are occasionally quantum effects in the phase transition. 
              In this grant period he is planning to focus his research program in three
              parallel directions.  In the first case, there will be a search for model spin
              systems, which undergo quantum phase transitions.   In the second case, there
              will be calculations of a wide variety of experimentally measured quantities
              such as (not only) transport and thermodynamic responses, but also including
              neutron scattering cross sections and NMR relaxation rates.  These will be
              compared with experiments on a variety of materials, such as high Tc
              superconductors, spin ladders and chains, 2-d spin gap systems, dimerized spin
              systems and other examples of complex and correlated electron effects. In the
              third case, there will be a continued search for controlled and systematic
              numerical methods for theoretical calculations.
%%%
This midcareer/senior PI
              is well known for his studies of materials which do not become magnetic until
              very low temperatures.  The reason being that the atomic moments find
              themselves encouraged to point in different directions by other atomic moments
              in the environment.  The magnets then, are called frustrated and their
              properties are strongly influenced by their inability to order.  Furthermore
              they also become possible candidates for novel phenomena such as quantum phase
              transitions.  The research program in this grant will pursue an organized
              course of research, including development of formalism, calculation of
              quantities which are measured in diverse experiments and then compared with
              experimental results and finally development of sophisticated tools of
              calculation.  It is an ambitious and complex plan of research which is expected
              to provide insight into the properties of novel and complex materials.
***

