Title       : The Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9986442

Award Number: 9986442
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Hugh M. Van Horn                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Glinka charles.glinka@nist.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIST
	      Building 226 Rm B226
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20899    301/975-2000

NSF Program : 1743      NATIONAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9164,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9986442
Glinka
This is a renewal award for the continued operation of the
              Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS). CHRNS is a major
              research facility jointly funded by the National Science foundation and the
              National Institute of Standards and Technology's Center for Neutron Research
              (NCNR). Its mission is to develop and operate state-of-the-art neutron
              scattering instrumentation, with broad application in materials research, for
              use by the general scientific community.  CHRNS presently comprises three
              facilities: 1) a 30 meter, high resolution, small-angle neutron scattering
              (SANS) instrument; 2) a spin-polarized, inelastic neutron scattering (SPINS)
              spectrometer; and 3) a Bonse-Hart-type, perfect-crystal diffractometer (PCD)
              for ultra-high-resolution SANS that will become operational as a user
              instrument in 2000.  The two SANS instruments combined are capable of
              determining statistically averaged structural information in materials on the
              widest range of length scale accessible at any neutron research center in North
              America.  These instruments are used by university, government and industrial
              researchers in materials science, chemistry, biology and condensed matter
              physics to investigate materials such as synthetic polymers, metal alloys,
              ceramics, porous media, structured fluids and gels, biological macromolecules,
              and magnetic materials.  The SPINS spectrometer is a cold neutron, triple-axis
              spectrometer with full polarization analysis that is used primarily by
              condensed matter physicists and physical chemists to probe nanoscale motions of
              atoms and magnetic moments in materials on time scales from 30 to 0.3
              picoseconds.  Through the use of innovative instrumentation, SPINS provides
              enhanced sensitivity for measuring low energy magnetic, vibrational and
              rotational excitations in ordered and disordered systems.
%%%
The Center for
              High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS) at the National Institute of
              Standards and Technology's Center for Neutron Research (NCNR) develops and
              operates state-of-the-art neutron scattering instrumentation, with broad
              application in materials research, for use by the general scientific community.
               CHRNS presently comprises three facilities: 1) a 30 meter, high resolution,
              small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) instrument; 2) a spin-polarized,
              inelastic neutron scattering (SPINS) spectrometer; and 3) a Bonse-Hart-type,
              perfect-crystal diffractometer (PCD) for ultra-high-resolution SANS that will
              become operational as a user instrument in 2000.  The two SANS instruments
              combined are capable of determining statistically averaged structural
              information in materials on a scale from one nanometer  to ten micrometers, the
              widest range accessible at any neutron research center in North America.  These
              instruments are used by university, government and industrial researchers in
              materials science, chemistry, biology and condensed matter physics to
              investigate materials such as synthetic polymers, metal alloys, ceramics,
              porous media, structured fluids and gels, biological macromolecules, and
              magnetic materials.  The SPINS spectrometer is a cold neutron, triple-axis
              spectrometer with full polarization analysis that is used primarily by
              condensed matter physicists and physical chemists to probe nanoscale motions of
              atoms and magnetic moments in materials on time scales in the picoseconds.
              Through the use of innovative neutron supermirror transmission polarizers,
              SPINS provides enhanced sensitivity for measuring low energy magnetic,
              vibrational and rotational excitations in ordered and disordered
              systems.
***

