Title       : Brookings Panel On Economic Activity 2000-2001 in Washington, DC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9986335

Award Number: 9986335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Perry gperry@brook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Brainard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brookings Institution
	      1775 Mass Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200362188    202/797-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986335
Perry

The Brookings Panel on Economic Activity aims to focus
              macroeconomic research on problems confronting the U.S. and world economy and
              on the economic relationships that are crucial to addressing such problems. The
              Panel strives to fulfill this purpose by generating, discussing, and publishing
              high quality, relevant, and timely research on a broad range of applied
              macroeconomic topics. The Panel's notion of relevance is broad. It includes
              research to explore fundamental characteristics of the economy and how it
              responds to policy, as well as more applied research aimed at clarifying and
              quantifying economic relations. It is concerned with issues affecting economic
              performance broadly, including areas such as global interdependence and trade
              policy, as well as the full range of issues associated with long run growth,
              business cycles, and economic stabilization. The Panel is committed to
              producing quality research, and its method of operation is designed with that
              goal foremost in mind. Its research, published in the Brookings Papers on
              Economic Activity, undergoes a much more intensive process of review,
              criticism, discussion and editing than conventional journals can provide. In
              this process, and in the selection of topics and authors, the directors of the
              Panel (principal investigators) are aided by the Panel advisers-- experts
              spanning a broad range of research interests, professional views and
              methodological preferences-- and, most actively, by a newly formed Advisory
              Group consisting of nine of those advisers.  The directors are especially
              interested in involving women, minorities and younger researchers and they and
              the Advisory Group have this in mind in selecting authors and discussants for
              the research papers.



