Title       : Committee on Hydrologic Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a9986796

Award Number: 9986796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Parker sdparker@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986796
Parker

The National Research Council (NRC) is continuing the work of
              the committee on Hydrologic Sciences (COHS).  The Committee's charge, broadly
              stated, is to conduct studies in the hydrologic sciences.  Such studies will
              identify research needs and provide scientific advice on the hydrologic aspects
              of multi-disciplinary U.S. national programs and U.S. contributions to
              international programs related to climate and water cycle research.  The
              initial focus of the committee's work was on the role of hydrology in the
              climate system and the implications of climate and land over change for the
              hydrologic system.

Formed in late 1998, the Committee met four times between
              February 1999 and January 2000.  Its first priority was to develop a report
              assessing the hydrologic component of the U.S. Global Change Research Program
              (USGCRP).  The report titled Hydrologic Science Priorities for the US Global
              Change Research Program:  An Initial Assessment was published and briefed to
              the sponsoring agencies in 1999.  In summary the report identifies two key
              research priorities that could significantly contribute to the USGCRP plan: 1)
              predictability and variability of regional and global water cycles, and 2)
              coupling of hydrologic systems and ecosystems and ecosystems through chemical
              cycles.  The first priority concerns understanding sources of variability and
              limits to prediction.  The second is focused on the integrative nature of
              terrestrial hydrology and the substantive role of ecosystems in exchange
              between land and atmosphere.	

During work on the first report several
              scientific challenges became evident that require more in-depth consideration. 
              Plans are currently being made to discuss these scientific challenges with the
              broader community than the small COHS membership through a series of workshops.
               As a first step COHS members are presently drafting white papers that will
              define the scopes of inquires and lay out issues to be explored in this format.
               It is intended that these white papers will guide workshop deliberations
              toward reports that will distill the workshop contributions into a coherent set
              of conclusions and recommendations.  Three such workshops are planned over the
              next five to ten months.  The topics relate to: 1) science at the frontier of
              integrated hydrological and ecological sciences, 2) groundwater fluxes across
              interfaces, specifically the challenge of estimating groundwater recharge and
              discharge across scales, and 3) predictability of regional and global
              hydrologic systems and opportunities that might be exploited due to advances in
              computation.

