Title       : CETPPA-Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation in Pennsylvania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a9986753

Award Number: 9986753
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry Peard tpeard@iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P.James Moser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denine Burkett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patsy Ann Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Narayanaswamy Bharathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Hovan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Mark G. Twiest  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Judith M. Hechtman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

This systemic reform initiative focuses on the science and
              math teacher preparation programs of the 14 campuses of the Pennsylvania State
              System of Higher Education (SSHE). In 1998, these universities prepared 35% of
              the science and 29% of the math teachers certified in PA. In 1998, the SSHE was
              also responsible for 39% of the PA elementary certifications. This project is
              facilitating implementation of systemic reform in the SSHE system. During this
              project, scientists, mathematicians, and educators from SSHE campuses are
              collaborating to: (1) change selected university content courses taken by
              education students to reflect research-based effective pedagogy; (2) supplement
              the math and science content of science and math education courses; (3)
              introduce the paired supervision of science and math student teachers by
              content and pedagogy specialists; (4) provide consistency in experiences
              received by science and math education majors between their revised university
              courses, their field 
experiences, and induction period; and (5) increase
              efforts at recruitment of underrepresented public school students to pursue
              careers in teaching science and mathematics. The SSHE universities are
              collaborating with nine community colleges and over 50 public schools in this
              project. However, system universities and partner community colleges interact
              with most of the state's 501 school districts in their normal course of
              operation. The extensiveness of these contacts offers high potential to improve
              both teacher preparation and the professional development of teachers in
              Pennsylvania. Induction of new teachers is very important in establishing how
              new teachers actually do teach and how many teachers remain teaching in
              Pennsylvania after the first several years of teaching experience. The CETPPA
              is establishing a strong induction program that provides first class mentoring
              of new teachers, supports new teachers for multiple years, is funded adequately
              to support all eligible new teachers, is linked to district and state
              standards, provides the means for sustained communication, and is evaluated for
              effectiveness. Statewide activities being implemented include teaming K-16
              faculty to revise and/or develop selected science, math, and education courses
              to include technology and reflect strong content and pedagogy components,
              creating science and math centers, offering professional development symposia
              for K-16 faculty, strengthening field experiences, and developing mechanisms
              for recruiting students into math/science education programs. External
              evaluation is being conducted by NCISE. Strong assessment and dissemination
              components accompany a comprehensive program of cultural change that can serve
              as a national model.




