Title       : Free Radical Chain Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9986200

Award Number: 9986200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Crich dcrich@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor David Crich, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Illinois at Chicago, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his
              studies of free radical chain reactions.  Development of selenol catalyzed
              stannane mediated chain reactions allows the trapping, before opening, of
              cyclopropylcarbinyl radicals.  In order to facilitate purification following
              this type of catalysis, Professor Crich is preparing and testing new selenols
              for use in fluorous phases.  The efficient trapping of cyclohexadienyl radicals
              by catalytic quantities of selenols provides entry to illustrative target
              molecules, while the introduction of stereochemical probes is leading to both a
              mechanistic understanding and synthetic applications of the vicinal
              nucleophilic substitution reaction.  In the course of these studies, Professor
              Crich is developing new low-temperature initiators for free radical chain
              reactions.

Although molecular species with an unpaired electron ("free
              radicals") have long been known, it is only comparatively recently that these
              intrinsically reactive species have been found to be sufficiently controllable
              to allow their use in the selective synthesis of desired organic molecules. 
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor David Crich, of
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Chicago, is
              developing new methods for the generation of free radicals and for their use in
              organic synthesis.  His studies are also extending the potential of free
              radical chemistry to lower temperature processes and to newly-developed
              "fluorous phase" solvents, offering promise for simple and environmentally
              benign separation and processing steps.
