Title       : Nearshore Benthic-Pelagic Coupling: Coral Growth Responses to Internal Tidal
               Forcing on Florida Keys Coral Reefs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9986547

Award Number: 9986547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345439             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Leichter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesus G. Pineda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Internal bores generated by internal tides and breaking internal waves represent
              an important source of physical variability and cross-shelf transport in a
              range of near-shore marine environments, including the slopes of coral reefs in
              the Florida Keys, USA. The arrival of internal bores is marked by rapid
              fluctuations in near-bottom water temperature and density coupled to the onset
              of strong upslope flows. Cool subsurface water is forced onshore at
              semi-diurnal frequencies throughout the summer months, and the penetration of
              cool water and the high frequency physical variability associated with this
              pulsing mechanism decreases with distance up reef slopes. The arrival of
              subsurface waters on reef slopes is associated with increases in concentrations
              of dissolved nutrients, phytoplankton and zooplankton. Internal tidal forcing
              represents a suite of physical mechanisms that can potentially connect
              near-shore benthic communities to water and materials associated with offshore
              thermocline and associated subsurface chlorophyll maximum layers. The impact of
              internal tidal forcing is widespread throughout reefs in the Florida Keys, and
              new observations show that very large internal bores can be detected near the
              bottom at 50 m depth at least 1.5 km seaward of the Keys reef tract. The timing
              of these large internal bores appears to correspond to upward deviations of
              offshore isotherms indicative of subsurface intrusions of cool water onto the
              shelf seaward of the reef tract. This upwelling of isotherms may be caused by
              offshore meanders of the Florida Current, suggesting a direct link between
              regional oceanographic variability and high frequency cross-shelf
              transport.

This project will be an investigation of the effects of internal
              tidal forcing on growth rates of suspension-feeding corals, as well as an
              examination of the roles of oceanographic variability in modulating internal
              tidal forcing along the Florida Keys reef tract. Two reef sites have been
              identified where natural topographic features produce adjacent reef slope
              microhabitats with equivalent depth gradients and similar overlying ambient
              water masses but with very different levels of exposure to internal tidal
              forcing. At these paired sites, manipulative coral growth rate experiments and
              analysis of skeletal banding patterns in native coral colonies will be combined
              with high frequency near-bottom physical sampling, measurement of fluxes of
              dissolved nutrients, and characterization of zooplankton availability. Results
              from experimental work will be considered within a context of broad-scale
              biological patterns, and regional-scale observations of high frequency
              oceanographic processes that can modulate internal tidal forcing. Understanding
              the biological and ecological importance of internal tidal forcing is limited,
              in part, by a lack of experimental studies and long-term, broad-scale
              observations. In addition to influencing thermal and nutrient dynamics, cross
              shelf transport associated with internal tidal bores may represent a dynamic
              conduit for delivery of larval invertebrates and fish to coral reefs. Such
              mechanisms of benthic-pelagic coupling have far-reaching potential consequences
              for biological processes on coral reefs and for connectivity among
              meta-populations distributed alongshore. Internal tidal forcing can directly
              influence small scale, high frequency physical variability within reefs, and
              may be modulated by regional scale oceanographic processes of water column
              stratification and alongshore currents. These forcing mechanisms, thus, may
              function to link small-scale, benthic biological processes to regional-scale
              oceanographic variability. This project should expand understanding both of
              coral responses to internal tidal forcing and of the importance of alongshore
              variability in internal tidal forcing for benthic marine communities.

