Title       : Modified Uridines, Contributors of Novel Chemistries to Functional RNA
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9986011

Award Number: 9986011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Agris Paul_Agris@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
9986011
Agris
RNAs contain the standard nucleosides adenosine, uridine,
              guanosine and cytosine.  In addition, RNA contains some 100 naturally occurring
              modifications of the four major nucleosides.  The modifications are as simple
              as methylations and thiolations and as complex as amino acid derivatives and
              tricylic additions. All are enzymatically synthesized after synthesis
              (transcription) of the RNA. Transfer RNAs (tRNA) having a large number and
              variety of modified nucleosides, its structure and function readily assayed, is
              a good model RNA for the study of modified nucleoside contributions to
              structure and function. Conventional wisdom has led researchers to believe that
              tRNA, responsible for bringing individual amino acids to the ribosome in
              response to genetic coding triplets (codons) in the messenger RNA (mRNA), do
              not require modified nucleosides to function in protein synthesis.  However,
              this laboratory has recently determined that at least two modified nucleosides,
              2-thiouridine derivatives (s2U) at "wobble" position-34 of and
              6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine (t6A) at position-37 of tRNA's anticodon stem and
              loop domain (ASL), are individually capable of restoring ribosome binding to
              the otherwise inactive ASL of human lysine-3 tRNA.  Position-34 is the first
              nucleoside of the anticodon that binds its complementary codon in the mRNA on
              the ribosome.  Thiouridines occur in tRNAs for glutamine, glutamic acid and
              lysine; t6A occurs in tRNAs for lysine.   Techniques for site-specific
              introduction of modified and stable isotope labeled nucleosides developed in
              this laboratory make it possible to probe the contributions these nucleosides
              alone and together, and in combination  with other modifications provide to RNA
              function and structure. The project's long-term objective continues to be an
              elucidation of the physicochemical contributions of modified uridines to the
              biological functions of RNA. Several testable hypotheses have been formulated: 
               a) Thiouridine-34 dependent ribosome binding is common to tRNAs with
              uridine-rich anticodon loops and is important for A-site, as well as P-site
              binding. b) Whereas t6A37 restores ribosomal binding to the ASLLys3UUU, the
              commonly occurring position-37 modification of glutamine and glutamic acid
              tRNAs, 2-methyladenosine-37  (m2A37), will not restore binding to ASLGlnSUC and
              ASLGluSCU. c) Modification-dependent ribosome binding is sequence context
              dependent.  d) Anticodon stem and loop modifications provide optimum ribosomal
              binding architecture to lysine, glutamine and glutamic acid tRNAs by
              significantly influencing chemical and conformational dynamics of the ASL.
              Biochemical and molecular biology techniques will be used as approaches,
              including the use of quantitative P- and A-site ribosomal binding, and
              quantitative footprinting of tRNA on ribosomal P- and A-site 16S rRNA
              nucleosides. The physicochemical contributions of modifications (thermal
              stability, base stacking interactions and structure) will be related to their
              abilities to restore ribosome binding to lysine, glutamine and glutamic acid
              ASLs.  Effects of modification on ribosome binding and footprinting will be
              related to the modifications' effects on stability, structure and
              dynamics.



