Title       : RUI: Early Guest Ig Expression and Diversity in Cloned Transgenic Cattle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9986213

Award Number: 9986213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Goldsby ragoldsby@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              These studies will determine if B cells of transgenic cattle bearing human
              immunoglobulin (Ig) genes can generate normal human antibodies.  The question
              is whether the bovine recombinases (Rag-1 and Rag-2) and other bovine-specific
              factors can successfully rearrange and express the human Ig genes.  The
              specific aims are (1) to assay for expression of surface and soluble forms of
              human Igs and their mRNA in bovine spleen cells, (2) to determine by sequencing
              the extent to which the genes encoding human light and heavy chains have
              undergone normal rearrangements, and (3) to determine the repertoire diversity
              of expressed heavy chains and lambda light chain.  These transgenic studies
              will be done in collaboration with the Hematech Corporation which will raise
              the transgenic fetal calves.  Two additional aims are proposed to determine the
              organization of bovine Ig genes.  The specific aims are (4) to characterize the
              germline elements and arrangement of the bovine heavy chain locus, and (5) to
              analyze the J-C introns of rearranged bovine genes to determine the
              mechanism(s) that give rise to J-C diversity (templated or untemplated somatic
              point mutations, or rearrangements of different gene segments).  The studies
              will contribute to the basic understanding of immunoglobulin genes in cattle. 
              Comparative studies on other vertebrate species indicate that there is
              significant cross-species diversity in the germline arrangement of these genes
              and variations in the mechanisms used to generate diversity.  The studies will
              provide insights into the evolutionary conservation of these basic mechanisms. 
              The results could have great practical importance for use of the bovine
              transgenic system to express specific human antibodies.  The project will also
              contribute significantly to the education and training of undergraduate
              students who will participate in this research at Amherst College.
