Title       : Economic Measurement of the Emerging Internet Access Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9986405

Award Number: 9986405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shane M. Greenstein s-greenstein1@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes to investigate two foundational economic issues in the
              emerging Internet platform and apply them to a specific case, the Internet
              access market.  What principles should govern the measurement of economic
              activity in the Internet access market?  How should economists characterize
              empirical outcomes in pricing and service in the Internet access market?  The
              answers to these questions inform a wide range of research on the economics of
              the Internet.  This proposal brings both original data and methods to bear on
              these questions. 

The Internet access market has several features which make
              it an ideal case study for understanding issues of valuation and measurement. 
              First, the commercial Internet access market is a key element in the value
              chain of electronic commerce.  Commercial providers now supply the vast
              majority of Internet access in the United States.  While revenues are
              relatively small for the communication and computing industry, they are rather
              large for a four-year-old industry.  These revenues are also expected to grow. 
              Second, a majority of Internet Service Providers, the private firms who provide
              most commercial access in the United States, have begun to branch into the
              offering of many services other than access.  This trend raises issues about
              the definition of economic activity, the creation of market value and how that
              is changing.  Third, there is considerable interest among policy makers and
              among scholars of applied theory about the operation and pricing of Internet
              networks.  There is a recognized need for the development of appropriate
              measurement methodologies, both to inform government statistical work involving
              data collection and to inform policy assessment at federal agencies, such as
              the FCC and NTIA.  Yet, little work to date has addressed these needs with
              empirical research using best-practice econometrics and empirical
              methodologies. 

This proposal first provides background about the specific
              market studied.  It then discusses the specific activities the principal
              investigator (PI) will pursue.  The PI proposes to estimate models of the
              determinants for why ISPs expand new services.  The PI proposes to extend data
              collection about ISP pricing.  The PI proposes to estimate models of pricing
              and valuation of access and new service.  All these activities raise and
              address foundational issues in classification and measurement of economic
              activity in emerging Internet markets.

