Title       : Roles of Histone Ubiquitination in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  2000   
File        : a9986650

Award Number: 9986650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arun Chatterjee                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Osley m-osley@ski.mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The identification of ubiquitinated H2B (uH2B) in the yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae and the discovery of phenotypes associated with its absence will be
              exploited to understand the role of this histone modification in chromosome
              structure and function.  The overall objectives are to define the biological
              processes that depend on uH2B and to learn how this modification is regulated
              in vivo.  The first goal is to determine whether uH2B is a chromatin
              constituent, since the subcellular localization of uH2B may determine its
              biological functions.  General chromatin association will be measured in
              preparations that enrich for chromatin-associated proteins and after
              purification of nucleosomes, using a novel method of immunological detection. 
              Preferential chromatin association of uH2B with specific genes will be assayed
              by the method of chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).  
	The modulation of
              chromatin structure by the posttranslational modification of histones has
              emerged as a key mechanism to regulate chromosome function in eukaryotes. 
              Although a wealth of studies have investigated how transcriptional regulation
              is affected by histone acetylation, the biological roles of other histone
              modifications remain largely unknown.  The discovery that uH2B is present in
              yeast and required for optimal cell growth and meiosis has provided a unique
              opportunity to study the impact of this modification in a genetically tractable
              organism.  Since histone ubiquitination is an evolutionarily conserved process,
              it is expected that these studies will make significant contributions to our
              understanding of how this modification influences the multiple processes that
              occur on eukaryotic chromosomes.
