Title       : REU Site Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology at Rochester
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9986712

Award Number: 9986712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Dewhurst stephen_dewhurst@urmc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheeptip Benyajati  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



ABSTRACT       Stephen Dewhurst       DBI# 9986712




           
              This three year REU Site Program is designed to organize the resources,
              environment and experience of a major research University so as to provide
              enhanced research opportunities in Cellular and Molecular Biology to promising
              juniors and sophomores.  The Program builds upon major strengths in the
              University of Rochester' s programs in the Biological Sciences and it is
              intended not only to provide outstanding research experiences, but also to
              encourage participating undergraduates to pursue career paths in the biological
              sciences.  The Program seeks to acheive a goal of 50% participation by women
              and underrepresented minorities.           Students will be recruited from
              four-year colleges, including women's colleges and historically black colleges,
              with which the University of Rochester has working relationships. University of
              Rochester undergraduates who conduct academic year research will also be
              strongly encouraged to apply to the program, and these students will be
              supported, with Program sponsorship, in preparing their results for
              presentation at national scientific meetings during the academic year. The
              central research experience will take place during a 10-week, full-time work
              period each summer.  At this time, each REU student will pursue an independent
              research'project under the supervision of a specific faculty advisor, and with
              the "hands-on" guidance of a specific graduate student or postdoctoral mentor. 
              AR of the students will participate in REU seminars, which will include topics
              in scientific ethics, biological safety and chemical hygiene as well as
              research presentations by University faculty and graduate students, and
              discussions of careers and graduate work.  Students will report in writing at
              the conclusion of the summer program, and they will also present the results of
              their work at a mini-symposium. Each student will be strongly encouraged to
              continue part-time research work during the academic year, with the aim of
              completing a scientific publication.  Students will also be strongly encouraged
              to present the results of their research at a national research meeting, such
              as the National Conference on Undergraduate Research.










