Title       : NANOSCALE: Nanoscale Self-Assembled Block Copolypeptide Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9986347

Award Number: 9986347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Deming tdeming@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrin J. Pochan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Deming - 9986347

The PI's plan to study the self-assembly of block
              copolypeptides as synthetic materials that
possess the ability to aggregate
              and/or "fold" into specifically defined, functional nanostructures.
The
              internal structure and nanoparticle shape are key features of these assemblies
              that should
impart the materials with exceptional attributes for applications
              in sensor technology as well
as drug and gene therapeutics. By understanding
              the rules by which such block copolypeptides
self-assemble, one should be able
              to prepare new, well-defined nanostructures that can be tailored
for specific
              applications. The PI's will be focusing on the self-assembly of these
              block
copolypeptides in solution, primarily with water as the solvent. By
              working with polypeptides,
it is expected that the secondary structures
              present in the block domains will substantially alter the
structures of the
              aggregates. They also plan to explore the nanoscale self-assembly
              of
multiblock copolypeptides (three or more domains), where the number of
              discrete structural
components might allow individual or small numbers of
              chains to adopt specific tertiary (3D)
structures of defined shape. The
              controlled aggregation of block copolymers into discrete
complexes with
              tertiary structure has yet to be accomplished, yet such materials, constructed
              of
amino acids, would certainly be invaluable for biomedical applications.
              Examples would be
drug and gene delivery, where the shape of the complexes
              favors selective interactions with
different biological surfaces. In addition
              to defining the nanostructure of aggregates, the
secondary structures of block
              copolypeptides have the added feature that they can be sensitive
              to
environmental changes, such as pH, solvent or temperature. This property
              can be utilized for the
construction of nanoscale assembled complexes that
              will be able to change their shape when
exposed to different conditions. Such
              features are useful for sensing applications or for programmed release of
              biologically active compounds in delivery applications.

To accelerate the
              discovery and understanding of these new, complex nanostructures, the
              PI's
plan to couple automated parallel synthesis and processing methods with
              state-of-the-art
analytical tools to rapidly screen the many parameters of
              block copolypeptide phase space (e.g.
composition, sequence, temperature,
              solvent). The speed of this approach will allow the
exploration of highly
              complex polymer sequences possessing nanoscopic folding and
              self-assembly
properties that will rival those of biological proteins. Such
              structure and function specific
assemblies will have wide ranging applications
              in the areas of biomimetics, biomineralization,
tissue engineering, high
              strength fibers, polar or surface-active films and coatings,
              and
optoelectronic devices and sensors. The major tasks of this project are
              (i) the synthesis of block copoly peptide libraries, (ii) processing of the
              crude polymers to assist self-assembly, (iii) rapid screening of the libraries
              to identify lead compounds and novel structures, and (iv) detailed
              characterization of new nanostructured materials. The successful demonstration
              of these components will verify that combinatorial methods can be applied
              successfully to the preparation and analysis of nanostructured materials. More
              significantly, this methodology will allow the future exploration of highly
              complex biomimetic materials that would otherwise be near impossible to study
              solely because of the number of possible variables in their composition. 

