Title       : Tailoring Surface Morphology in Group III Nitride Heteroepitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a9986271

Award Number: 9986271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignatius S. Tsong ig.tsong@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to encompass the complete cycle of film growth of GaN, from
              substrate preparation through growth of buffer layers and nitride epilayers to
              deposition of metal contact layers. The primary objective is to achieve
              consistent growth of smooth two-dimensional basal-plane oriented layers of
              Group III nitrides by MBE using direct feedback provided by in-situ microscopic
              observations, and to tailor, optimize, and control the surface morphology
              during growth. A combination of ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) microscopies: low-energy
              electron microscopy (LEEM), scanning tunneling microscope (STM), and atomic
              force microscopy (AFM) will be used to conduct in situ deposition and growth
              studies of Group III nitrides on 6H-SiC(0001) substrates. SiC is chosen as the
              substrate over sapphire because of its semiconducting nature offering topside
              and backside contacts, which is not only more convenient for our proposed in
              situ microscopy studies but also for device applications. Through greater
              understanding of the growth process, more viable guidelines to the consistent
              growth of smooth two-dimensional basal-plane oriented layers of Group III
              nitrides by MBE will be established.
%%%
The project addresses basic research
              issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. Experimental tools are now available to allow atomic level
              observation of elementary surface processes which when better understood allow
              advances in fundamental science and technology. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and circuits by providing a
              fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
              materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is
              the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***

