Title       : CAREER: The Biological Digital Library: Information Retrieval Meets
               Bioinformatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a9986085

Award Number: 9986085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig G. Nevill-Manning nevill@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Biological research involves synthesizing information from previous experiments
              with new data. Because much new biological data is in digital form, and
              literature describing previous research is becoming increasingly available
              electronically, doing biological research entirely within a computer becomes a
              possibility. Indeed, as the volume of data increases, using advanced
              computational tools as an adjunct to wet-lab experiments is crucial. This
              research aims to integrate biological sequence, structure and literature within
              a consistent framework based on relationships between biological data such as
              bibliographic citations (literature-literature), functional descriptions of
              proteins (literature-sequence), and protein sequences underlying structures
              (sequence-structure). The interface of bioinformatics and information retrieval
              is not only a ripe area for research, but also a critical area for educational
              development. This project involves the development of remedial materials for
              biology and computer science students to prepare these two different
              constituencies for a first course in bioinformatics. It also provides for
              organization of a series of workshops for computer scientists to discuss
              application of their work to biology. Finally, in information retrieval,
              faculty, students and research software have been drawn increasingly to
              industry, leaving a vacuum of instructional staff and materials. A new course
              combining material on distributed computing and information retrieval
              techniques is therefore planned. The system for automatically exploring
              connections between biological objects as well as new initiatives for graduate
              education in bioinformatics and information retrieval will allow biologists to
              investigate higher-level questions, as well as suggesting novel avenues for
              research based on interactions that might otherwise have been
              ignored.
http://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~nevill


