Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986944

Award Number: 9986944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francine Johnson fjohnson@coppin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Sommerfeldt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coppin State College
	      2500 West North Avenue
	      Baltimore, MD  212163633    301/383-4500

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Coppin State College Department of Mathematics and Computer Science is
              requesting $138,000 over a two year period from NSF to support upwards of 25
              mathematics and computer science students with scholarship grants through the
              NSF's Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS)
              program. Scholarships will be awarded on a semester-by-semester basis to each
              student who qualifies (or re-qualifies). Initially, both juniors and seniors
              would be eligible. In the years following the first year of operation, rising
              juniors would replace the seniors who graduated the previous year. 

This
              program will enable the department to:
* Recruit more and better qualified
              students into our majors. Currently the department cannot offer any assistance
              to promising students. If the department can assure them that once they have
              shown that they can handle the material in the introductory courses the
              department can guarantee that finances will not hinder them in completing their
              degree requirements, the department is convinced that many will take advantage
              of this opportunity. 
* Retain good students. Perilous financial situations
              are a major reason why many of our majors do not complete our program. Over the
              years, the department has seen many a promising student stop out, stop in, stop
              out, etc., and never finish. The department has "lost" good students to
              colleges and universities which are able to offer scholarships.
* 
* Enable
              our students to become more competitive. Since most of our students have heavy
              work or athletic commitments, they don't have as much time to devote to their
              studies as they need to achieve excellence. The department will require that
              scholarship recipients commit outside-of-class work equal to twice the number
              of their math/computer science credit hours. 

