Title       : Small Scale Spatial and Temporal Variations in Bacterial Activity in Marine
               Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9986331

Award Number: 9986331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bacteria in the ocean play a key role in transforming dissolved organic matter
              into C02 through respiration and into biomass that is available to higher
              trophic levels within the microbial food web. They are the dominant form of
              biomass in the ocean. From highly productive coastal and upwelling regions to
              extremely oligotrophic waters, bacteria abundances range only between about 10
              to 10 ml, respectively. The activity of these bacteria, however, varies much
              more widely. Typically examined spatial scales of meters to kilometers may not
              be appropriate for cells that are smaller than 10-6 in and may occur in patches
              on the scale of 10-5 to 10-3 M. Microscale patchiness can provide
              concentrations of organic nutrients to cells much higher than those measured by
              bulk methods, leading to very different predictions of bacterial responses to
              physical and biogeochemical perturbations. In this project we propose to use
              automated flow and imaging cytometry combined with sensitive -fluorescence
              methods to measure the single-cell composition and activity of marine bacteria
              at small spatial and diel temporal scales. A variety of single-cell fluorescent
              probes will be used to indicate cell composition such as protein and nucleic
              acid content, and physiological processes such as respiration, membrane
              potential, and enzyme activity. These single-cell responses will be quantified
              using automated flow and imaging cytometric methods for increased sensitivity
              and count precision, quantitative fluorescence per cell measurement, and
              objective detection - all improvements over visual microscope methods. Our
              laboratory is uniquely equipped and experienced in these approaches. Bulk and
              single- cell methods will be compared. Microscale patchiness of bacterial
              activity (as ell as abundance) will be examined over a range of spatial scales
              and natural turbulent mixing conditions. The size distributions of active and
              total bacterial populations will be measured over seasonal cycles and across
              trophic gradients providing a variety of regimes of plankton community
              structure. Short time variations in bacterial activity will also be studied to
              determine how bacterial activity varies over diel cycles. Experiments will be
              conducted over seasonal time scales and on cruises from productive, coastal
              waters to oligotrophic, blue water sites. By measuring single-cell activities
              at appropriately small spatial and short temporal scales, but across the
              dominant ecological gradients of the temperate ocean we will gain significant
              insight into the mechanisms controlling bacterial biogeochemical processes.
