Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986984

Award Number: 9986984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest R. Phillips ephillips@mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31), Engineering (59), Mathematical Sciences (21) 
This CSEM
              Scholarship Program is providing scholarship support to 40 academically
              talented, but financially disadvantaged students that will allow them to attend
              school full-time and complete degrees in computer science, engineering
              technology and mathematics in a timely fashion. Undergraduate or graduate
              students who have a chance to complete their degree in two years are being
              selected from a pool of eligible students at the university or at four "feeder"
              community colleges in middle Tennessee.  Students enter the program at the end
              of their sophomore year and participate in a two-year program designed to
              graduate highly competent, competitive professionals.  To achieve this goal,
              faculty are stressing academic excellence with high standards and realistic
              expectations of participants whose needs are assessed at admission and
              continuously monitored and met throughout the program.  Students are  involved
              in disciplined inquiry and research under the direction of faculty mentors, and
              they spend one day a semester in the work environment of the corporate world or
              a graduate school depending on their goals.  In addition to academic counseling
              and guidance, CSEMS students are receiving career, financial aid, and personal
              counseling as needed, and assistance in such critical areas as writing, study
              skills, tutoring, preparation for exit exams and the GRE, resume writing, job
              interviewing, and selecting a graduate school.  The project expects to increase
              the number of graduates with degrees in computer science, engineering
              technology, and mathematics to help meet the country's shortage of technical
              professionals in areas of national need.
