Title       : Scope and Consequences of Variability in the Early Life History Traits of a
               Caribbean Coral Reef Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9986359

Award Number: 9986359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Su Sponaugle ssponaugle@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Events occurring during the pelagic larval stage of benthic marine organisms can
              play an important role in the regulation of open populations. The transition
              between the pelagic larval stage and the benthic juvenile stage (settlement and
              metamorphosis) is generally recognized as a critical period in the life of many
              benthic marine fishes such as coral reef fishes, yet the linkage between these
              phases had received relatively little attention. Biological traits exhibited
              during the larval stage can influence not only larval survival, but also the
              recruitment and survival of subsequent juvenile stages. Patterns of natural
              variability in early life history (ELH) traits, early juvenile mortality, and
              trait--related survival are entirely unknown. We currently have no knowledge of
              which larvae survive to settle successfully, and which of those then survive
              the early life on the reef, including the energetically expensive process of
              metamorphosis. While ecological theory concerning the ELH traits that confer
              higher survival has been developed for larval fishes in temperate systems,
              rarely has this theory been extended across the transition to juveniles, and
              very few data are available on the relationship between ELH traits and survival
              for tropical species such as coral reef fishes.
This field study is designed
              to investigate patterns of natural variability in the ELH traits of a common
              Caribbean coral reef fish and the consequences of this variation to the
              survival of young larvae and juveniles during the transition from the plankton
              to the reef. Multiple cohorts of newly recruited Thalassoma bifasciatum will be
              censused and collected from sites in the Florida Keys over several seasons (6
              mos.) and hydrographic conditions to identify the relationship between
              environmental conditions, ELH traits, and recruitment success. Recruits will be
              collected from replicate sites with high and low densities of resident fishes
              to examine how variable growth and mortality further influence the distribution
              of ELH traits of recruits. Examination of the otolith record of late-stage
              larvae and young juveniles will enable the identification of within--cohort,
              among-cohort, and among-site differences in ELH traits such as larval growth
              rates, size-at-age, size and age at settlement, and juvenile growth rates. In
              addition, cohort-specific condition indices will be measured for late-stage
              larvae and emerging juveniles (<1 d on the reef). Longitudinal and
              cross-sectional analyses of otolith records will reveal whether faster-growing,
              larger or older larvae, or larvae of higher condition preferentially survive,
              and whether large recruitment events are composed of larvae or recruits with
              particular ELH traits. An intensive series of juvenile censuses will provide
              daily age-specific mortality rates, which together with the otolith-derived ELH
              trait analyses will define the relationship between growth, survival, and
              selective loss of ELH traits. As such, this field study will be the first broad
              in situ investigation of the relationship between ELH traits and the survival
              of larvae and young juvenile reef fishes. Results of this study will contribute
              to our understanding of the dynamics of this important transitional phase in
              the life history of coral reef fishes and the factors contributing to
              recruitment variability in these open populations.

