Title       : Studies on RNA Cleavage: Catalyst Design and Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9986332

Award Number: 9986332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet R. Morrow jmorrow@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Richard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research by Janet R. Morrow and John P. Richard of the Chemistry
              Department, State University of New York at Buffalo. They will design catalysts
              to cleave RNA and DNA and attempt to determine the mechanism of these cleavage
              reactions.  There are three main components to the project.  First, new Zn(II)
              and Th(IV) dinuclear complexes will be prepared.  These will have variable
              bridging ligands to control the geometry and separation of the metal ions. The
              investigators will also use various combinations of other metal ions in the
              compounds, including Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb, and In.  Next, model RNA substrates will
              be used in reactivity studies to determine the site(s) at which different metal
              complexes provide transition state stabilization. Structure-reactivity effects
              on catalytic activity will be used to distinguish metal complexes that interact
              with the nucleophilic 2'-hydroxyl at the oxyphosphorane-like transition state
              from complexes that interact with the oxygen leaving group at this transition
              state.  The mechanism of RNA cleavage will be examined to determine whether
              there is simultaneous activation of both the leaving group and incoming
              nucleophile, or if there is "double" Lewis acid activation by chelation of the
              nonbridging oxygens, with no interactions at the leaving group/nucleophile. 
              Analytical and computational methods will be developed to examine relationships
              between metal-metal distance, geometry, and catalytic activity for cleavage of
              RNA.  The third part of the study will focus on acid-base catalysis of the
              cleavage of the 3'-phosphodiester linkage at substrates that resemble RNA in
              order to distinguish acid-base catalysis that occurs at the leaving
              group/nucleophile from electrophilic catalysis at the nonbriding oxygens of the
              phosphate group. 

Cleavage agents for RNA may eventually have practical
              therapeutic applications, but at this point present substantial intellectual
              challenges.  The mechanism of the reaction is not well understood and so the
              optimal design features of a cleavage agent are unknown.  In this study,
              various dinuclear metal complexes will be used as cleavage agents and their
              mechanism of action determined.  The role of acid-base mechanisms will also be
              considered.  Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from involvement
              in this interdisciplinary project that includes organic and inorganic synthesis
              and the determination of kinetic parameters. Students will participate in the
              Chemical Biology program at SUNY-Buffalo and be mentored by a team of
              investigators with a wide range of skills.

