Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hemispheric Specialization of the Processing of
               Linguistic Pitch Contrasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9986246

Award Number: 9986246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy L. Diehl diehl@psyvax.psy.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Research studies have shown that the two hemispheres of the brain have different
              functions.  For example, the left hemisphere has been argued to specialize
              language processing while artistic/creative abilities are specialized by the
              right hemisphere.  This dissertation will evaluate two possible accounts for
              hemispheric specialization of pitch processing.  The first account is a
              functional account which states that hemispheric specialization of pitch
              processing is determined by the function of pitch contrasts.  For example,
              pitch contrasts that are more linguistic (e.g. linguistic tone, stress, and
              intonation) are processed by the left hemisphere, and pitch contrasts that are
              less linguistic (e.g. music) are processed by the right hemisphere.  The second
              account is an acoustic account which states that acoustic correlates determine
              hemispheric specialization, and therefore, all processing of pitch, regardless
              of function, is carried out by one hemisphere of the brain.  Thus, pitch used
              in both intonation and music might be processed by the right hemisphere or the
              left hemisphere.

Three sets of experiments involving the perception of
              linguistic tone (or linguistic pitch contrast) will be conducted in order to
              evaluate these two accounts.  Linguistic tone is defined as pitch pattern that
              is used to signal meaning at the word level (e.g. in Chinese, /ma/ spoken with
              a high pitch means 'mother'; the same syllable means 'a horse' when spoken with
              a falling pitch).  The first experiment will use brain-damaged individuals as
              subjects; patients with either left-hemisphere or right-hemisphere damage will
              be asked to identify linguistic tones.  The second experiment is a dichotic
              listening experiment which will present linguistic tones to only one ear of
              normal-hearing subjects and assess which ear/hemisphere combination better
              detects these tones.   The third experiment will use neuroimaging technique to
              examine directly which cerebral hemisphere is active when normal-hearing
              subjects are listening to linguistic tones.

Most languages of the world
              (although not English) utilize linguistic tones.  A better understanding of how
              the brain processes linguistic tones will not only help us to understand
              language processing and the universality of language, but may also help us to
              develop therapeutic techniques to help rehabilitate the oral communication
              skills of many brain damaged patients.
