Title       : Ecological and Evolutionary Physiology of the Stress Response and Stress
               Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9986163

Award Number: 9986163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Roberts sroberts@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A major issue in ecological and evolutionary physiology is the relationship
              among the traits of complex organisms, organisms' ability to exploit diverse
              environments, and species' persistence in time. The proposed investigation in
              part uses the heat-shock protein Hsp70 in Drosophila as a model
              trait/organism/system to address this issue. In response to heat or other
              stresses, nearly all organisms express heat-shock proteins (I-Isps),
              highly-conserved proteins that contribute to stress tolerance by functioning as
              molecular chaperones. Research supported by previous NSF awards has established
              that experimental manipulation of copy number of the hsp7O gene of Drosophila,
              which encodes Hsp7O, is sufficient to cause changes in outright survival of
              natural thermal stress, and that natural populations vary in Hsp70 expression
              in ways that are consistent with it being adaptive. The proposed research will
              build upon a recent and significant preliminary finding: that not only does
              Hsp70 protect against heat death, it also mitigates major morphological
              anomalies in wings and abdomens of adults that have undergone exposure to
              natural thermal stress during their pre-adult stages. Such morphological
              abnormalities can occur in > 10% of surviving adults and potentially compromise
              courtship and mating, territorial defense, oviposition, flight, and water
              balance, each a likely component of fitness. The proposed research will first
              relate the incidence of these abnormalities to the temperatures that non-adult
              Drosophila undergo in the laboratory, and then verify that similar
              relationships occur for Drosophila in nature. Next, the proposed research will
              establish the effect of these abnormalities on courtship and mating,
              territorial defense, oviposition, flight, and water balance. Finally, the
              proposed experiment will genetically and experimentally manipulate Hsp
              expression to establish the role of Hsp7O in protecting or mitigating
              morphological defects. The projected outcome of the proposed research has
              immense potential to integrate molecular, genetic, functional, and evolutionary
              perspectives to advance understanding of adaptation.


