Title       : U.S.-China Seminar in Science Policy, Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1999    
File        : a9986117

Award Number: 9986117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324240             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Ratchford jratchfo@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986117
RATCHFORD

This award supports the initial activities and planning of
              a series of science policy seminars, forums and related events over the next
              decade that will build on the experience gained from the productive,
              long-standing relationship between the National Science Foundation of the
              United States of America (NSF) and the National Natural Science Foundation of
              China (NSFC). The principal objective of the series will be to explore issues
              with significant implications for the vitality of science and engineering in
              the borderless, knowledge-based economy of the 21~ century. A Coordinating
              Committee will be responsible for the organization and implementation of the
              series of events. Consideration will be given to the establishment of an
              Advisory Board representing leading government and nongovemment scientific
              institutions in the two countries to provide strategic guidance. This proposal
              covers planning and oversight for the first three years and travel costs for
              participants in the first two events planned in the series.

The theme of the
              first event in the series, to be held in Beijing in October 1999, is Linking
              the Production, Dissemination, and Application of Research. This theme could
              also serve as a guiding principle for the entire decade- long series of
              events-including a proposed U.S.-China Science Forum, in Washington, DC, in
              March or April 2000 featuring presentations by distinguished Chinese scientists
              and engineers and discussions with similarly distinguished American scientists.
              Specific topics to be considered at the October 1999 Beijing seminar will
              include: 1) Knowledge-Based Science Policy; 2) Human Resources for Science and
              Engineering; 3) Data for Science and Technology; and 4) Changing Character of
              R&D. Participants in this seminar will include representatives from key
              government R&D agencies in the two countries, as well as experts from the
              industrial and academic sectors. Outcomes would include: (1) a written and
              electronic record of the seminar, including recommendations that could be
              addressed individually and jointly by two countries, and (2) suggestions for
              subsequent events in the series.

Based on these outcomes, the Coordinating
              Committee will develop a definitive schedule of events as a basis for bilateral
              science policy cooperation, and a foundation for strengthened partnership in
              specific areas of science and engineering.  The cochairs for these events are
              Dr. J. Thomas Ratchford, Distinguished Visiting Progfessor, National Center for
              Technology and the Law, George Mason University, and Dr. Xu Weixuan, Director
              of the Institute of Policy and Management, Chinese Academy of
              Sciences.







