Title       : CSEM Scholars: Options in Mathematics and Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9986652

Award Number: 9986652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice E. Cuny cuny@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Oregon CSEM Scholar program provides extensive support to
              students, aimed at increasing their retention through graduation, encouraging
              their enrollment in advanced degree programs, and ultimately securing their
              desired employment outcomes in Oregon's changing economy. Much of the support
              will be gleaned from services already available within the University: services
              provided by Academic Learning Services, the Career Center, the Information
              Technology Curriculum, the Teaching Effectiveness Program, and the Office of
              Multicultural Affairs. The support will be delivered in the form of a required,
              integrated five quarter seminar sequence. The sequence will be organized and
              taught by the PI, with the liberal use of guest speakers to increase the
              students' contact with mentors, role models, and research advisers. In
              addition, the students will be required to take independent research or
              internship credit for at least one quarter. The goals of these curricular
              requirements are fourfold: (1) to introduce students to research and graduate
              school options; (2) to assist the students in career planning, internship
              placement, and securing post graduate employment; (3) to broaden the students'
              perspectives on Mathematics and Computer Science; and (4) to allow the students
              to develop presentation skills while providing outreach to other students
              potentially interested in pursuing math and computer science degrees. 

The
              sequence will include two new courses -- a Mentoring course and a Great Ideas
              course -- that could become a permanent part of the UO curriculum. The
              Mentoring course (cotaught with staff from the Careers Center) will introduce
              students to the use of informational interviews. The students will conduct
              interviews with professionals in their chosen field to assess their interest in
              specific careers and to "size up" organizations. Students can use the
              information they get to promote themselves to a prospective employer or to
              network, opening the door to future contacts and job possibilities. The course
              also gives students practice in presenting their findings and it gives them a
              chance to hear reports on all of the interviews, expanding their knowledge of
              related career paths. The Great Ideas course aims to broaden the students' view
              of Computer Science and Mathematics beyond the content of their required
              departmental courses. The course will consist of a series of distinguished,
              guest lectures from the Math and Computer Science faculty discussing the truly
              great ideas of the field. Topics will come from Computer Science, from Math,
              and from the bridges between the two fields. 

