Title       : The Relationship between Social Capital and Ethnic/Immigrant Tracking: An
               Analysis of German and U.S. Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9986586

Award Number: 9986586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina E. Werum rwerum@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-9986586
Regina Werum


Most studies of ethnic inequality in the U.S.
              focus on differences in educational achievement (grades, scores, degrees) or
              long-term mobility patterns (status attainment).  Increasingly, researchers are
              extending their analyses beyond black-white comparisons to include ethnic
              immigrant minorities.  Generally, these studies focus on how micro-level
              factors, such as socio-economic background and various aspects of cultural and
              social capital, affect educational and occupational attainment.  However, few
              U.S. studies have analyzed whether track placement in secondary school-a key
              determinant of educational and occupational attainment-is shaped by ethnically
              specific dynamics.  Moreover, few studies have examined track placement
              patterns from a cross-national perspective to assess the relative power of
              institutional vs. competing individual-level explanations of
              tracking.

Employing simple and multinomial logit models to analyze data from
              the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) and the U.S. based National Education
              Longitudinal Study (NELS), the study will examine whether we can indeed
              extrapolate from the U.S. findings concerning the determinants of tracking to
              countries whose educational systems are marked by different institutional
              characteristics.  While Turks compose the immigrant group of interest for
              analyses of German data, the focus in the U.S. is on Hispanics, especially
              Mexicans.  Germany and the U.S. provide an ideal basis for ethnic comparisons
              across nations because their educational systems are organized in a strikingly
              different manner.  The study will address two major questions: (1) does track
              placement follow ethnically specific patterns within each country?  To use
              Germany as an example, do micro-level factors that shape track placement for
              ethnic Germans differ from those for non-Germans (e.g., Turks)?, and (2) to
              what degree do similar ethnically specific mechanisms shape track placements in
              both countries, e.g., does social capital carry the same weight for ethnic
              immigrant minorities in Germany's externally stratified institutions as it does
              for comparable minorities in internally stratified institutions typical of the
              U.S.?

