Title       : Nonlinear Systems Analysis of Spike Encoding in Motoneurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9986167

Award Number: 9986167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Binder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall K. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              "Nonlinear Systems Analysis of Spike Encoding in Montoneurons"

Individual
              nerve cells (neurons) transform the chemical and electrical signals they
              receive from other neurons into a series of electrical impulses or spikes.  The
              frequency and pattern of these spikes forms the "neural code" by which
              information is transmitted throughout a network or system of neurons.    Thus
              far, descriptions of the basic input-output transform of neurons, called spike
              encoding, have been largely limited to steady-state conditions in which the
              input signals that the cell receives are held constant. The objective of this
              proposed research program is to derive a general, quantitative description of
              spike encoding that will apply to both steady-state and dynamic conditions in
              which the input signals vary as they do under normal physiological
              conditions.

In the proposed experiments, the responses of mammalian neurons
              to brief injected current transients will be measured.  The injected current
              transients are constructed to mimic real inputs as they appear in the cell body
              of a neuron.  Non-linear systems identification procedures originally developed
              for electrical engineering applications will be used to characterize how these
              input signals affect the generation of spikes by the neuron.  The advantage of
              this approach is that it yields a basic input-output function that is not as
              computationally complex as those derived from more detailed neuron models, but
              still accurately reproduces a wide range of neural behaviors.  This compact
              input-output function can be then incorporated into the neural elements used in
              models operating at the network and systems levels, increasing the degree to
              which such models can accurately represent their biological counterparts.

