Title       : The Determinants of Punishment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9986418

Award Number: 9986418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232636             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce I. Sacerdote   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Glaeser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The economic approach to punishment in criminal cases suggests a calculus where
              sentence length is determined to minimize costs due to crime (including the
              costs of punishment). While there is a long literature on the theoretical
              implications for law enforcement, there is much less research on the extent to
              which sentencing in practice follows the implications of the Becker (1968)
              framework.  This project tests whether the basic optimal deterrence framework
              actually explains behavior in homicide sentencing. In particular, it examines
              whether sentences are higher for types of homicide where probability of
              apprehension are low and higher for types of homicide where recidivism is
              high.

Our most significant test of the Beckerian framework is to see whether
              victim characteristics matter as strongly for vehicular homicides as they do
              for other types of murder. In vehicular homicides, victims are not completely
              randomly chosen, but they are much more random than in most other forms of
              murder. Basic deterrence theory suggests that the connection between victim
              characteristics and sentences should be much weaker in the case of vehicular
              homicides. Preliminary work suggests that this is not the case and the victim
              gender and race are just as important with vehicular homicides as they are for
              other forms of murder. One major objective of this research proposal is to
              assemble a larger database of vehicular homicides with which to further test
              this hypothesis.  

A second advantage of looking at the impact of victim
              gender and race in vehicular homicides is that it is much less likely that
              these characteristics proxy for omitted characteristics of the criminal or the
              crime. Thus, for example, it is possible that men who kill women in standard
              settings are just generally more dangerous and they receive stiffer because of
              higher recidivism rates. This argument is harder to make in the case of
              vehicular homicides. The gender effect in those types of homicides is more
              likely to represent a general societal inclination to particularly punish
              people who kill women.  A second objective of this research proposal is to test
              for the existence of agency problems, which may interfere with optimal
              deterrence. The presence of judge or jury effects in sentencing suggests that
              optimal punishment may not be happening because individuals are maximizing
              their own welfare not that of the community as a whole. To the extent to which
              there is this form of heterogeneity, this information may be useful in
              considering optimal reform of the legal system.  

Following in the vein of
              the positive approach to punishment, this proposal also suggests a second
              research project examining the rise of incarceration in the late 19th century.
              A simple model, sketched in the proposal, suggests that the rise of
              urbanization lead to professional criminals and greater heterogeneity among
              criminals. As incapacitation becomes more important, relative to deterrence,
              when heterogeneity among criminals rises, this might explain the rise in jails
              in the early 19th century.

