Title       : Understanding and Surviving Computation in the Wild
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a9986555

Award Number: 9986555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $871476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie Forrest forrest@cs.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Ackley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The marriage of the personal computer and the Internet has led to explosive
              growth in the contacts between separately administered computing resources,
              creating new opportunities and risks.  Applets, agents, viruses, email
              attachments, and downloadable software are escaping the confines of their
              original systems and spreading through communications networks.  Computers are
              disabled by network-borne infections;  browsers crash due to unforeseen
              interactions between an applet and a language implementation;  application
              programs are broken by operating system upgrades.  This computation in the wild
              is a far cry from the carefully isolated,  controlled, and managed computer
              systems of the past.  The connections between computer systems and living
              systems are superficially obvious and yet deep in their implications.  This
              proposal argues that networked computer systems can be better understood,
              controlled, and developed when viewed from the perspective of living systems,
              treating the rich and dynamic network computer environment formed by diverse
              benign and malicious software collectively as a software ecosystem. 

Taking
              seriously the analogy between computer systems and living systems encourages
              rethinking many aspects of current computing practice ranging from operating
              system design to communications mechanisms to computer security.  This project
              is aimed at developing design strategies from biology, constructing software
              that can survive in the wild, and developing a better understanding of the
              current and emerging software ecosystems.  Like many researchers, we believe
              that the current crisis of software development is unlikely to improve
              significantly through incremental research using traditional methods.  New
              approaches must be tried, and new ways of thinking about computing must be
              developed.  Biological principles stand to unify many scattered current
              research efforts addressing robust operation, survivability and security, while
              also suggesting new avenues for research.   In addition, as the size and scope
              of software systems continues to grow, and global computer networks continue to
              expand, tools and methodologies from biological research will be increasingly
              relevant for understanding and monitoring the results.

The proposal takes
              the investigators' ideas and insights about living systems online, emphasizing
              concrete implementations that demonstrate new approaches to solving real
              problems.  Specifically, the following projects centered on and exploring
              computation in the wild are proposed:  Homeostasis for improved operating
              system survivability, Beyond network intrusion detection, Toward a living
              networked operating system, Software diversity for species survivability, and
              Tools and techniques from biology.  The homeostasis project will augment a
              computer operating system with mechanisms similar in spirit to those of
              biological systems, which maintain homeostasis, by coupling system-call based
              process monitoring to feedback mechanisms.  The second project will generalized
              and extend an existing prototype TCP-based intrustion-detection systems based
              on immunological principles.   The third project differs from the first two by
              relaxing the constraint of staying within the bounds of operating system
              architectures and technology.  Rather, it will pursue promising directions for
              robust operation and computer security based on living systems principles, even
              where they involve possibly significant levels of incompatibility with existing
              software and designs.  The software diversity project will investigate methods
              by which software can be made more diverse, and the fifth project will apply
              quantitative methods from biology to the study of the current software
              ecosystem.

