Title       : Electronic Networks and Civic Life: A Longitudinal Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9986552

Award Number: 9986552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene Borgida   (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,1371,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal extends a prior NSF-funded study of the impact of a
              community-based electronic network linking citizens in the city of Grand Rapids
              in rural Itasca County, Minnesota. In 1995, Grand Rapids initiated planning for
              a community-wide electronic network. Implemented in late 1997, GrandNet's goals
              included increasing the community's access to the national information
              infrastructure, reducing residents' disparities in access,increasing
              information available to community members, and facilitating the sharing of
              data and information among the partner organizations. The GrandNet Project now
              encompasses both GrandNet and ItascaNet, an expansion of GrandNet to
              surrounding Itasca County. This study addresses several very broad issues. The
              first is to identify what distinguishes a community that attempts to develop a
              community-wide, non-commercial network with broad-based citizen access from one
              that relies entirely on market economics and makes no effort to address issues
              of equity or civic life. One potential answer resides in the social capital
              literature: communities with greater social and human capital attempt to
              provide collective rather than individual applications of information
              technologies. A second issue is to assess the consequences for political,
              human, social, and economic resources of developing a community-wide civic
              network. Compared to a similar community lacking such an effort, what in
              economic, political, and social life is improved? Finally, the project will
              focus on three fundamental values an electronic community can affect. Regarding
              equity of resources, it will address whether an electronic community alleviates
              or exacerbates urban-rural differences in economic opportunities, technology
              use, educational resources and health care. Second, it will examine equity of
              opportunity within the community. Over time, how are special subgroups (senior
              citizens, at-risk children, Native Americans, and the economically
              disadvantaged) affected by the implementation of an electronic network? Third,
              given national trends of increased citizen apathy and decreased civic
              participation, how may an electronic community affect community bonds? Can a
              communications system lacking face-to-face interaction strengthen community
              ties? Alternatively, would increased information flow between local government
              and citizens encourage or weaken citizen support and participation? To assess
              these issues, the project will compare GrandNet in Grand Rapids with a control
              town lacking such a  community-wide network (Detroit Lakes, MN, which was
              selected by a rigorous cluster analysis coupled with qualitative analysis of
              the characteristics of several communities and counties.) The control community
              does not lack technology development efforts, but it does lack a
              public-oriented community effort. This allows a comparison of GrandNet's
              effects with a community that is experiencing the kind of technological change
              that Grand Rapids and Itasca County would probably experience were it not for
              the efforts of the GrandNet partners. The prior work has shown that, in the
              control town, computer access and use is a function of economic resources,
              whereas in Grand Rapids, access and use are rather strongly affected by
              political and civic as well as economic resources. This project will collect
              additional baseline and follow-up data to compare ItascaNet in Itasca County
              with Becker county (home of Detroit Lakes) in order to discern whether changes
              in attitudes and behaviors reasonably can be attributed to GrandNet. Baseline
              and follow-up information will be collected and analyzed for both counties,
              including surveys and aggregate demographic and economic statistics. During
              year 1, the team will administer mail surveys in Itasca and Becker counties.
              The year 1 survey will be a baseline assessment of ItascaNet and a time 2
              follow up of the fall 1997 baseline survey of the city of Grand Rapids. 
              Researchers will also conduct a series of focus groups with citizens and
              community leaders, as well as longitudinal panels comprised of members of three
              special populations (seniors, at-risk children and adolescents, and Native
              Americans). To supplement the data from the general- and special-population
              surveys and focus groups, the team will collect aggregate statistics for
              Minnesota cities and counties for a number of demographic and economic
              characteristics and conduct interrupted time series analyses. In year 2 data
              collection will be a county-wide survey in the spring of 2001 that represents a
              time 3 Grand Rapids assessment and a time 2 Itasca County assessment. The
              researchers will continue to conduct focus groups and small-scale surveys with
              members of the special populations. In Year 3, the focus of the research effort
              will be a county-wide survey administered in the fall of 2002, which will
              provide a fourth assessment of the impact of GrandNet and a third assessment of
              the impact of ItascaNet on the community. The project will be able to track
              changes that occur over the first five years of the network's existence. 
              Results will be presented at meetings and symposia, and in articles and other
              publications.     
