Title       : Studies in Aggregate Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9986667

Award Number: 9986667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Prescott prescott@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this research is to develop tools that permit the introduction
              of long-lived organizations into applied general equilibrium analyses of the
              macro economy and to exploit these tools in addressing economic issues. Many
              economic insights have been gained simply by relying on an aggregate production
              function and by introducing entrepreneurs that manage capital and labor.
              However, introducing large organizations is necessary if certain issues are to
              be addressed successfully. I model these large organizations as dynamic
              coalitions or clubs. One feature of these organizations is that they can, and
              often do, outlive their founders. Another key feature is that their longevity
              depends upon future generation participation constraints and future managers'
              incentive compatibility constraints.
Theory which includes such long-lived
              organizations has consequences for measurement. Currently the aggregate value
              of firms far exceeds the value of their physical assets less their net
              indebtedness.  Perhaps huge amounts of intangible organization capital are
              embodied in firms.  If so, the investment in organization capital has important
              consequences for measuring the performance of the economy. This theory has
              relevance for developing a theory of intergeneration transfer schemes, in
              particular social security arrangements. The theory may also be extended to
              analyze the formation and expansion of economic unions, in particular the
              European Union and NAFTA in recent times, and the United States earlier.

