Title       : GOALI: Understanding for Control of Gas Barrier Properties of Poly(ethylene
               terephthalate) and Related Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a9986467

Award Number: 9986467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei I. Nazarenko sin@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Hiltner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Ludovice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Schiraldi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1024,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI proposal (co-supported by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              of the Directorate for Mathematical & Physical Sciences) describes a
              synergistic collaborative research effort to elucidate the fundamental
              structural characteristics that control gas transport through glassy polymers
              using poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) as the base material.  The combination
              of cost, materials and processing properties has made poly(ethylene
              terphthalate) (PET) one of the most important food-packaging resins.  New
              requirements have emerged in recent years.  PET has shortcomings for making
              hot-fillable bottles and containers for oxygen sensitive foods and beverages. 
              For these appellations the modification and improvement of gas and thermal
              properties of PET is required.  The synergism of the collaboration is based on
              expertise and facilities in transport measurements and structural
              characterization at Case Western Reserve University, the computer modeling
              expertise at Georgia Institute of Technology, and the polyester synthesis
              capabilities of KoSa Corporation, the world's largest produce of thermoplastic
              polyesters.  The chemical structure of PET will be modified by
              copolymerization, and the solid state structure will be modified by
              crystallization and orientation.  The research plan encompasses design and
              synthesis of new PET copolymers, gas transport measurements, correlation with
              molecular relaxation processes, and computer modeling and simulation of
              structure, molecular motions, and static and dynamic aspects of free volume. 
              In addition, the experimental study addresses the effects of solid state
              morphology obtained upon crystallization, orientation and heat-setting on gas
              transport.

The proposed resrach will have a fundamental impact on
              understanding the basic mechanisms of gas transport through glassy state in
              amorphous, semicrystalline and oriented polymeric structures.  It will also
              have a broad impact on polymer education at Case Western Reserve University and
              Georgia Tech.  By interacting closely with the industrial partner, graduate
              students will become familiar with the needs and perspectives of the industrial
              sector.  Undergraduate students will also have the opportunity to participate
              in the research.  Invited lectures by the industrial co-PI in polymer science
              courses will expose graduate and undergraduate students to issues in the
              application of barrier and transport properties.  It is also anticipated that
              as a result of this project, experiments in transport properties will be
              incorporated into the polymer science laboratory courses.

