Title       : FASEB Conference on Nucleic Acid Enzymes: Structures, Mechanisms and Novel
               Applications; June 18-22, 2000, Saxtons River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2000      
File        : a9986876

Award Number: 9986876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9080               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stewart Shuman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1144,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	This conference will focus on the structures, mechanisms, biological roles, and
              practical applications of enzymes that act on DNA and RNA. The meeting aims to
              attract a broad cross-disciplinary group of scientists with expertise in
              structural biology, biochemistry, and cell biology. This meeting will be the
              fourth sponsored by the Federation of American Societies of Experimental
              Biology (FASEB) in the areas of nucleic acid enzymology; the most recent in
              this series was held in 1998, with support from the National Science
              Foundation. 

	The explosive pace of discovery of new enzymes that act on
              nucleic acids, the wealth of mechanistic information emerging from high
              resolution structural analysis, and the central role of DNA and RNA enzymology
              in biotechnology are factors that make this next FASEB 2000 meeting extremely
              timely and topical.  	The scientific program will consist of nine sessions of
              oral presentations by distinguished invited speakers.  The subjects of the
              sessions include the following areas: (1) DNA repair enzymes; (2) DNA and RNA
              polymerases; (3) Transposition and recombination; (4)  DNA and RNA modification
              enzymes; (5) Helicases and nucleic acid-dependent NTPases; (6) RNA and DNA
              catalysts; (7) Cleavage and degradative enzymes; and (8) New applications for
              nucleic acid enzymes and new insights from genomics into the evolution of
              enzyme systems. The organizers have recruited leading investigators to serve as
              discussion leaders for these sessions. The program will also include daily
              poster sessions. 

 	The conference aims to highlight the parallels and
              differences between enzymes involved in DNA metabolism and those of the RNA
              world. Hence, the program has been configured so that most sessions will
              include talks on both RNA and DNA transactions. The intimate format of the
              conference is designed to promote free exchange of information and ideas among
              researchers who work on RNA and DNA enzymes - thereby expediting research in
              both fields.  Such research enhances our understanding of the natural world and
              thus our ability to use it for the greater benefit of society.   	

	All
              attendees will be asked to present posters on their research. To encourage
              career development of junior scientists, six outstanding posters from the ranks
              of graduate students and post-doc attendees will be selected for oral
              presentations. Financial support from NSF will be  targeted specifically to the
              six junior scientists and will also be used to defray expenses for the sessions
              listed above. 
