Title       : NANOSCALE: The Ribosome: Motor-Driven Protein Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9986381

Award Number: 9986381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Koen Visscher visscher@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the role of the ribosome as a molecular motor.   During
              protein synthesis the ribosome moves towards the 3'-end along messenger RNA
              (mRNA), one codon at a time, driven by the hydrolysis of GTP. 
 It reads the
              genetic information encoded by mRNA, recruits the appropriate transfer RNA and
              associated aminoacid, and pieces together a protein, thus linking genotype and
              phenotype.  It is not well understood how the ribosome, a complex structure
              consisting of over 50 proteins and several ribosomal RNAs, works as a molecular
              motor and moves in coordinated fashion to maintain the reading frame.  To
              answer such questions we will develop an in vitro motility assay and record
              translocation of individual ribosomes at nanometer-scale resolution.  Ribosomes
              will be attached to a microscope coverslip and the displacement of a single
              ribosome will be derived from the movement of a microscopic bead, which has
              been attached to the mRNA molecule.  Bead velocity will be directly related to
              ribosome velocity and translation rate.  A special microscope equipped with
              optical tweezers and nanometer-sensitive position sensors will be constructed
              to measure the forces produced by individual ribosomes and to investigate how
              ribosome velocity is affected by mechanical load.  Such information is
              essential for constructing physical or mathematical models of ribosome
              movement.  The proposed research opens the way towards a variety of experiments
              at the single molecule scale, which are specifically aimed at protein synthesis
              and ribosome mechanics or dynamics.  Such experiments will shed light on how
              this naturally occurring protein-making machine works, and might provide
              valuable information for designing similar man-made nanomachines.



