Title       : A GPS-linked Model Helicopter System for Stream Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9986839

Award Number: 9986839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Johnston   (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Bonde  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9986839
John P. Bonde
University of Minnesota
A GPS-linked Model
              Helicopter System for Stream Imaging

Ecologists need a remote sensing device
              to map data at resolutions intermediate between on-the-ground measurements and
              satellite measurements.  Previous techniques to provide this data have focused
              on photography from cameras affixed to tall ladders, long poles, and balloons. 
              Unfortunately, these methods cannot be used for making maps because they only
              cover a single spot on the ground.  Ground mapping with surveying instruments
              is a frustrating and time consuming process that limits experimental
              replication.

	To solve the mapping problem for stream imaging, a Model
              Helicopter Stream Imaging System (MHSIS) will be developed.  The system will
              use a remote control model helicopter, capable of carrying a 10 pound payload
              and flying at very low elevations.  A gondola attached to the helicopter will
              contain a small computer, a 2-way radio, a GPS, an aerial survey laser, and an
              infrared digital camera.  The digital camera will photograph the ecosystem, the
              laser will measure helicopter height above the ground, the GPS will measure the
              exact location of the helicopter, the 2-way radio will transmit commands and
              data, and the computer will control operations and record data.  Back on the
              ground, the information collected will be converted into an ecosystem
              map.

	The MHSIS will be tested in wetlands and desert streams, in
              conjunction with two research projects funded by the NSF Division of
              Environmental Biology. The project will support an Undergraduate Research
              Assistant from the Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering at
              the University of Minnesota, Duluth, an undergraduate institution.  Because of
              the Natural Resources Research Institute's applied mission, our GIS Laboratory
              is often toured by visitors from area secondary schools, and county, state, and
              federal government land use agencies; this project will be highlighted during
              those tours.


	 


