Title       : Chromosome Partitioning and the Regulation of Cell Division in Caulobacter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9986127

Award Number: 9986127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329649             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Gober gober@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The bacterium Caulobacter crescentus expresses polarity during its cell cycle
              that is generated by a simple developmental program.  Cell division yields two
              dissimilar daughter cells: a motile swarmer cell and a sessile stalked cell. 
              These two cell types differ in their relative programs of gene expression and
              DNA replication.  The progeny stalked cell reinitiates DNA replication
              immediately after cell division, whereas replication is silenced for a defined
              period of time in the swarmer cell.  The Caulobacter developmental cycle allows
              the experimental analysis of the basic mechanisms underlying cell cycle
              controlled gene expression, the regulation of DNA replication and the molecular
              basis of positional information.  The objectives of this project are to
              genetically and biochemically determine the molecular basis of chromosomal
              partitioning and the coupling of this event to cell division in Caulobacter. 
              The project will examine the roles of the conserved biochemical functions of
              ParA and ParB in partitioning, chromosome orientation and cell division by
              first employing site-directed mutagenesis to create mutants of ParA that
              possess altered ATPase activity, and mutant ParB derivatives that have defects
              in DNA binding.  These mutants will be introduced into Caulobacter cells and
              their effect on partitioning and cell division will be determined. 
              Furthermore, the biochemical activities of these mutants will be assayed.  The
              mechanism of ParA and ParB polar localization will also be determined by
              examining the role of ParA ATPase activity and ParB DNA binding activity in
              bipolar localization, defining the role of ParA and ParB interaction in
              directing localization, identifying the proteins responsible for ParA and ParB
              localization by screening for interacting gene products using an expression
              library and/or by biochemical means, and by performing in vitro assays with
              interacting proteins.  Lastly, the mechanism of regulation of cell division by
              ParA and ParB will be determined by assaying the transcription of critical cell
              division genes in response to ParB depletion and ParA overexpression, and
              identifying mutants that do not respond to ParA/ParB regulation.  This project
              will yield important information regarding how bacteria segregate their
              chromosomal DNA.  Since the proteins under investigation are conserved in most
              species of bacteria it is likely that the investigations accomplished by this
              project will possibly contribute to the design of new antimicrobic compounds
              that inhibit this critical cellular process.

