Title       : Collaborative Research: Residential Segregation and the Spatial Division of
               Labor of Immigrants in Los Angeles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9986928

Award Number: 9986928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Ellis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the geography of residence and workplace for immigrants in
              the Los Angeles region to see how residential location and spatial
              accessibility affect the concentration of immigrants in particular lines of
              work.  Data limitations have previously restricted empirical analyses of such
              effects.  The Census Bureau has recently released a special version of the 1990
              Census of Population and Housing that includes information on employment, place
              of residence by census tract, and place of work by census tract.  The project
              will use these data to address a series of basic questions that include: Where,
              by census tract, in Los Angeles do immigrants work?  How is place of work
              related to an immigrant group's geography of residence?  Where are a group's
              niche jobs (notable industrial and occupational employment concentrations) in
              relation to its non-niche jobs? And how far away are these niches from
              residential concentrations?  The project employs two different methods to
              answer these questions.  First, we plan to plot immigrant workers by census
              tracts of employment and residence by sex and immigrant group for the Los
              Angeles CMSA.  These maps are input to a series of map-based statistics
              summarizing the relations between immigrant employment specialization and their
              geographies of work and residence by tract.  Second, we estimate a nested logit
              model of the probability of working in an immigrant niche and choice of
              residential location for the most recent immigrant arrivals to Los Angeles -
              those who came between 1985 and 1990. 

In general, the aim of this research
              is to uncover the interrelationship between the residential  clustering of
              immigrants and their concentration in particular types of work.  Scholars have
              speculated about the connections between these two types of segregation -
              residential and industrial - but have rarely investigated its specific form. 
              These connections are likely bound-up with workplace segregation - the
              concentration of specific types of jobs in particular places, usually described
              as the spatial division of labor.  This project explores linkages between these
              three forms of segregation - residential, industrial, and workplace - in order
              to better understand how the jobs immigrants hold depend on the location of
              their ethnic neighborhoods in relation to the spatial distribution of
              industries. In so doing, the project will help shed light on the role ethnic
              residential segregation plays in ethnic employment inequality.    


