Title       : Endogenous Mechanisims
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a9986190

Award Number: 9986190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew O. Jackson jacksonm@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project focuses on the design of mechanisms or institutions for
              collective decision making.  The first problem discussed in the proposal
              concerns the ability of candidates to affect the outcome of a voting procedure
              through their endogenous choices to enter or exit an election. The first
              question for study involves characterizing the voting procedures (mechanisms )
              that are immune to such strategic entry/exit decisions by candidates. While
              there may exist some voting procedures that are immune to strategic candidacy,
              it appears that this class may be quite limited. So, it also makes sense to
              work towards understanding the impact that strategic candidacy has on various
              voting procedures that are not immune to strategic entry and exit decisions. An
              analysis of voting by successive elimination shows that accounting for
              entry/exit decisions can introduce some Pareto dominated outcomes. So a
              question that arises is whether this is true for other interesting voting
              procedures as well. This, and a series of related questions that are aimed at
              understanding the effects that endogenous candidacy decisions have on voting
              procedures, form the first part of the proposed research agenda.

The second
              problem to be analyzed under the proposed research, also relates to
              understanding the impact of actions taken by agents before the operation of a
              mechanism. It is also motivated by a specific problem: that of producing a
              public good. In particular this part of the proposed research is focused on
              voluntary contributions mechanisms, and understanding how unilateral promises
              by some individual to match the contributions made by other individuals can
              affect the outcome. There are many situations where public goods receive
              significant funding through voluntary contributions. Examples include research
              into various diseases, disaster relief, charities, higher education, and
              environmental concerns, public television and radio. to name a few. A free
              rider analysis of voluntary contribution mechanisms tells us that in many
              situations these will be underfunded and inefficiently supplied. While a
              straight voluntary contribution mechanism would result in inefficiency, we
              often see endogenous additions to such mechanisms. For instance, many companies
              provide matching contribution plans, agreeing to supplement an employee's
              contributions to a variety of causes.  The primary question to be analyzed in
              this part of the proposed research is whether such endogenous alterations of
              the voluntary contribution mechanism result in efficient outcomes. More
              specifically, under what conditions should we expect such matching plans to
              appear, and under what conditions will they result in efficient production of
              the public good?




