Title       : Surface and Overlayer Electronic Structure of Wide Band Gap Nitride
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9986099

Award Number: 9986099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Smith ksmith@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young professor at Boston University
              for a project to study both the basic surface electronic structure of wide band
              gap nitride semiconductors, and the electronic structure of metal and non-metal
              overlayers on such nitrides. The specific goals of the program are to first
              study the surface electronic structure of nitride alloys; then to study the
              adsorption of simple gas molecules on well characterized nitride surfaces in
              order to understand their chemical reactivity, passivation, and properties of
              non-metal overlayers; and finally to study the reaction of metals with nitrides
              with the aim of understanding the growth, structure, and stability of contact
              overlayers.  The electronic structure will be measured using two complimentary
              spectroscopies: angle resolved photoemission and inverse photoemission.  This
              combination of spectroscopic techniques will provide a comprehensive
              understanding of the surface electronic and chemical properties of wide band
              gap nitride semiconductors.  The project will educate postdoctoral research
              associates, graduate and undergraduate students in the physics of novel
              semiconductor materials, and the application of state of the art spectroscopic
              probes in their study. 
%%%
An important new class of semiconductor based on
              nitrogen compounds is the focus of intense scrutiny due to their numerous
              potential applications in lasers and other optical devices that operate in the
              blue/UV portion of the spectrum. These materials, known as wide band gap
              nitride semiconductors, also hold the promise of being used in electronic
              devices operating at much higher temperatures than conventional materials. 
              While many simple devices have been fabricated from these nitrides, there
              remains an acute lack of knowledge about their surface properties.  It is of
              vital importance for the full commercial exploitation of these new
              semiconductors to understand their basic surface properties since the surface
              electronic structure controls many aspects of their chemical reactivity, their
              structural stability, and how other materials are bonded to the nitrides to
              form, for example, electrical contacts.  This individual investigator award to
              a young professor at Boston University is for a project to study surface
              properties of these semiconductors using two probes: photoemission spectroscopy
              and inverse photoemission spectroscopy.  These probes involve respectively the
              excitation of the electrons in the material by illumination with intense x-rays
              and measuring their response, or inserting electrons into the solid, and
              measuring emitted x-rays.  This combination of spectroscopies will provide a
              comprehensive understanding of the surface electronic and chemical properties
              of wide band gap nitride semiconductors. The program will also educate
              postdoctoral research associates, graduate and undergraduate students in the
              physics of novel semiconductor materials, and the application of state of the
              art spectroscopic probes in their study.
***


