Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Multiple Charge Transfer Reactions in
               the Condensed Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9986761

Award Number: 9986761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Hammes-Schiffer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sharon Hammes-Schiffer is supported by the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to pursue investigations of multiple charge transfer
              reactions, including multiple proton transfer and proton-coupled electron
              transfer.  The broad goal of this project is to elucidate the fundamental
              principles of multiple charge transfer reactions in the condensed phase.  Two
              complementary approaches will be implemented to accomplish this goal.   In the
              first approach, using mixed quantum/classical molecular dynamics methods, the
              solvent is represented as explicit molecules treated classically, while
              transferring protons and active electrons are treated quantum mechanically.  In
              the second approach, based on multistate continuum theory, the solvent is
              represented as a dielectric continuum and the transferring protons and active
              electrons are treated quantum mechanically.  Both approaches will be developed
              and tested by applications to model systems.

This combination of the
              development of theoretical and computational methodology and subsequent
              application to chemically and biologically relevant systems will provide
              insight into the fundamental principles of multiple charge transfer reactions. 
              Such reactions are important in proton wires (proton transport along chains of
              water molecules), asymmetric salt bridges, and enzyme reactions vital to
              metabolism.
