Title       : GOALI: Use Of Microsample Testing To Characterize and Model Bond Coat
               Performance and TBC Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a9986752

Award Number: 9986752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Hemker hemker@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P. Kennard Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9986752
Hemker 

A key component of high temperature thermal barrier coatings
              (TBC's) is the bond coat since it provides both the thermally grown oxide layer
              critical to the attachment of TBC's, especially those deposited by physical
              vapor deposition, and the mechanical foundation upon which the coating sits.
              The collaboration in this GOALI grant joins the novel microsample tensile,
              creep and fatigue testing capabilities developed at Johns Hopkins with the
              expertise of aerospace engineers and scientists and the test capabilities at
              General Electric Aircraft Engines. The overall goal of this collaborative study
              is to characterize the deformation behavior of bond coat layers and relate
              their mechanical performance and failure processes to TBC life. The microsample
              testing approach adopted permits characterization of small-scale and highly
              scale-specific coatings and properties in a way not possible by conventional
              means. The use of microsamples provides a unique opportunity to measure the
              high temperature coefficient of thermal expansion, Young's modulus, and
              tensile, creep and fatigue strength of both as-deposited and thermally cycled
              bond coat layers. Detailed observations of the failure mechanisms and
              underlying microstructure will be used to assess the importance of strain
              accommodation, micro-cracking, void formation, elemental diffusion, grain
              boundary sliding, and other failure processes thought to affect TBC
              performance. The collaboration provides a mechanistic foundation for life
              prediction assessment using finite element modeling calculations in addition to
              generating much needed design data. The GOALI effort includes closely meshed
              research activities and yearly personnel exchanges, placing students and
              faculty in direct contact with engineers and scientists at GE-AE. Doing so
              broadens the education of the JHU students by providing invaluable
              technological and industrial experience. The benefits to GE-AE include the
              availability of unique experimental facilities and the ability to focus on
              fundamental research not otherwise undertaken in an industrial environment. 
              The grant is jointly funded by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              and the Metals Research Program in the Division of Materials
              Research.
%%%
The performance and durability of aircraft engine turbines has
              become more closely linked to the capability and durability of TBC's that are
              placed on hot section components. TBC's are now widely used to increase
              durability of turbine components, but the use of TBC's to increase inlet
              temperatures, and thus performance, is currently inhibited by the possibility
              of spallation. If TBC's are to be used to increase engine performance, it is
              essential that these coatings be retained reliably on the metallic substrates
              they are designed to protect.
***

