Title       : Racial Socialization, Identity Development, and Function in African American
               Adolescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9986101

Award Number: 9986101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Sellers rsellers@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A three-year longitudinal study will investigate how African American
              adolescents develop specific attitudes regarding the significance and meaning
              of race in the ways in which they define themselves. Specific race-related
              attitudes are referred to as racial identity.  The research has three
              objectives. The first objective is to examine how parents' and peers' racial
              identity attitudes and racial socialization practices influence the racial
              identity of African American adolescents. The second objective is to examine
              whether adolescents' racial identity attitudes adhere to a specific pattern of
              change over time. The third objective is to examine whether particular racial
              identity attitudes are associated with more positive academic and psychological
              well-being outcomes for the adolescents. The Multi-Dimensional Model of Racial
              Identity (MMRI) provides the theoretical base for conceptualizing and measuring
              racial identity attitudes. The MMRI delineates the extent to which African
              Americans view race as a significant component of their self-concept and how
              they define what it means to be Black. The MMRI proposes four dimensions of
              racial identity: identity salience, the centrality of the identity, the
              ideology associated with the identity, and the regard in which the person holds
              the group associated with the identity. Every African American adolescent in
              grades 7 through 9 of a public school system in a small midwestern city will be
              recruited to participate in a three-year longitudinal study. The primary
              caregiver for each adolescent will also be recruited to participate in the
              study. The study addresses several limitations in the existing research
              literature. Although recent studies have begun to examine racial socialization
              practices, relatively few have examined it from an intergenerational
              perspective. By assessing both the parents' perspective on the racial messages
              they hope to transmit and the adolescents' perspective of what messages they
              receive from their parents, the present study provides a more complex view of
              the racial socialization process. The longitudinal component of the study
              provides a unique opportunity to examine how adolescents' racial identity
              attitudes change and remain stable over time. The investigation of the
              relationships between adolescents' racial identity attitudes and academic and
              psychological functioning also provides an opportunity to test the relevance of
              racial identity in the lives of African American adolescents. These
              contributions to the research literature are essential for a more accurate
              understanding of the unique racial and cultural experiences of a traditionally
              under-investigated population.


