Title       : Age-Related Changes in Neuro-Motor Coordination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9986221

Award Number: 9986221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody L. Jensen JLJ@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Age-related Changes in Neuromotor Control

Abstract
The purpose of this
              research is to document the development of lower extremity neuromotor control
              in children.  Functional and adaptive motor skills require the task-appropriate
              combination of muscular and non-muscular forces (e.g., gravity, or the
              passive-reactive interaction of moving body segments).  The muscle force is the
              only force under neuromotor control.  Thus, the acquisition of skill requires
              that the neuromotor system adjust the muscle response to each context of
              forces.  From the perspective of physics, each force is described by its
              magnitude and its direction.  For successful task completion, then, it is
              insufficient that we simply produce large quantities of force, we must also
              apply the force in the appropriate direction.  There is no reason to believe
              that increasing force production capabilities of children (e.g., increases in
              force magnitude) are automatically accompanied by task-appropriate force
              direction control. Thus force magnitude and force direction are hypothesized as
              separable developmental mechanisms contributing to skill acquisition.

We
              will test this hypothesis by using the task of cycling.  Force direction
              control is necessary to push the pedal around its trajectory and to do this at
              various speeds.  Force magnitude control is necessary to cycle against
              increasing resistance.  Children between the ages of 4 and12 will ride a
              stationary bicycle, pedaling against at multiple workloads and at multiple
              cadences.  We will monitor both the kinematics of their movements - the
              positions, velocities, and accelerations of their leg movements - and the
              muscle activation patterns associated with the pedal trajectories under
              different workloads and cadences.  The central hypothesis is this series of
              studies is that age is a significant factor only when experience is low. 
              Specific inquries include: A) The effect of maturation: Holding experience
              constant, we can assess age-related changes in performance and the underlying
              mechanisms related to muscle coordination and force control. B) The effect of
              experience: Holding age constant, we can assess the effect of experience on
              developing force control. C) The adaptability of the neuromotor system: With
              age- and experienced-matched subjects, we can assess the adaptability of the
              system by manipulation of cadence and workload in the cycling tasks. These
              manipulations will reveal age- and experience related trends in responsiveness
              to changes in context (e.g., external forces). D) Trainability of the
              neuromotor system: At what age is the neuromotor system responsive to training?
               By implementing a training study, we can begin to document the effectiveness
              of training at difference levels of maturation and experience.

The
              significance of this work lies in its potential contribution to understanding
              how the developing neuromotor system solves movement problems - specifically
              the developmental trajectory in the construction of muscular and non-muscular
              forces to produce functional movement.  In the applied domain, this work will
              also provide information about age-related sensitivity to task manipulations
              and training.  This information is important for understanding children's
              readiness and responsiveness to educational and therapeutic interventions.


