Title       : NANOSCALE: Miniaturized On-chip Biosensors by In Situ Assembly of Colloidal
               Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9986305

Award Number: 9986305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Kaler kaler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Orlin D. Velev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Miniaturized sensors will be created by interfacing of colloidal assemblies with
              on-chip micropatterned electrodes.  The microscopic, electronically readable
              biosensors will be assembled in situ from latex particles.  The active areas of
              the sensors will be generated from suspended particles collected in
              micrometer-sized gaps between the electrodes under the action of
              dielectophoesis and assembled by modification of the operating colloidal
              interactions.  The key step in particle immobilization into sensor patches will
              be to decrease the repulsive interactions to a degree where the van der Waals
              and hydrophobic forces coagulate the particles.  The theoretical limit of
              detection of the microscopic sensors approaches an extremely low limit of a few
              hundred molecules.  One goal will be to study methods for improvements of
              devices previously fabricated.  Speed and sensitivity will be increased by
              generating an electro-osmotic flux over the sensor area and by optimizing the
              gap geometry.  Sensors based on direct protein immobilization in the gap
              between the electrodes fabricated by microstamping will also be developed.  If
              successful, this work will lead to an improved sensor for rapid, sensitive
              immunological testing.


