Title       : Chemosensory Function of Ion Channels in Amphibian Skin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9986008

Award Number: 9986008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley D. Hillyard hillyard@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin V. Hoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Unlike other vertebrate animals, amphibians don't drink by mouth.  Instead, they
              absorb water by osmosis across their skin, a process termed cutaneous drinking.
               Since water absorbed by cutaneous drinking does not enter the mouth, there is
              no opportunity for salt taste receptors in the tongue to evaluate the salt
              content of the water, yet previous NSF suported studies in our laboratory have
              demonstrated that toads will avoid cutaneous drinking behavior when presented
              water that contains excessive salt.  Conversely, dehydrated toads show a
              preference for a small amount of salt, a phenomenon that is analagous to salt
              appetite by mammals, including humans, who can taste salt with their
              tongue.

The research supported by this proposal is designed to study the
              sensory function of toad skin and the cellular mechanisms that allow them to
              detect the presence of salt in a water sources essential to their amphibious
              lifestyle.  To date we have found that the cellular mechanisms of salt taste by
              the skin resemble those of taste buds in the tongue of animals that drink
              orally.  The primary goals for the coming period of support are to: 1. identify
              the route of entry for cations (such as sodium and potassium) and anions (such
              as chloride) across the skin, 2. to identify specific receptor cells that relay
              sensory information to the nervous system and 3. to identify specific nerve
              cells that relay sensory information from the receptor cells to the nervous
              system. These studies will allow us to better understand the similarities
              between salt taste in amphibians and mammals and how amphibians respond to
              changes in their environment.  Amphibian populations are known to be declining
              world wide and are considered sentinel species for the detection of global
              environmental changes, yet little is known about how these animals actually
              perceive changes in their environment.


