Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Innovation, Reinvention,
               and Change in Workplace Drug-Testing Policy in the American States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9986303

Award Number: 9986303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5300               (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Berry wberry@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Award project demonstrates the usefulness of
              selection models for undertaking state level policy research.  The use of
              selection models serves to deal with a shortcoming currently found in this
              research.  In the study of state policy, the concepts of innovation,
              reinvention, and change are often studied in isolation.  This can lead to
              incomplete and disjointed views of the policy process.  Scholars are interested
              in not only whether states adopt certain broad categories of legislation, but
              also in the specific content of those laws and if they change over time. 
              However, when examining policy outcomes, the states that choose to adopt a
              given policy constitute a non-random sample and care must be used in exploring
              the determinants of such policy.  If traditional single-equation statistical
              analyses are run on such samples, biased results are likely.

The doctoral
              student uses selection models to examine states' decisions about whether to
              enact some form of legislation concerning drug-testing in the workplace, and,
              if said legislation is enacted, to examine the contents of the statutes and how
              they change over time.  Such models allow a more complete examination of state
              policy and protect against statistical bias.


