Title       : Social Norms, Institutions and Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9986170

Award Number: 9986170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199461             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Levine david@dklevine.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986170
Levine

The goal of the project is to provide a coherent framework
              for understanding the emergence and consequences of economic institutions and
              their impact on growth. Examining wide spans of history, it is apparent that
              some institutions are relatively more successful than others. Which
              institutions will emerge, and which will be successful? What social norms are
              needed to support particular institutions? How does production technology
              impact on institutions? This project addresses these issues theoretically and
              in the laboratory and relates the findings to historical and current
              institutions.  The short-term goal is to develop simple models that enable us
              to understand which social norms and institutions will emerge in particular
              environments, and to relate this to social norms and institutions observed in
              the field and laboratory.   The long-term goal is to provide an integrated
              theory.

Institutions differ in the extent to which they promote growth,
              efficiency and inhibit conflict. Competitive environments we understand
              relatively well. Non-competitive environments are less well understood. From
              laboratory experiments, as well as casual empiricism, attitudes towards others
              play an important role that they do not play in competitive environments. It
              matters little to the wheat market how a consumer personally feels about a
              particular wheat farmer. However, the attitude of a top-level employee toward
              an employer has a direct bearing on how successful the firm will be.  The
              perspective taken in this project is that attitudes towards others are social
              norms that arise as an equilibrium phenomenon. The dynamic equilibrium
              determines preferences at a moment of time that may be altruistic or spiteful,
              despite underlying selfishness.   The first project is a theoretical study of
              how such social norms function to support a simple and primitive society.  How
              does this simple egalitarian equilibrium breaks down as the population size and
              parameters of information and technology vary. This gives a solid foundation
              for understanding what problems more complex institutions must deal
              with.

Complementary to this, the second project is designed to examine
              existing social norms in the laboratory. One of the key questions is the
              consistency of social norms. Are particular players spiteful, or is their spite
              triggered by the play of opposing players? How do social norms differ in
              populations of different sizes? Will social norms adapt to equilibrium in the
              laboratory, and if so, over what time horizon? How does information play a role
              in enabling players to determine the intentions of their opponents, and does
              this make a difference to their play? These are some of the issues we plan to
              study in the laboratory.

As we move beyond simple relatively egalitarian
              institutions. specialization becomes important. Specialization is also crucial
              in development and technological progress.  The third sub-project continues
              previous work on explosive growth with diminishing returns to scale.   The goal
              is to examine more closely the role of specialization, and make an explicit
              comparison to economies in which there are fixed costs due to ideas or
              designs.

One of the key elements of institutions we observe in the field is
              the emphasis on avoiding costly conflict.  The final project focuses on
              conflict and why it arises. It extend an existing static literature on conflict
              to examine the extent to which conflict may arise due to time consistency
              problems, and be avoided through a series of small concessions.

