Title       : An Engineering Research Center for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9986821

Award Number: 9986821
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16192755           (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Silevitch msilevit@censsis.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bahaa E. Saleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis O. Jimenez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carey M. Rappaport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Modestino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems
              seeks to revolutionize our ability to detect and image objects or conditions
              that are underground, underwater, or embedded in the human body.  Northeastern
              University has formed a partnership between with Boston University, Rensselaer
              Polytechnic Institute, and the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez and four
              affiliated hospitals and research institutions (Massachusetts General Hospital,
              Brigham and Women's Hospital, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and the
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute).
The center will focus on difficult and
              intractable problems in sensing and imaging involving detecting and locating
              and identifying objects that are obscured beneath covering media.  Mapping
              plumes underground, detecting a tumor under the skin, and identifying
              developmental defects in the interior of an embryo all share the problem of
              distinguishing the effect of a dispersive, diffusive, and absorptive medium
              from the desired details of the sursurface structure and functionality.  The
              problem is similar whether the wave problem is electromagnetic or acoustic,
              whether the medium is soil or tissue, or whether the target is a land mine or a
              tumor.  To address these research barriers the center will focus its
              interdisciplinary research thrusts on Subsurface Sensing and Modeling,
              Physics-based Signal Processing and Image Understanding, and Data and Image
              Information management.  Systems testbeds will be used to enable a wide range
              of next-generation sensing and imaging systems.
The Center will create a new
              team-based learning environment for students, with research internship
              experiences in industry.  The ERC will develop new discovery-based, educational
              laboratories for each campus involved, putting modern imaging technology in the
              hands of undergraduates early in their education to solve real, open-ended
              problems.  The ERC will develop undergraduate educational modules in sensing
              and imaging systems and interdisciplinary, team-taught graduate courses and
              seminars derived from the ERC's research.  Middle and high school students will
              be impacted by the ERC through design competitions in sensing and imaging
              systems and summer pre-engineering programs.
The goals of the industrial
              partnership program are to gain industrial insight into the research
              challenges, to speed technology transfer to industry, and to help the center
              graduate engineers and scientists who are familiar with technology and
              industrial practice, better prepare to be successful in industry and
              academe.
This award provides $2.6 million for the first year of NSF support to
              the ERC through a five-year cooperative agreement, which is renewable in year
              three and in year six.

