Title       : Collaborative Research - The Quality of Elected Public Officials: Causes and
               Consequences.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9986255

Award Number: 9986255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo Morelli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This planning grant will enable two young investigators to complete theoretical
              studies on the causes and consequences of the quality of the political
              leadership in representative democracies and develop a program of empirical
              research to test the theory. The focus is on two dimensions of quality:
              competence and honesty.   A model is developed that captures a rigorous theory
              of the determinants of the average quality (in terms of competence, honesty, or
              both) of office holders.  The model spotlights incentives to run for office as
              the key determinant of the quality of the political elite.   The most
              interesting results emerge when such incentives are endogenous. Specifically,
              if the returns from holding office are increasing in the average quality of
              office holders, there can be multiple equilibria in office-holders' quality.
              There are "high" equilibria in which, many office holders being of high
              quality, it pays for high--quality citizens to run, and "low" equilibria in
              which, many office holders being of low-quality, high-quality citizens are
              discouraged from running.  The investigators also look more closely at the role
              that institutions - and especially electoral systems and party organizations -
              play in determining the average quality of office holders. In the model, the
              citizen-candidates differ from one another not only in terms of quality but
              also in terms of ideological position (on a uni-dimensional policy space) and
              intensity of policy preferences vs. quality preferences. There is a party for
              each ideological position and the party leaders choose the candidates in each
              district. The model allows the investigators to consider a variety of electoral
              systems and includes a description of the ex post coalition formation game
              taking place in the Parliament if no party achieves the absolute majority. A
              preliminary result in this rich framework is that if most voters have a high
              intensity of policy preferences (caring less about quality), then plurality
              rule always creates incentives for party leaders to select high--quality
              candidates, whereas under proportional representation there exist equilibria
              with low average quality of office holders.

The project also begins a
              large-scale data collection effort aimed at documenting variation across
              countries in the average quality of the political leadership. While
              cross-country data on corruption already exist, comparable data on office
              holders' skills have not been heretofore available: this project aims to fill
              this gap.    The project will start collecting information by country on
              elected officials' education, previous profession, previous income and social
              status.  These proxies for office holders' ability can be used to test and/or
              inform theories of the determinants of office holders' quality, as well as to
              investigate its consequences.

