Title       : A Comparison of Metal Accumulation in Arctic and Temperate Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9986069

Award Number: 9986069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas S. Fisher nfisher@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Baines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
OPP-9986069
Fisher

The Principal Investigator will compare the
              bioaccumulation of metals and nuclear-waste associated radionuclides by Arctic
              and temperate populations of three organisms.  High concentrations of heavy
              metals and radionuclides are often observed in terrestrial and aquatic
              organisms that are key to the livelihood of native human populations.  Thus,
              there may be large sources for these elements in the Arctic and/or efficient
              accumulation of metals and from the environment by Arctic food chains.  The
              large scale controlled discharge of radioactive materials in the Irish Sea, the
              North Atlantic, and the Russian Arctic has generated concern about impacts on
              sensitive commercial and subsistence fisheries.  A fundamental assumption
              behind risk assessments of the danger posed by anthropogenic radionuclides and
              heavy metals in the Arctic is that bioaccumulation and trophic transfer studies
              conducted on temperate organisms under temperate conditions are applicable to
              the Arctic.  This study will address this assumption directly and
              systematically.

Standard radiotracer methods of assessing metal accumulation
              will be used to compare uptake of metals into three species: clams, Macoma
              balthica; mussels; Mytilis edulis; and brown alga, Fucus vesiculosus.  These
              species are either eaten by humans or organisms important to native diets, or
              are used extensively in biomonitoring programs.  Six radioisotopes will be
              used: 137Cs, 241Am, 109Cd, 203Hg, 65Zn, and 110mAg.  They represent either
              components of radioactive waste material (131Cs, 241Am, 110mAg and 65Zn) or
              metals which are found at high levels in the soft tissues of organisms in the
              Arctic and elsewhere (Ag, Zn, Cd, Hg).  These metals also span a wide range in
              particle reactivity, association with proteins and biological function. The
              temperature dependence of radionuclide uptake and loss in whole organisms will
              be directly compared between Arctic and temperate populations of each
              species.

The results of this study will have three applications: 1) the
              uptake and loss of metals and radionuclides from Arctic organisms will improve
              assessments of the danger posed to native populations by anthropogenic metals
              and radionuclides: 2) the results will advance the interpretation of geographic
              variability in target organism tissues; and 3) the results will help establish
              a baseline that will improve our understanding of the mechanisms behind the
              effects of temperature and adaptation on the accumulation of metals in marine
              organisms.






