Title       : RUI: Modeling of Reactive Compatibilization in Polymer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9986879

Award Number: 9986879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuck Yeung   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9986879
Yeung
This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI) award to
              obtain a theoretical understanding of reactive compatibilization in polymer
              blends.  Undergraduate students will be participating in the research.  In the
              reactive compatibilization process, complementary functional groups are placed
              on different homopolymers of a polymer blend.  These functionalized polymers
              react at the homopolymer-homopolymer interface to form a copolymer layer that
              produces blends with better properties by enhancing the interfacial adhesion,
              reducing the surface tension and hindering the coalescence of droplets.  The
              combination of these effects produce blends with better thermal and mechanical
              properties.

A number of complementary numerical and analytical methods,
              including molecular dynamics, mean field dynamics, and a hybrid model
              incorporating both of these dynamics, will be employed to determine how the
              copolymer layer forms and grows with time.  The different methods are valid in
              different regimes of reactivity and density of the functional groups, so
              reactive compatibilization for the entire range will be studied.  

The
              results will increase our understanding of how the growth of the copolymer
              layer depends on the microscopic parameters.  Scaling regimes and crossover
              times will be identified and compared with extant theoretical results.  The
              physical mechanism behind each scaling regime will be identified by comparison
              to experimental measurements of the correlation function and average polymer
              displacement. 
%%%
This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI)
              award to obtain a theoretical understanding of reactive compatibilization in
              polymer blends.  Undergraduate students will be participating in the research. 
              In the reactive compatibilization process, complementary functional groups are
              placed on different homopolymers of a polymer blend.  These functionalized
              polymers react at the homopolymer-homopolymer interface to form a copolymer
              layer that produces blends with better properties by enhancing the interfacial
              adhesion, reducing the surface tension and hindering the coalescence of
              droplets.  The combination of these effects produce blends with better thermal
              and mechanical properties.
***

