Title       : Theoretical Studies of Superconductivity and Superfluidity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9986199

Award Number: 9986199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Leggett tony@cromwell.physics.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This grant supports theoretical research in the properties of coherent matter:
              superconductors, Bose condensates and Fermi liquids.  In superconductors, the
              PI chooses to ask a question, "How much can we learn about superconductivity,
              without theoretical preconceptions, simply from a study of the experimentally
              observed normal-state behavior?"  More specifically what can be learned from
              existing and planned experiments on electron-energy-loss spectroscopy and
              optics.  The project is expected to provide important clues as to the generic
              conditions necessary for the occurrence of superconductivity at high
              temperatures.  In the area of Bose condensed atomic alkali gases, the project
              focuses on relaxation following a sudden, hard perturbation, for example,
              relaxation of two uncoupled subsystems which have been suddenly coupled,
              relaxation from a metastable (current-carrying state in an annulus) state and
              other similar situations.  Finally, there will be first-principle calculations
              of an ultra-cold Fermi system, following intense local heating, with
              implications for an earlier analysis based on ideas developed in the context of
              early universe.
%%%
This grant supports the theoretical research of a
              distinguished PI, noted for his unique, innovative and insightful approach to
              fundamental problems in coherent matter.  Most of the projects attempt a deeper
              understanding of the problems involved.  In superconductors, the PI asks, "What
              are the generic conditions for the occurrence of superconductivity at high
              temperatures?"  He plans to attempt an answer based on a careful study of some
              special experiments.  In Bose-condensed atomic alkali gases (BEC) he wants to
              study relaxation processes, which strain the abilities of current theoretical
              approaches, thereby, building better theories.  Finally there are experiments
              on relaxation of ultra-cold systems, subjected to intense heating in a small
              region in space.  These experiments have been analyzed using the ideas
              developed in the context of early universe.  The last project concerns a
              careful, fundamental study of these experiments.
***


