Title       : Prediction of the Quaternary Structure and Folding Thermodynamics of Multimeric
               Helical Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2000     
File        : a9986019

Award Number: 9986019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Skolnick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Kolinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Danforth Plant Sci Center
	      975 N. Warson Rd.
	      St. Louis, MO  63132    314/587-1048

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Skolnick, J
MCB 9986019
	
The long-term objectives of this research are the
              development of algorithms capable of predicting the quaternary structure of
              small oligomeric helical proteins as well as to provide qualitative insights
              into their thermodynamic properties. To accomplish these goals, the lattice
              models developed by Skolnick and Kolinski will be reparameterized to better
              reproduce the balance of secondary and tertiary interactions, denatured state
              properties will be simulated to insure that they are treated appropriately, and
              the quaternary structure and folding thermodynamics of simple, multimeric
              helical proteins will be predicted. In particular, using Entropy Sampling Monte
              Carlo, the quaternary structures of coiled coils such as the GCN4 leucine
              zipper, its fragments, sequences designed by Hodges, and ROP-based dimers will
              be examined.

Many proteins only assume their biologically active
              conformation on association to multimers. For example, the leucine zipper motif
              present in eukaryotic gene regulatory proteins is one of the three known modes
              by which regulatory proteins recognize and bind DNA. Obviously, the ability to
              predict their quaternary structure is of practical importance. In contrast to
              the substantial body of experimental work, there are few theoretical studies on
              these important systems. The research described here is aimed at addressing
              this need in coiled coils and in somewhat more complicated multimeric helical
              proteins, such as ROP. Such studies are the first steps in the understanding on
              a molecular level of metabolic and signaling pathways.

This project is
              jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical Physical Chemistry
              Program in the Division of Chemistry.

