Title       : Collaborative Research: Width Adjustment in Mixed-Load Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9986238

Award Number: 9986238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95762              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Pizzuto pizzuto@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A river adjusts its shape to reflect the supply of water and sediment from its
              drainage basin.  Research conducted over the last four decades has provided a
              strong theoretical basis for predicting the stable form of channel cross
              sections and an empirical basis for understanding downstream trends in
              hydraulic geometry.  Many important questions about river morphology remain,
              however.  This research project examines processes of width and depth
              adjustment in mixed-load rivers, which carry a mixture of fine and coarse
              sediment.  A series of appropriately scaled flume experiments will be conducted
              to test hypotheses regarding the formation of a stable channel cross-section in
              rivers that are bounded by coarse sediment but that carry predominantly fine
              sediment.  Such rivers commonly occur, but they are not easily explained by
              existing theories, which tend to restrict the problem to one type of sediment
              and to impose the constraint of steady, uniform flow.  The present study
              attempts to model width adjustment in channels subject to temporal and spatial
              variations in flow and sediment transport.  Three sets of experiments will be
              conducted.  The first set examines how a straight gravel channel, carrying no
              fine sediment, evolves when it is subjected to a series of overbank flows. 
              These flows will range in magnitude from slightly above to well above bankfull.
               The second set of experiments will examine the same basic question, although
              the flow will carry only moderate amounts of suspended sediment.  The final
              form of the channel is expected to be different from the clear-water case owing
              to deposition of fine sediment along the channel margin or on top of the
              floodplain.  The third set of experiments will examine how spatial variations
              in riverbed topography and channel curvature affect fine sediment deposition. 
              These experiments will focus on the relative importance of advection versus
              diffusion as a mechanism for transporting fine sediment onto bar tops and
              floodplains.  The results of the experiments will ultimately be used to test
              and refine a theory for quasi three-dimensional flow and sediment transport in
              mixed-load rivers.  The experiments will be conducted at the St. Anthony Falls
              Laboratory at the University of Minnesota.  This project represents a departure
              from previous projects that have been based on the concept that equilibrium
              channels are formed and maintained by "representative" discharges.  By focusing
              on the effects of variations in discharge and sediment load, this study should
              broaden understandings of how natural rivers behave.  The results have
              potential additional implications for managed or modified river systems,
              especially with respect to river restoration efforts.  The study also will
              provide added insight into channel-floodplain interactions, thereby helping
              lead to fuller understandings of the processes involved in floodplain
              sedimentation.

