Title       : RUI: Structural Variations in the alpha-Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1999   
File        : a9986698

Award Number: 9986698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Fountain sc18@truman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Lamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              continuing support for the work of Dr. Kenneth Fountain in the Division of
              Science/Chemistry at Truman State University in Kirksville, MO.   The purpose
              of the work, using a combination of laboratory experimentation and theoretical
              calculations, is to explore and understand the alpha-effect, in which a
              nucleophile (a molecule with a reactive pair of electrons) can be much more
              reactive if there is an additional pair of electrons on a neighboring atom.  
              The work attempts to answer some  important questions in physical organic
              chemistry, and provides excellent training for the undergraduate students who
              do the work.   Dr. Fountain has infectious enthusiasm, and has been unusually
              successful in attracting students, getting them involved in the excitement of
              research, and encouraging them to go on to careers in chemistry.

Dr.
              Fountain proposes to develop quantitative expressions for the alpha-effect as
              functions of the groups being transferred, the nucleophiles involved, and the
              leaving groups.   He will also explore solvent effects, which can be quite
              important.   The results of linear free energy studies will be correlated with
              independent determinations of secondary deuterium isotope effects.   Students
              will be involved in synthesis, kinetics, electrochemistry, and ab initio
              computations, and encouraged to publish their results both in papers in the
              chemical literature and talks at national meetings of the American Chemical
              Society.
