Title       : Enhancing Workforce Preparation in Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986910

Award Number: 9986910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuben W. Farley rwfarley@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean A. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roland E. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronnie J. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Haver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), in partnership with J. Sargeant Reynolds
              Community College (JSRCC), is conducting a National Science Foundation CSEM
              Scholars Program. Forty NSF CSEM (Computer Science, Engineering, and
              Mathematics) Scholars are selected based on need (Pell Grant eligible) and
              their potential to complete their undergraduate degree within two years through
              full-time enrollment. As urban institutions both VCU and JSRCC, its primary
              feeder community college, serve a large population of part-time students
              including large percentages of racial minorities and women. During the 1998-99
              academic year, over 295 students who were enrolled in CSEM degree programs at
              VCU received Pell grants. Due to work constraints, two-thirds of these students
              were unable to carry a 30 hour annual load which would lead to graduation in
              the normal four year period; 29% were unable to carry 25 credit loads annually;
              and 19% could not carry 20 credits. 

Through the support of the NSF Computer
              Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars program, the project goal is to
              significantly increase the number of students in this pool who can complete
              their undergraduate degree programs in a normal time frame for full-time
              students. Successful applicants are recognized as NSF Scholars at an awards
              ceremony and receive $2500 scholarships. The NSF CSEM Scholars prepare an
              Individualized Contract under the guidance of a specially designated advisor
              who works with the Scholars to maximize the effectiveness of the existing
              university support programs in the following areas: (1) financial aid planning,
              including securing additional scholarships and aid, (2) academic program
              planning, academic achievement progress and supplemental tutoring and
              assistance, and (3) career planning through a selected in-field experience such
              as co-op or internship programs augmented by career day interactions with
              working professionals.

 The success of this project is monitored by an
              evaluator working through the Metropolitan Educational Research Consortium
              (MERC). The evaluation program provides the formative guidance needed to
              maximize on-going effectiveness as well as the summative conclusions necessary
              to validate the program model. 

