Title       : Algorithmic Verification and Synthesis of Hybrid Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9986918

Award Number: 9986918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Lemmon Michael.D.Lemmon.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A supervisory hybrid system is a system generating a mixture of discrete-valued
              and continuous-valued signals. Such systems arise when computers supervise or
              control complex dynamical plants. In recent years, there has been significant
              interest in the use of algorithmic methods for the verification and synthesis
              of hybrid control systems.  Algorithmic methods use algorithms whose successful
              execution provide necessary and sufficient conditions on the system's ability
              to satisfy a desired behavior. Symbolic model checking for hybrid automata
              represent a well-known algorithmic approach to hybrid system verification.
              Hybrid system model checking, unfortunately, has been shown to be undecidable
              for many classes of hybrid systems and this negative result has greatly limited
              the practical potential of algorithmic methods in analyzing and synthesizing
              hybrid control systems. This project proposes a paradigm shift in which we use
              algorithmic methods to verify the existence of 'controlled' hybrid systems
              satisfying desired behaviors. This approach to verification is decidable for a
              large class of practical systems and therefore provides a breakthrough making
              possible the development of algorithmic methods that provide a practical means
              for the verification and synthesis of hybrid control systems.

