Title       : NANOSCALE: Pharmaceutically Engineered Nanoparticles for the Targeted Delivery
               of Plasmid DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9986441

Award Number: 9986441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Mumper rjmump2@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators propose a novel method to pharmaceutically engineer solid
              nanoparticles in the size range of 5 to 50 nm containing plasmid DNA
              fornon-viral gene therapy applications.  The method potentially
              overcomeslimitations of current non-viral gene delivery technology which uses
              positively-charged lipids or polymers to form larger, unstable complexeswith
              negatively-charged plasmid DNA in the size range of 100 to 1000 nm.  Further,
              using the microemulsion precursor method to engineer solid nanoparticles,
              well-defined and uniform solid nanoparticles (5 to 50 nm)may be spontaneously
              and reproducibly made without the use of expensive or potentially damaging
              techniques involving high-torque mechanical mixing, microfluidization,
              homogenization, or milling.  The proposed method involves the spontaneous
              formation of novel microemulsions wherein the dispersed droplets, which are
              typically 5 to 50 nm in diameter, are precursors for the formation of solid and
              stable nanoparticles.  In addition to plasmid DNA, engineered nanoparticulate
              systems may contain many different materials for various medical and
              engineering applications such as nanomagnets and nanosensors.

The specific
              goal of the project is to demonstrate that targeted solid nanoparticles
              containing plasmid DNA can be engineered from novel microemulsion precursors. 
              The project has three specific aims, 1) demonstrate that plasmid DNA can be
              incorporated into a stable microemulsion and that stable solid nanoparticles
              (5-50 nm) containing plasmid DNA can be made from the microemulsion precursor,
              2) characterize the solid nanoparticles (i.e., size, surface charge and
              porosity, DNA release and stability) and demonstrate that the solid
              nanoparticles are stable in biological fluids and can express a transgene
              in-vitro, and 3) incorporate a cell-specific ligand onto the surface of the
              solid nanoparticles and demonstrate surface recognition of the targeted
              nanoparticles.








