Title       : Optical Sectioning Microscopy by Wavelength Scanning Digital Interference
               Holography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a9986257

Award Number: 9986257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myung K. Kim myungkim@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will develop a simple yet novel and versatile digital holographic
              microscope
device for imaging three-dimensional microscopic volume objects.
              The resultant images
obtained from this device will have submicron resolution
              in both the lateral and
longitudinal directions. Moreover, the blurring and
              degrading of images due to out-of-
focus object planes are completely
              suppressed. The device is based on numerical
reconstruction and interference
              of a number of digitally recorded holographic images,
while the wavelength of
              the illuminating laser is scanned. Because a hologram retains
all of the
              amplitude and phase information of the light field and because of the
              freedom
of digital manipulation of the holograms, it is possible to carry out
              an interference
process in the numerical virtual space that is quite
              impossible in physical space. When
a number of holographically recreated light
              fields of varying wavelengths are
superposed, and if the wavelengths are
              regularly spaced, then the interference among
them result in the light
              intensity being concentrated at object points only - propagation
of light
              through space is in effect eliminated. When focused, numerically, on an
image
              plane, only those points corresponding to any discontinuities or
              irregularities,
such as cellular surfaces and structures, of the object render
              bright image spots. The
resulting effect is analogous to scanning confocal
              microscope images, but this
system presents significant potential advantages.
              It has no mechanical moving parts.
The image acquisition consists of N
              exposures of two dimensional images, instead of
pixel-by-pixel build-up of 3D
              volume. The range of physical sizes and resolution of
objects that can be
              imaged is readily controlled by proper choice of the wavelength
intervals. And
              with the holographic phase information readily available,
              further
interferometric or holographic image processing is possible.
              Furthermore, the optical
sectioned images of the awarded system can be
              reassembled into a three-dimensional
digital model that can be further
              manipulated for specific applications, such as
correction of scale distortion,
              arbitrary section and cut-away views, and automatic
feature enhancement and
              identification. This system has a potential to impact
the general field of
              microscopic optical imaging by providing a simple and versatile
mode of
              acquiring and manipulating three-dimensional digital model of
              microscopic
objects.

