Title       : Theory and Simulations of Open Semiconductors and Insulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9986706

Award Number: 9986706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Otto F. Sankey Otto.Sankey@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9216,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9986706
Sankey
This grant supports theoretical research of a novel materials
              class that is gaining increased attention from engineering and synthesis
              communities - that is of open framework semiconductors and insulators.  These
              include (i) Si, Ge or Sn clathrate materials in which 4-coordinated atoms form
              cages tightly linked into crystals with guest atom residents in the cages, and
              (ii) semiconductors linked via chalcogens into supertetrahedron or linked open
              structures via small molecules.  Density functional calculations and
              simulations will be done to determine their properties, particularly
              electronic.  An important application is thermo-electric properties of open
              semiconductors.  Besides desirable electronic conductivity and Seebeck
              qualities of clathrates, trapped guest atoms inside cages produce localized
              Einstein-like "rattling" oscillators which hybridize with and scatter
              heat-carrying phonons of the framework.   This engineers the thermal
              conductivity in an advantageous manner.  Rattlers will be modeled by first
              applying electronic structure methods to determine the restoring forces, and
              then investigating the rattler's effect on the thermal conductivity by a Kubo
              linear response analysis.

These focused studies of the thermo-electric
              properties will be performed in tandem with general studies.  The novel
              structure of semiconductor clathrates offers a unique opportunity to
              investigate general properties of semiconductors from an unusual perspective. 
              Non-conventional semiconductor alloys of Group IV elements with Group III (or
              V) elements compensated by cation guests will be investigated (Zintl-alloys). 
              The unusual topology of clathrates motivates a search for new polymorphic
              states.  In addition, guest mediated softening of silicon's covalent bonds will
              be investigated - an effect not possible in a dense phase.

High risk
              projects involving new open framework materials more similar to zeolites will
              also be undertaken.  For example, solids with building blocks not of a single
              tetrahedron, but rather of a tetrahedron of tetrahedra will be studied by
              electronic structure methods for the first time.  
%%%
 This grant supports
              theoretical research of a novel materials class that is gaining increased
              attention from engineering and synthesis communities - that is of open
              framework semiconductors and insulators. An important application is
              thermo-electric properties of these open semiconductors. These focused studies
              of the thermo-electric properties will be performed in tandem with more general
              studies.  The novel structure of semiconductor clathrates offers a unique
              opportunity to investigate general properties of semiconductors from an unusual
              perspective.  These materials are of fundamental interest and may have many
              technological applications.
***


