Title       : Redox-Dependent Regulation of the Structure and Function of HSF1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a9986189

Award Number: 9986189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Y. Liu liu@biology.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9986189 
Liu 
HSF1, a member of the multigene Heat Shock Factor family, is the
              principal transcription factor that mediates the cellular transcriptional
              response to stress.   In higher eukaryotes, HSF1 is constitutively expressed
              and exists as a latent monomer in the cytosol under unstressed conditions.  
              Stress triggers a multistep process of modification of HSF1 including
              trimerization, nuclear translocation, and inducible phosphorylation that
              results in the activation of DNA-binding and transcription activities of HSF1. 
              The foundation of the goal of this research is the concept that redox-dependent
              modification of cysteines provides a useful and versatile means of regulating
              protein structure and function. Thus, the goal is to determine whether cysteine
              thiol-disulfide exchange modulates the structure and function of HSF1 in human
              cells. The hypothesis is that cysteine disulfide bond formation is an
              off-switch for the activation and trimerization of HSF1.    The PI has observed
              that the placement of three of the cysteine residues in hHSF1 is such that C3
              is likely to be juxtaposed to C4 and C5 in the hHSF1 monomer and thus capable
              of forming disulfide crosslink(s).   The PI reasoned that such modification(s)
              would affect both the structure and function of the protein.  Disulfide
              crosslinks would yield a more compact hHSF1 when analyzed by gel
              electrophoresis or filtration.  Such crosslinking would also stabilize the
              monomer form of hHSF1 and interfere with its trimerization.   These
              possibilities will be evaluated experimentally using pharmacological, genetic,
              and biophysical means. Cysteine-directed reagents, including diamide,
              dithiothreitol, and nitric oxide will be used to modulate the redox state of
              cysteines of hHSF1 in vitro and in vivo.   Conformational differences and
              relative abundance of the reduced versus oxidized forms of hHSF1 will be
              assessed using protocols and reagents which have been  developed and that allow
              for the resolution, detection and quantitation of redox conformers of HSF1. The
              ability of the oxidatively modified hHSF1 to undergo transformation from an
              inert monomer to the active DNA-binding homotrimer will be evaluated in an in
              vitro activation system.  The particular cysteine residue(s) involved in this
              regulation will be defined using cysteine site-specific mutants of hHSF1.  The
              occurrence of cysteine disulfide crosslink, the identity of the cysteine(s),
              and the reversibility of this crosslink by dithiothreitol will be evaluated and
              confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight
              (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry.   It is anticipated that this research will
              provide important information about of the role of redox as a regulator of the
              structure and function of hHSF1.   In so doing, these studies will contribute
              to the emerging concept that reactive oxygen and/or nitrogen species and redox
              modulation provide a versatile mechanism by which cells regulate important
              biological processes.


