Title       : Theory of Composite Fermions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a9986806

Award Number: 9986806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jainendra K. Jain jain@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports work on quantum Hall effect.  Nearly a decade ago, this PI
              proposed the notion of composite fermions, objects which are complexes
              consisting of an electron and an even number of flux quanta, formed when
              electrons in a layer are subjected to intense magnetic fields.  A gas of
              independent composite fermions is the conceptual foundation underneath a
              physical understanding of fractional quantum Hall effect as well as the Fermi
              sea in the vicinity of a half-filled landau level.  To incorporate effects of
              interaction between the composite fermions this PI has developed a wavefunction
              based approach, which has been successful in providing insight into several
              experiments.  In the current grant period, he plans to build further.  In
              particular, he plans to explore the conditions where the independent composite
              fermion picture breaks down and instabilities set in.  He wants to study the
              composite fermion counterpart of instability towards ferromagnetism in
              low-density electrons (without any magnetic field), which was first discussed
              by Bloch seventy years ago.
%%%
When a layer of electrons is subjected to
              high magnetic fields, their motion becomes strongly correlated and leads to
              integer and fractional quantum Hall effects.  Some ten years ago, this PI
              proposed a simple, insightful framework, called composite fermions, to describe
              the properties associated with fractional quantum Hall effect.  Over the past
              ten years, this conceptual device has been immensely successful in
              understanding experimental results and has helped develop insight and
              intuition.  The current grant proceeds with a new twist: while the past studies
              have been limited to free composite fermions, when does this view break down,
              what happens when the breakdown occurs and what happens afterwards?
***

