Title       : Corporate Governance and Managerial Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9986268

Award Number: 9986268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sendhil Mullainathan mullain@nber.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Bertrand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project will investigate the general question of how corporate governance
              affects managerial decisions. Business Combination (BC) legislation, passed by
              several states in the mid-80s, provide an excellent opportunity for studying
              the effects of governance. By reducing the threat of takeovers for firms
              incorporated in a given state, these laws likely weakened corporate governance,
              as evidenced by the negative share price reactions surrounding the passage of
              these laws. BC laws should provide more precise variation in governance than
              can be obtained by looking at changes in control or firm's adoption of takeover
              defenses.
	We propose constructing a match between the Longitudinal Research
              Database and COMPUSTAT to investigate the effect of BC laws on a set of
              managerial decisions. This matched data would provide two advantages. First, it
              would allow us to look at a wide set of variables that are unavailable in the
              COMPUSTAT balance sheet data, such as accurate wage and employment information,
              productivity, plant births and plant deaths. Second, this data would allow us
              to exploit an institutional feature of the laws and sharpen our identification
              strategy. The laws affected firms based on their state of incorporation and not
              their state of location. By identifying each plant's state of location, we can
              fully control for state-specific economic shocks that are contemporaneous with
              the passage of the BC laws. In other words, we can contrast two plants that are
              located in the same state but only one of which belongs to a firm incorporated
              in a legislating state. The resulting methodology therefore weakens concerns
              that the political endogeneity of the laws biases estimates.
	Using this
              methodology, we plan to study four key variables: measures of size,
              diversification, wages and productivity. These variables will help us
              understand the relative importance of three models of managerial preferences:
              empire building, managerial inertia and stakeholder protection.
	We will
              extend our basic methodology in four ways. First, we will merge the Central and
              Auxiliary Offices data to our sample. This allows us to examine white-collar
              outcomes, since these workers are covered quite poorly in the LRD. This is
              especially important since stakeholder protection theories of the firm would
              likely emphasize manager's more favorable treatment of white-collar workers.
              Second, we plan to track changes in state of incorporation for each of the
              firms in our sample, information not available in COMPUSTAT. This addresses the
              potential endogeneity bias arising from reincorporations subsequent to the
              laws. It also allows us to examine whether takeover legislation did indeed
              influence reincorporations, an important step in determining whether
              competition between states in corporate regulation leads to a race to the
              bottom. Third, we will examine the substitutability and complementarily of
              different governance mechanisms. Specifically, we will test whether firms with
              large shareholders or in more competitive industries react more or less to the
              passage of BC legislation. Finally, we will investigate whether these laws
              affected the sensitivity of wages to local unemployment or the sensitivity of
              investment to q. These last results will help determine the importance of
              managerial inertia theories.

