Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986989

Award Number: 9986989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Putnam lputnam@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (31), (59), (21) The university is selecting forty (40) students for a
              Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics (CSEM) Scholarship Program. The
              program has two goals:

1) To provide educational opportunities to low-income
              academically talented students through scholarships that promote full-time
              enrollment and degree achievement

2) To increase the number of women,
              under-represented minorities, and persons with disabilities completing a
              baccalaureate degree

In support of these goals, students are selected on the
              basis of financial need, academic merit, and ability to complete a degree
              within two years. Preference criteria related to gender, ethnicity, and
              disability status are applied, and educational level is a consideration. The
              emphasis on undergraduate students grows from the conviction that many
              university graduates are well prepared to go on to advanced degrees and to
              excel in leadership positions in academia and in industry, if, early in their
              education, they experience support to internalize this aspiration and to build
              confidence in their own abilities to succeed.

The university mission focuses
              on high quality educational programs and the promotion of diversity. These
              strengths can be applied to help address the national problem of under
              representation of women, minorities, and students with disabilities among
              computer science, engineering, and mathematics degree recipients.

The CSEM
              Scholarship Program benefits from the many campus services and activities that
              promote cultural sensitivity and support minority students. Students selected
              for the program receive a high degree of personal attention and undergo
              individualized application oriented experiences. They are given high priority
              for partial tuition waivers to supplement support available through NSF
              funding.

Program success is guaged on quantifiable outcomes: degree
              completion, post-graduation placement in either graduate school or employment.
              Evaluation also examines the effectiveness of recruitment efforts and program
              components such as support networks and special activities.
