Title       : Enhanced Sensitivity Biological EPR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9986942

Award Number: 9986942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gareth R. Eaton geaton@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9986942
Gareth R. Eaton
University of Denver
Enhanced Sensitivity
              Biological EPR

Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) is a spectroscopic
              method for studying unpaired electrons.  Unpaired electrons are often found in
              naturally occurring proteins that are important in chemistry and biology. 
              Unpaired electrons are also produced by radiation damage and by pyrolysis in
              foodstuffs and in other materials.  Modern EPR methods can determine the
              detailed environment of unpaired electrons, their lifetimes, and their
              interactions.  For example, interactions between discrete pairs of free
              radicals can be used to measure distances in proteins.
The special features of
              EPR that provide unique power for biological characterization are that (1) the
              method detects only unpaired electrons, and thus can literally see the needle
              in the haystack; (2) EPR can see unpaired electrons in solids or in liquid
              solution phase and over a wide range of temperatures; and (3) the large
              electron magnetic dipole results in very-long-range effects on EPR line shapes
              and relaxation times.  EPR spectra can be observed for proteins in membranes
              and even in whole cells and tissues, environments that can confound other
              physical methods. 
Unfortunately, these advantages of EPR sometimes cannot be
              exploited in biological systems because of a severe signal-to-noise problem. 
              This award will support improvement in the signal-to-noise level attainable by
              EPR.  The award will make it possible to combine newly invented types of EPR
              resonators, cryogenically coolable limiters, and low noise cryogenically
              coolable microwave amplifiers into application-specific modules.  The resulting
              spectrometer will be used to study proteins whose EPR signals are too weak to
              be effectively studied by current commercial EPR spectrometers.
	The
              technology developed will be transferable and could be used to upgrade existing
              EPR spectrometers in other laboratories.  Students, and visitors to the
              University of Denver, will be trained in the new technology.  Through
              collaborations with researchers at many other schools the new technology will
              be applied to a wide variety of biological problems and will be iteratively
              refined to give the best signal-to-noise possible for biological samples.	 


