Title       : Evolutionary Analyses of the Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Ldh-B Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9986602

Award Number: 9986602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359861             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Crawford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many researchers have suggested that variation in enzyme expression is an
              important mechanism for adaptive change, yet few studies address the molecular
              mechanisms responsible for these changes.  Closely related species of the
              killifish, Fundulus, provide a system to investigate these mechanisms and thus
              address the molecular changes responsible for the adaptive variation in the
              glycolytic enzyme, lactate dehydrogenase B (LDH-B) expression.  Populations
              among these species have independently evolved in different thermal
              environments and show adaptive changes in the levels of LDH enzyme.  One can
              investigate the DNA sequences that control enzyme expression among these
              populations and, by applying the appropriate evolutionary analyses, distinguish
              between random DNA sequence variations and DNA sequence variations that has
              evolved by natural selection.  The functional variation in DNA sequences that
              affect enzyme expression among these closely related taxa also will be
              investigated.  By examining both the evolutionary and functional significance
              of DNA sequence variations, this research seeks to clarify the molecular
              mechanisms that produce adaptive changes in enzyme expression.  The analyses
              among closely related species are more likely to identify the specific
              molecular changes responsible for adaptive variation than studies that focus on
              single model organisms.  Thus, these studies provide unique information and a
              persuasive perspective concerning DNA sequence variation that could be critical
              for the health or performance of humans and other animals.
