Title       : NANOSCALE: Shape Control in Nanoscale Crystallization Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9986545

Award Number: 9986545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kaplan david.kaplan@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Botsaris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-9986545
D. Kaplan, Tufts University

The goal of this research
              is to use principles of biomimetics to control the shape,
chirality and
              morphology of nanoscale inorganic crystals. Reactions will be carried out
in
              confined geometries (thin films or reverse micelles), taking advantage of
              template
chemistry, organized water layers, and chirality of the template.
              Peptides specific for
inhibiting crystal growth at surfaces will be selected
              via combinatorial methods and used
in the experiments to assess their ability
              to modulate control of crystal shape. Calcium
carbonate and sodium chlorate
              will be used as the model salt systems. These experimental
strategies will
              help us begin to mimic biomineralization processes, natural processes that
are
              adept at precise control of nanoscale inorganic crystallization processes;
              systems
useful to emulate in vitro. Well-defined monolayers will be formed
              with amino
acid-terminated surfactants in which head group chemistry, based on
              the specific amino
acid, and chirality, through the use of L- or D-amino
              acids, can be controlled. The
surfactants will be used in reverse micellar and
              thin film formats as confined geometries.
The chiral organic surfactant head
              groups will be used to understand the relationship
between chirality and
              inorganic crystal morphology. Phage display will be used for
combinatorial
              selection of peptides as specific inhibitors of crystal surfaces. The
outcome
              of the studies will be new options to modulate crystal shape through
              combinations
of template chemistry, template chirality, crystallization in
              confined geometries and the
presence of selective inhibitory peptides. The
              unique combination of experimental tools
that we plan to use will provide new
              insight into fundamental processes of nanoparticle
crystallization and lead to
              a better understanding of how to control the shape of these
nanoscale sized
              inorganic crystals. Shape and morphology control of crystallization
processes
              are significant for a wide range of electronics, optics and
              pharmaceutical
applications.

