Title       : The Inflation Bias Hypothesis and Monetary Policy in the Open Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9986707

Award Number: 9986707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Christiano lchrist@merle.acns.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The author proposes research to help identify ways of improving monetary policy
              in both closed and open economy settings. The first project would explore one
              hypothesis about the reasons market economies undergo prolonged periods of low
              and high inflation. The inflation bias hypoth-esis suggests that the periodic
              episodes of costly high inflation reflect a weakness in the design of monetary
              institutions in that they do not confer monetary policy makers with the ability
              to cred-ibly commit to consistently low inflation policies. To test the
              inflation bias hypothesis, the author proposes to incorporate the various costs
              and benefits of inflation into general equilibrium models with an optimizing
              monetary authority which lacks a commitment technology. The advantage of using
              general equilibrium models is that they have implications for a wide array of
              data. In this way a large amount of information, not just data on inflation and
              output, can be brought to bear in the models' design and construction. The
              author argues that if the resulting model can account for the observed level
              and volatility of inflation, then we should have greater confidence in the
              inflation bias hypothesis and in its implication that improvements in monetary
              policy require redesigning monetary institutions to incorporate greater
              commitment.
The author reports some initial results based on analyzing two
              conventional general equi-librium models. He finds that these models do not
              support the inflation bias hypothesis, and that they imply there is little to
              be gained in the redesign of monetary institutions. However he also reports
              that the models' implications for money demand are poor. Moreover, he shows
              that when changes in the models' intermediation technologies are introduced to
              improve their money demand implications, then the inflation bias hypothesis is
              resuscitated. On this basis, the author proposes to undertake additional work
              on the modeling of intermediation technologies in order to develop a credible
              evaluation of the inflation bias hypothesis. A convincing test also requires
              that the model do well in accounting for a broader set of variables.
              Accordingly, the author plans to extend existing models so that they
              incorporate capital accumulation and government fiscal variables such as debt
              and taxes. The author expects that the research will help shed light on other
              issues including various puzzles in the empirical money demand literature and
              puzzling features of hyperinflation episodes.
The second project would help
              shed light on the causes and remedies for financial crises experienced by a
              number of emerging market economies. The author seeks to gain new insights into
              these experiences by analyzing models which emphasize the foreign and domestic
              working capital requirements of firms. He proposes research designed to help
              shed light on the ap-propriate monetary policy to follow in the immediate
              aftermath of a crisis. He presents preliminary results which suggest that the
              nature of the monetary transmission mechanism in 'crisis' times may be very
              different than what it is in 'normal' times. The author also proposes to study
              alterna-tive monetary regimes, including dollarization, to see which is most
              likely to produce good results. In this work, he plans to take into account the
              various shocks affecting particular emerging market economies, including shocks
              to expectations. The proposed research would involve constructing quantitative
              general equilibrium models of small open economies. The construction and
              parameter-ization of these models would be guided by empirical analysis of
              individual countries. The research also entails an empirical investigation of
              what happens in the aftermath of a crisis, including the analysis of the type
              of collateral constraints that may be imposed at that time.
There are two
              additional projects. One would explore, with the use of quantitative general
              equilibrium models, recent concerns that have been raised about the supposed
              dangers of low nominal rates of interest. Another would investigate the
              monetary transmission in an economy with a large number of firms of different
              ages and productivity.

