Title       : Geometric Inequalities in Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9986154

Award Number: 9986154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107679             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Beckner beckner@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The objective of this research program is to develop a broad
              conceptual
understanding of geometric analysis on manifolds which takes as
              its
paradigm the role of sharp inequalities in Fourier analysis on
              the
manifold as encoding geometric information about intrinsic
              invariants,
symmetries and the underlying geometric structure of the manifold.
              Our 
direct focus is to obtain new and sharper results on
              isoperimetric
inequalities, critical Sobolev embedding, log Sobolev and
              Levy-Gromov
functionals, and multilinear fractional integrals that incorporate
              the
framework of the Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev inequality,
              Stein-Weiss
integrals, Birman-Schwinger kernels and Riesz potentials,
              especially in
the setting of Lie groups, symmetric spaces, complex manifolds
              and affine
geometry including hyperbolic space, SL(2,R) and the Heisenberg
              group.
Sharp embedding estimates are a critical tool to establish existence
              and
regularity for solutions to pde's, and to control oscillatory behavior on
              
a manifold. This program reflects a natural interplay and stimulus
              with
problems in conformal deformation, fluid dynamics, geometric
              probability,
statistical mechanics, string theory and turbulence.
              Computational methods
are essential tools to obtain a clearer understanding of
              the complexity of
the geometric symmetry.


Mathematical models that
              characterize physical phenomena and the analysis
of differential equations
              that describe dynamical processes require a rich
and diverse analytic
              framework. Scientists say that "mathematical laws
underpin the fabric of our
              universe." The aim of this research program is 
to develop a supporting
              mathematical structure that helps us to understand 
relations that connect
              uncertainty, entropy and disorder, geometric symmetry, 
renormalization and
              scaling arguments, non-homogeneity of space-time models, 
isoperimetric
              comparison between surface area and volume, and the fine detail 
of hyperbolic
              geometry. We want to obtain broad and rigorous understanding of
mathematical
              tools that support a quantitative description of the fundamental
laws of
              nature, and to develop and explore mathematical structures that model
physical
              phenomena ranging from fluid dynamics to string theory, especially
by using
              patterns of symmetry and intrinsic constants that encode geometric
information
              about the underlying theoretical framework.



