Title       : The Anatomy of American Passenger Travel and Transportation CO2 Emissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9986386

Award Number: 9986386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77125              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. R. Lakshmanan laksh@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines factors behind recent trends in American passenger
              transport demand and the consequent greenhouse gas emissions.  Prior work shows
              that growth in Americans' propensities to travel has more than offset the
              beneficial effect of improvements in energy efficiency on CO2 emissions from
              passenger transportation.  This project will explore drivers behind growth in
              travel propensity by means of two complementary research strategies.  The first
              is to decompose growth in travel propensity into components associated with
              changes in the life cycle, economic, and geographic structure of the traveling
              public.  The second is to carry out a statistical analysis of factors that
              underlie the shifts in propensity within relatively homogenous groups of people
              over time.  The empirical analysis will exploit two rich databases on passenger
              transportation in the United States: The National Personal Transportation
              Survey, which provides data on daily travel, and the American Travel Survey,
              which focuses on long-distance travel.

Emissions of CO2 from the
              transportation sector have grown both in absolute terms and as a proportion of
              total US emissions.  In order to devise strategies for emissions reductions in
              the transportation sector it is necessary to understand the social and
              behavioral mechanisms that drive the propensity to travel.  The results of this
              analysis will shed considerable new light on these mechanisms, thus expanding
              our understanding of travel behavior and providing guidance to the formulation
              of policies.

