Title       : Diagnosis and Control of Network Variability by Massively Accessed Servers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9986397

Award Number: 9986397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1210768            (Estimated)
Investigator: Azer Bestavros best@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Byers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Crovella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal seeks funding to investigate a number of basic research
              problems within the general framework of network-aware server protocols and
              services.  Tackling these problems is critical for the continued scalability of
              the Internet.
     Mass servers are popular Internet servers which produce a
              substantial fraction of the traffic flowing through the network.  Currently,
              such Mass servers are tuned to optimize their own performance (e.g. capacity,
              latency, I/O utilization), while overlooking the opportunity to monitor network
              conditions and to use that information advantageously.  This information could
              be used both to improve network behavior  (e.g. alleviate the problems
              resulting from congestion) and in further optimizing the performance of
              servicing requests.  Thus, Mass servers are uniquely positioned (1) to observe
              and diagnose network conditions by tracking the flows that they generate, and
              (2) to manage and control network resources by better regulating and scheduling
              the traffic they inject into the network.  These goals must be pursued over a
              wide spectrum of time scales to maximize the beneficial impact that can be
              achieved.
     On the shortest time scales, a Mass server can minimize packet
              loss by smoothing the otherwise bursty process of injecting packets into the
              network.  At medium time scales, a Mass server can perform aggregate congestion
              management by bundling like connections to avoid the burstiness that results
              from competition among flows.  At even longer time scales, a Mass server can
              map persistent hotspots in the network and optimize scheduling of connections
              to mitigate the impact of overusing those resources.  These objectives are
              representative of projects which the researchers intend to undertake on these
              various time scales.  
     The research work outlined in this proposal aims
              at achieving these benefits through the derivation of new measurement and
              analysis techniques to enable diagnosis of network conditions, and the
              development of new services and protocol to enable efficient network resource
              management and control.
     Proposed work in network measurement and
              diagnosis at Mass servers focuses on the use of passive and active probing
              techniques for the identification of network bottlenecks (e.g. congestion
              conditions) along various time scales.  The techniques to be used range from
              multi-resolution analysis using discrete wavelet transforms, to maximum
              likelihood estimators for packet loss estimation.
     Empowered with such
              diagnostic information, the proposed work in network resource management and
              control at Mass servers focuses on alleviating the problems associated with
              network bottlenecks (e.g. large delays and jitters, low and unfair resource
              utilization) along various time scales.  The techniques to be used range from
              the development of traffic pacing protocols to alleviate burstiness at the
              sub-round-trip-time scale, to aggregate congestion control algorithms for
              improving utilization of network resources and reducing jitter.
     A key
              component of the proposed work is implementation and prototyping.  To that end,
              the utility of the tools and protocols developed will be demonstrated by
              integrating them into three modular components for distribution to the research
              community, namely: (1) BEACON: A collection of network measurement and
              diagnosis tools, (2) TURNPIKE: A collection of network management and control
              protocols and services, and (3) BACKBAY: A platform that supports the
              integration of BEACON and TURNPIKE functionality into a high performance web
              server architecture.
     The pursuit of the research goals outlined in this
              proposal is timely.  Achieving these goals will leapfrog current piecemeal
              attempts aiming at supporting Internet growth.  The research team assembled to
              pursue these ambitious goals has made significant, nationally-recognized
              contributions to the understanding of Internet traffic characteristics and has
              an established record in software development and technology transfer.  Boston
              University is committed to supporting this team through substantial financial
              and infrastructural commitments that complement and leverage the support sought
              from NSF.

