Title       : Enhancement of Light Propagation in Tissue Using Hyper-Osmotic Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a9986296

Award Number: 9986296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashley J. Welch welch@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Diller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986296
Welch
We have shown that hyperosmotic solutions of dextrose, glycerol,
              hypaque, and polyethylene glycol reduce light scattering in tissue; local
              regions containing the hyperosmotic agent become transparent. The mechanisms
              for reducing scattering are believed to be index of refraction matching of the
              hyper-osmotic agent with tissue constituents such as collagen and tissue
              dehydration. This macro- and microscopic index matching decreases internal
              light scattering, which increases transmittance and decreases reflectance (back
              scattering) of a sample of skin.

The use of chemical agents will provide a
              technique for locating sources of scattering and evaluating the contribution of
              tissue constituents to scattering. This will increase our knowledge of light
              propagation in tissue at the micro and macro levels. The dynamics of the
              process are dependent upon the mass transfer of the hyper-osmotic agents and
              water. Optical measurements such as local transmittance using optical fibers
              and Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) will be combined with computations
              obtained from a network thermodynamic model to evaluate mass transport
              throughout skin as a function of time.

The proposed research will elucidate
              the mechanisms of tissue clearing and determine the feasibility of using
              hyper-osmotic agents to enhance light-based diagnostic and treatment
              procedures. We anticipate that the working depth of fluorescence spectroscopy
              and confocal imaging can be increased by a factor of five to ten. In addition,
              it should be possible to image blood vessels in skin using CDOCT. Demonstration
              of these enhancements will establish the feasibility of potential diagnostic
              applications for this basic science. These applications include skin
              morphologic examination, skin, bladder, GI and mucosal tumor identification,
              and non-invasive blood glucose measurement. Potential therapeutic applications
              include hair removal, ablation of deep stromal tumors, leg vein coagulation,
              photodynamic therapy (PDT) of tumors, targeting of individual dermal vessels,
              transscleral photocoagulation, and endoscopic surgery of the bladder, prostate,
              and GI tract.


