Title       : Empirical Evidence on the Labor-Market Impacts of Foreign Direct Investment and
               Multinational Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9986404

Award Number: 9986404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Slaughter matthew.j.slaughter@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Less-skilled workers in the United States and many other countries have
              experienced wage declines in recent decades, both in real terms and/or relative
              to more-skilled workers. These developments are an important policy issue, and
              they have also been the focus of a large body of academic research. In
              particular, a number of economists have examined the role of increased
              international trade. There is still no clear consensus, however, about how much
              international trade has pressured wages -- either absolutely or relative to
              other forces such as technological change.
     This project aims to broaden
              the research focus of "trade and wages" in two ways. First, I plan to consider
              international linkages other than just trade -- in particular, foreign direct
              investment (FDI) of multinational enterprises (MNEs). Second, I plan to
              consider labor-market outcomes other than just wages --for example,
              labor-demand elasticities. To date, there are very few empirical studies of the
              labor-market impacts of FDI and MNEs. I plan to build on these studies using a
              newly available firm-level panel data set covering the United Kingdom
              manufacturing sector annually from 1970 forward. These data contain a lot of
              information, in particular the nationality of each firm's ultimate owner, which
              make it well suited to questions of how FDI by MNEs affects labor markets.
              Specifically, the project aims to address three main issues.
     First, I
              plan to look for globalization pressures not the prices for labor but rather in
              the elasticities of demand for labor. Changing elasticities can matter for a
              number of reasons. Higher elasticities shift the incidence of non-wage labor
              costs; they trigger more-volatile responses to any exogenous labor-demand
              shocks; and they shift from labor towards capital bargaining power over any
              extranormal profits. In theory, greater international linkages via FDI and
              other forces increase labor-demand elasticities in two main ways: by making
              output markets more competitive and by making domestic labor more substitutable
              with foreign factors of production. These effects can arise in the absence of
              factor-price changes. This means that finding little effect of globalization on
              wages can be entirely consistent with finding a large effect on elasticities.
              Despite the plausible case for globalization making labor demands more elastic,
              there is almost no empirical evidence on this subject.
     Second, I plan to
              examine whether FDI improves firm performance or whether good firm performance
              induces FDI. In many countries it is has been documented in cross-sectional
              data that MNE affiliates are "better performers" than domestic firms -- i.e.,
              show higher labor productivity, pay higher wages, etc. But cross-sectional
              evidence alone cannot distinguish the two alternative causal explanations
              between MNEs and firm performance. Understanding causation here is particularly
              relevant for policy, as many MNE-attracting policies presume that FDI improves
              firm performance. With the U.K. panel data I can examine more clearly the links
              between MNEs and firm performance.
     Third, I plan to examine whether
              foreign affiliates of MNEs generate spillovers to domestic plants. Recent
              research has found negative spillovers in some developing countries. This
              negative correlation might be caused by developing countries lacking sufficient
              human capital and infrastructure needed to reap positive spillovers. For a
              developed country like the United Kingdom the nature of FDI spillovers might be
              very different. This can be examined with the U.K. data; in particular, I can
              see if the nature of spillovers varies by MNE country ownership.

