Title       : The Genetic Basis of Homology Recognition in Coprinus Cinereus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9986002

Award Number: 9986002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Pukkila pukkila@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The mechanisms responsible for meiotic chromosome pairing, and their
              relationship to genetic recombination, are not understood.  Several mutants
              that disrupt pairing and synapsis in defined ways have been isolated in
              previous work from this laboratory.  None of the mutants affects the repair of
              DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation.  Analysis of double mutant phenotypes
              has revealed that these genes do not appear to act in a simple linear pathway. 
              In addition to disrupting meiotic pairing (as assayed by microscopy and in situ
              hybridization), some of these mutants also affect the epigenetic modification
              of duplicated DNA sequences.  Accordingly, epistasis analysis will be used to
              ask if five additional synaptic mutants (including spo11, which blocks the
              initiation of meiotic recombination) can be incorporated into the two
              previously defined genetic pathways.  Relationships between chromosome pairing
              and recombination early in meiotic prophase will be analyzed using in situ
              hybridization and PCR.  Epistatic interactions among mutants exhibiting defects
              in the recognition and methylation of DNA duplications will be examined. 
              Finally, a combination of methods will be used to obtain cloned DNA sequences
              that can complement the defects in duplication-dependent DNA methylation and/or
              synapsis conferred by three synaptic mutants (bad45, bad48, and bad42).  In
              conclusion, this research will use a unique collection of mutants with
              well-characterized defects in DNA and chromosome pairing to determine cause and
              effect relationships among these processes that are essential to maintain
              genome stability.

