Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9986810

Award Number: 9986810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yeu-Sheng P. Shiue pshiue@cbu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Blanks  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Christian Brothers Univ
	      650 East Parkway South
	      Memphis, TN  381045568    901/278-0100

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (99), (31), (59), (21) The goal of this project is to enable students to obtain
              undergraduate degrees in computer science, engineering and mathematics and to
              enter post-graduate schools or to directly enter the workforce in their chosen
              field. The objectives are to (1) increase the number of low-income students
              obtaining undergraduate degrees in computer science, engineering, and
              mathematics, (2) improve professional development and career choice
              opportunities of participating students, and (3) strengthen partnerships
              between the university and corporations employing graduates in relevant fields.
              

This project offers the incentive of financial support for student costs of
              attendance at the university for two years (four semesters), plus individual
              attention leading to graduation and ultimately to successful employment. The
              university is awarding NSF-funded scholarships of $2,500 per academic year to
              ten low-income undergraduate students majoring in computer science, engineering
              or mathematics. The scholarship program prepares participants for graduation
              within two years of entry into the program. 

The NSF CSEMS Scholarship
              program offers much more than financial assistance for low-income students. The
              program provides assistance in academic efforts, research opportunities, career
              opportunities and on-going personalized monitoring. Program activities include
              individual and group meetings with the PI, site visits to local corporations,
              workshops, senior research projects with a mentor and/or external sponsor, and
              study sessions to prepare engineering majors for the Tennessee State Engineer
              Intern Examination. An Early Warning System is in place to notify the PI of
              potential academic or personal problems. Personal counseling, tutors and the
              math lab are available for students on an as-needed basis. 

The principal
              investigator, oversees the program administration and implementation. A
              scholarship selection committee selects the scholarship recipients. Criteria
              for selection includes eligibility for a Pell Grant, good academic standing, a
              junior standing in the fall semester of academic year 2000/2001, and a
              recommendation from their faculty advisor. Recipients must be U.S. citizens,
              U.S. nationals, refugee aliens or permanent resident aliens. 

The P.I.
              establishes a framework to follow NSF CSEMS scholarship recipients through the
              two academic years of the project and beyond. A Scholarship Team, led by the
              P.I., implements program activities and reviews the progress of participants.
              The Scholarship Team is composed of the Principal Investigator, the Dean of
              Academic Services, the Director of Institutional Effectiveness and two faculty
              members representing the School of Engineering and the School of Science. The
              Scholarship Team evaluates the program based on academic achievement, retention
              to graduation, number and percentage passing license examinations, and
              employment upon graduation. The PI, the Institutional Effectiveness Office, and
              the Career Center staff follow-up on the NSF CSEMS scholarship recipients after
              graduation. 

