Title       : Genetic Analysis of Synaptic Transmission in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9986990

Award Number: 9986990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $715664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Ordway rwo4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ordway
9986990

As the organ system responsible for controlling our
              movements, our senses, and our consiousness, the nervous system must be capable
              of rapid information processing and rapid transmission of that information
              throughout the organism. To meet these demands, complex networks of nerve
              cells, like electrical networks in computers, use electricity for information
              processing and transmission. Transmission occurs at specialized sites of
              contact between two nerve cells, called synapses, and is typically mediated by
              a complex process called chemical synaptic transmission. Thus understanding
              chemical synaptic transmission is essential to an understanding of fundamental
              mechanisms underlying essentially all neural processes. In the nervous system
              of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, electrical signals are transmitted
              in a manner quite similar to that in vertebrates. Importantly, Drosophila is
              also amenable to a powerful combination of experimental methods including
              classical genetic analysis, recombinant DNA technology, and functional analysis
              of chemical synaptic transmission. The work proposed here utilizes a remarkable
              class of Drosophila mutants in which the function of a specific protein can be
              turned off at any desired time simply by changing the temperature. The ultimate
              goal of this work is to understand the role of these proteins in chemical
              synaptic transmission by asking how the process changes when their function is
              perturbed.
The progress made in Drosophila is expected to lead directly to a
              better understanding of our own nervous system. This is emphasized by the
              recent completion of the Drosophila genome sequence, which has further
              established striking evolutionary conservation of genes involved in the
              function and pathology of the human nervous system. The combination of this
              strong evolutionary conservation and the remarkable power of the fruit fly as
              an experimental system provide a unique opportunity to investigate the
              molecular mechanisms of neural function.

