Title       : Cliometrics Conferences in 2000, 2001, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9986169

Award Number: 9986169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Price V. Fishback pfishback@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel H. Williamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9986169
Fishback

This grant supports the annual Cliometrics Conferences for
              2001 and 2002 and provides travel grants to the 2000 World Congress of
              Cliometrics in Montreal for PhD students and scholars from lesser developed
              nations.   Sites for the 2001 and 2002 Conferences will be selected from a list
              of several universities offering to host.  "Cliometrics" is economics in the
              service of history and history in the service of economics.  The field of
              cliometrics evolved in the 1960s from research interests in several fields;
              most notably economics, history, and statistics, but drawing also on
              demography, political science, and sociology. Its focus has been on the
              application of economic theory and quantitative analysis to a wide range of
              problems in economic history. Cliometrics is an area of research that owes its
              existence to the support of the National Science Foundation. In 1960 a small
              group of scholars interested in establishing an agenda for research in economic
              history held a conference at Purdue University. The original conference
              initiated a series of NSF funded conferences that became the forum for
              presentation of innovative research in quantitative economic history not only
              in the United States, but throughout the world.  

Few academic conferences
              offer the combination of seriousness of purpose and underlying geniality which
              characterizes the Cliometrics Conferences. The reasons are two: form and
              spirit. The form is pre-circulation of the papers, keeping presentations to a
              maximum of 5 minutes, with a long discussion following from the floor. About a
              dozen papers are presented in the two working days spread over three calendar
              days, giving ample time to discuss each. No formal discussants are assigned.
              The conferences are small enough--approximately 40 to 50 people--to have a
              stimulating 'workshop' atmosphere which encourages participants to speak
              freely. The spirit is tough but respectful, and is perpetuated by the practice
              of inviting a balance of seasoned cliometricians and participants new to the
              field.   Papers to be presented and other participants are chosen by a
              Selection Committee, composed of the Principal Investigator and the current and
              two previous conference hosts. This procedure aids in maintaining institutional
              memory while expanding the diversity of the intellectual interests of the
              selection committee.  A special effort is made to have the work of graduate
              students and/or assistant professors on the program. The steady mixing of new
              faces and experienced researchers has created a unique intellectual environment
              

Funding from the NSF accomplishes several things. First, it enables a group
              of graduate students and young faculty to attend a conference which they could
              otherwise not afford. Funding established practitioners ensures that they
              fulfill the obligation to read all the papers in advance and arrive prepared
              with questions and discussion. Second, authors presenting papers receive
              intense exposure for their work from an 'expert' group, which without the
              Cliometrics Conference could take several years. Third, all participants
              benefit by discovering knowledgeable and enthusiastic colleagues. This unique
              combination of financial support from the NSF and professional support from
              conference attendees provides young scholars with the stimulation and
              encouragement to commit themselves to the field.

