Title       : Reinventing Infanticide for a Global Age: Gender, Race, Class, and Nationality
               in Infanticide Prosecutions in Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9986150

Award Number: 9986150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Briggs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research is concerned with the way infanticide and related crimes are
              prosecuted in Venezuela because the criminal processing of these cases,
              appropriately analyzed, can yield insight on important themes in law.
              Preliminary research in Delta Amacuro State in the eastern part of the country
              and in the capital, Caracas, suggests that both prosecution and defense
              arguments as well as media accounts focus on issues relating to social
              inequality. In Delta Amacuro, where the racial distinction between "indigenous
              persons" and "criollos" (meaning "non-indigenous persons" or members of the
              "national society") structures all aspects of life, race lies at the heart of
              legal arguments when defendants are classified as "indigenous." In Caracas, on
              the other hand, poverty and immigration are much more pressing social issues;
              thus, when women are tried for infanticide in the capital they are often
              depicted as products of an "environment of violence" and "social
              disorganization," thereby reproducing dominant images of life in poor hillside
              "barrios" and of ignorant, unruly immigrants.
The research conducted to date
              has enabled the PI to generate a number of hypotheses regarding the conduct of
              infanticide trials in Venezuela and their relationship to broader legal,
              social, political, and economic processes.  A central hypothesis is that the
              content of case discussion has changed, from individual psychopathology, to
              emphasis on structural issues related to social inequality.  A research team
              that includes four advanced students will work in a range of sites around the
              country for three months in the summer of 2000.  The data collected will then
              be analyzed using discourse analytic techniques designed to test the research
              hypotheses generated in the preliminary study. 



