Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Stable Isotope Labeling and Detection Methods for
               Monitoring Bacterial Transport During In Situ Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1998  
File        : a9861304

Award Number: 9861304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Fuller fuller@envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9861303
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes
              to develop and test new methods to label bacteria with 13C, and to detect the
              labeled bacteria using modified gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
              Bioaugmentation requires that bacterial transport be monitored to assure that
              injected bacteria have contacted all areas of the contaminant plume. This has
              usually been determined by plate counts. However, this leads to an
              underestimation of bacterial concentrations due to the inability of plate
              counts to detect organisms, which are still viable and active, but will no
              longer grow on bacteriological media. The incorporation of stable isotopes into
              cells before injection, with subsequent detection of the isotopically labeled
              cells would allow all injected organisms to be enumerated, regardless of
              culturability. Methods will be developed to yield high incorporation of 13C
              into bacterial fatty acids. Analysis  13C-labeled fatty acid extracts using gas
              chromatography-chemical reaction interface-mass spectrometry (GC-CRIMS) will be
              optimized with respect to the lower detection limits and determination of
              isotopic enrichment. Sediment microcosm and intact sediment core experiments
              will be conducted to evaluate the labeling and detection of 13C-labeled fatty
              acids. It is anticipated that this methodology will enhance the ability to
              detect and track injected organisms during bioaugmentation.
    
              Bioremediation of contaminated soil and groundwater using bioaugmentation is
              expected to become increasingly widespread, especially for organic and
              inorganic pollutants that are not amenable to other physical/chemical or
              biological remediation schemes, or at sites where other remediation strategies
              are not effective. The development and application of the proposed methods will
              allow the bacterial transport component of bioaugmentation to be effectively
              monitored and validated. Since more accurate measurements of viable bacterial
              cell densities will be possible, expenditures for additional injections will
              only occur when they are absolutely necessary, thereby reducing the overall
              cost of remediation. Additionally, these methods have potential use in other
              basic and applied research in the areas of microbial ecology, microbial
              pathogenicity and microbial physiology, as well as in non-microbiological
              fields of study, since stable isotopes can be used as tracers in much the same
              way as radioactive compounds, but without the risk to human and environmental
              health.

