Title       : SBIR Phase I: Endohedral Metallofullerenes for Fiber Optic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9861142

Award Number: 9861142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Miller millerm@lunainnovations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Luna Innovations, Inc.
	      PO Box 11704
	      Blacksburg, VA  240601704    540/953-4267

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9861142
     This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project aims to
              obtain erbium endohedral metallofullerenes using recently developed
              purification processes and incorporate these materials into optical fiber and
              related devices with improved performance suitable for near term commercial
              application. Glasses activated with trivalent lanthanide ions emitting in the
              near infrared region are of current interest because of their potentiality as
              materials for high power lasers and optical amplifiers for fiber
              communications, and for fiber optic sensing applications. Currently, erbium
              doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA) are used for regeneration of optical data,
              enabling transmission over extremely long distances. In addition, erbium doped
              fiber is being investigated for use in ring laser devices for gyroscopic
              applications, and fluorescence of rare-earth materials such as erbium may be
              used to measure temperature through the relation between the fluorescent decay
              time and temperature. By encapsulating erbium ions in the metallofullerene Er2
              @ C82, the erbium is provided an exceptionally homogeneous environment relative
              to silica glass. This can have the effect of increasing the excited state
              lifetime and corresponding laser efficiency, and can be important in
              upconversion lasers. 
     Improved erbium doped materials using endohedral
              metallofullerenes would have immediate commercial application in erbium doped
              fiber amplifiers, fiber lasers, fiber ring laser gyroscopes, and other
              communication and sensor products, including fluorescence based temperature
              sensors for aircraft applications. Purified erbium endohedral metallofullerene
              material can be sold as raw material, and fiber preforms doped with erbium EMF
              could be sold to fiber manufacturers.



