Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Noise Canceller for Enabling Speech Recognition in Noisy
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9861548

Award Number: 9861548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Felix Rosenthal sigsep@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Signal Separation Tech
	      4020 Iva Lane
	      Annandale, VA  22003    703/978-4976

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861548
	This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Signal
              Separation Technologies (SST) applies noise cancellation to enable speech
              recognition systems to function more effectively in noisy environments such as
              automobiles where, in addition, hands-free operation of the speech microphone
              is a desired capability, e.g., in voice commands to car phones, conversing on
              car phones, and non-emergency commands to operate windows.  Building on the
              Signal-Free Reference using Singular-Value Decomposition (SFR-SVD)-based noise
              canceller produced under an SBIR contract from Army, the novel and highly
              effective noise canceling algorithms are now believed to be capable of solving
              the noisy environment problem.  The proposed application will be evaluated by
              measuring the improvement in percentage of correctly interpreted commands when
              noise canceling is applied.
	Speech recognition systems are receiving
              considerable attention as reflected in Business Week's 1998 Special Report with
              the subheading "Speech Technology is the Next Big Thing in Computing" which
              discussed progress at the major manufacturers of speech recognition and
              software systems.  Such systems significantly lose reliability in the presence
              of engine, road, and other noise.  In this context, Signal Separation
              Technologies proffers its technology:  a high accuracy signal separation noise
              canceller which has the potential to work effectively over a wide frequency
              range for use as an input to speech recognition systems.  The initial target
              market for this technology is luxury cars, but penetration into the total car
              market of over 100 million is anticipated in to follow.  In the United States
              alone, there are 10 million luxury cars and it is estimated that a good 50% are
              likely to have speech recognizers in the near future.

