Title       : SBIR Phase I: Innovative Software Definable Radio and Network Architecture for
               Low-Cost Commercial Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1998  
File        : a9861124

Award Number: 9861124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Radkey Theclacker@msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ameranth Wireless, Inc.
	      12230 El Camino Real
	      San Diego, CA  921302090    717/897-0103

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861124
     Software-defined radios (SDRs) permit use of the same hardware to
              address a spectrum of applications, rapidly shifting the operation of a single
              hardware system to meet the multiple demands of the user.  In its short
              history, most of the SDR development has been for military and personal
              communicator applications.  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project from Ameranth Technology Systems seeks to attain an
              industrial/commercial goal, i.e., to develop a family of low-cost
              interoperating radios for data input and display in the warehousing and
              material management environments, with embedments of voice communications and
              system commands, data transceiving, and single-frame video interchange.  The
              radio architecture is based on a demonstrated and successful system using
              precedent silicon technology.  For this proposed work, an advanced, highly
              integrated radio chip set will be "opened up" to allow complete access to the
              software "hooks" for software definition of the radio functions by the
              operator.  In Phase I, Ameranth Technology will design the system based on its
              prior subsystem elements, using software control of low-cost wireless-telephone
              silicon to perform all the functions of a half-dozen large and generally very
              expensive single-purpose radios.  In the next phase of the research, a system
              family of radios will be built and tested in a demonstration prototype.
    
              The project proffers broadly redefinable radio subsystems that can be mixed and
              matched to each other and to the external (cellular phone) world to enable a
              very low-cost, readily proliferous system for real-time accounting and control
              of operations now controlled by rivers of paper.  Specific market niches for
              the equipment are hospitality, retail, and defense.
