Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reliable Distributed-Object Computing with Fault-Tolerant
               Cooperative Intelligent Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9861270

Award Number: 9861270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Yalowitz jyalowitz@sentar.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SENTAR, Inc
	      4900 University Square
	      Huntsville, AL  358161839    256/430-0860

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5371,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861270
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project builds on
              new cooperative intelligent agent technology and proven fault tolerance
              techniques to improve greatly the reliability of distributed object-computing
              environments such as the Common Object Request Brokering Architecture (CORBA).
              The movement toward Distributed Object Request Management (DOM) systems such as
              CORBA recognizes the need to extend object-oriented computing dynamically into
              the network. However, these architectures are vulnerable because of the
              variability of networks and the complexity of distributed interfaces, and they
              do not incorporate fault tolerance features. Fault tolerance is essential for
              DOM to he usable in many distributed systems with high value or safety
              implications.  The goal is to make CORBA fault-tolerant by employing
              fault-tolerant cooperative intelligent agent developed by Sentar as, adjuncts
              to the distributed client applications, object request brokers, and object
              repositories that comprise CORBA implementations. The project will investigate
              fault tolerance methods for application and abstract levels of interaction that
              do not impact the CORBA standard or burden non-critical applications.  The
              objectives are to adapt agent and fault tolerance software components for the
              CORBA environment, prototype critical aspects of the fault CORBA support agent
              network, and evaluate reliability under various feasible fault conditions.
   
               A vast commercial market has developed in recent years for distributed object
              computing technology and products. Of the market, a significant segment
              requires highly reliable software for safety and asset protection. If the
              proposed research meets its goal, users in this critical software segment will
              enjoy the cost savings and operational benefits CORBA provides to
              others.




