Title       : SBIR Phase I: Photonic Networking of Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems Arrays for
               Smart Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1998  
File        : a9861405

Award Number: 9861405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Behzad Moslehi bm@ifos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Fiber Optic Sy
	      650 Vaqueros Avenue, A
	      Sunnyvale, CA  940853543    408/328-8610

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1445,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9861405

     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              develop novel photonic networks supporting optically-powered
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) arrays for applications requiring
              numerous sensors and actuators.  This research addresses the enormous challenge
              for interrogating, activating and controlling all microdevices to improve
              health monitoring of smart structures.  The proposed networks will be
              implemented with wavelength-division-multiplexed, fiber-optic circuits in
              architectural configurations, well-suited to the project goal.  MEMS arrays
              have been fabricated for real-time measurement of shear-stress distribution. 
              With the increase in number of microdevices employed in a single structure, the
              problem remains a lack of high-capacity interconnection system.  Further
              problems include operation in electrically-noisy and potentially-explosive
              environments.  The proposed photonic networks offer ultra high capacity,
              electromagnetic  interference immunity, electrical passivity, and
              expandability.  Because of increasing need for networked microdevices and
              recent advances in MEMS, the time is ripe to advance the research toward
              commercialization.  The firm is in a unique position to undertake this program
              because of (a) the pioneering history of its staff and team (Stanford, UC
              Berkeley, UCLA) in the subject, and (b) its recent related device technology
              advancements.  Phase I will design, fabricate and test microdevice fiber bus
              interfacing and powering, as wells as design an expandable, photonically
              networked, multiplexed, multiple microsensor, MEMS arrays for Phase II
              application-specific implementation.
     MEMS is predicted to be a $100
              billion market by the year 2000.  Commercial applications of the proposed
              photonically interconnected MEMS array networks include civil, mechanical,
              aerospace, chemical and marine engineering, particularly monitoring and control
              of smart structures by microsensors (shear stress, pressure, temperature,
              strain, gas, liquid level, fluid flow, etc.) and microactuators for mechanical
              systems, electrical power plants, automobiles, materials processing (e.g.,
              semiconductor), and medical devices.  If successful, the resulting networks can
              accommodate MEMS arrays on flexible substrates in a smart skin configuration
              for 3 D measurements on curved surfaces.  There is also market potential in
              fields such as communications.  Potential industrial partners have expressed
              interest in commercial development.

