Title       : SBIR Phase I: Fiber-Optic Deflectometer for Bridge Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9861382

Award Number: 9861382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Brower dbrower@astrotechnology.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Astro Technology Inc
	      14227 Oak Chase Drive
	      Houston, TX  770622036    281/464-9992

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1442,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9861382
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              investigates the feasibility of developing a fiber optic deflectometer.  The
              deflectometer will consist of laser, mounted on a stationary object near the
              bridge, and an array of fiber optics attached to the area of the bridge where
              the deflection measurements are desired.  Real time structural monitoring of
              bridges requires a new way to measure deflection.  Current deflection
              measurement methods generally use linear potentiometers that are mounted on the
              bridge and attached to the ground directly below with a cable.  The ground
              below the bridge acts as a reference against which bridge deflection is
              measured.  This method does not work in most real time applications since
              bridges usually have traffic or water underneath. This project will develop a
              new, low cost, deflectometer that does not require access to the ground below
              the bridge.  The fiber optic array can be configured to provide varying degrees
              of sensitivity.  Individual fiber optic strands will be laser interrogated and
              any vertical displacement of the bridge, while subject to static or dynamic
              loads, will be detected and recorded.  The new deflectometer will provide
              advancement in technologies for bridge condition assessment and reliability
              investigations.  New sensors, including fiber optic strain gauges have recently
              been applied to bridge structural monitoring.  These devices have proven
              successful in monitoring strain in structural components of the bridge but do
              not provide displacement data.  A reliable deflectometer, in addition to strain
              gauges, is needed to measure displacement of the bridge in order to make a full
              structural evaluation.
     The research will provide a method to measure
              deflection in bridges and any other civil engineering structure that requires
              deflection measurements.  Government, research institutions, Universities, and
              construction companies are potential users of the instruments.

