Title       : SBIR Phase I: Methods and Software for Modern Time-Frequency Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1998  
File        : a9861160

Award Number: 9861160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pitton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Insightful Corporation
	      1700 Westlake Avenue N Ste 500
	      Seattle, WA  981093044    206/283-8802

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861160
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              conduct research on the methodology and application of time-frequency analysis,
              and develop a broadly applicable time-frequency toolbox providing advanced
              time-frequency signal processing techniques to the non-expert practitioner. 
              The goal of the program is to make time-frequency analysis readily accessible
              to a wide range of users and non-specialists so that it becomes a standard
              signal-processing tool. In most real-world applications, nonstationary signals
              are the norm. Everyday applications such as communications, speech, sonar,
              radar, manufacturing, and biomedical signal processing routinely process
              nonstationary data or must function in the process of nonstationary
              interference. Standard methods of processing nonstationary signals, however,
              suffer from a trade-off between time and frequency resolution, resulting in
              degradations in accuracy and performance. Powerful modem techniques for
              processing nonstationary signals, known as "time-frequency representations,"
              overcome the shortcomings of the traditional methods. Time frequency analysis
              has been successfully applied to a broad range of applications. Due to
              limitations in existing software and methodology, however, these methods have
              not seen widespread use by non-specialists. Moreover, a comprehensive
              collection of software tools for computing time-frequency representations and
              incorporating the results into standard analyses or applications is not
              currently available.
     This program should provide a software toolkit
              offering a complete methodology for time-frequency analysis. The toolkit will
              be commercialized as an S-PLUS module and a MathCad extension pack, and will be
              marketed to the installed base as well as other scientists and engineers.
              Instructional material (books and hypermedia) will also and the technology
              licensed to other vertical markets (e.g., communications).



