Title       : SBIR Phase I: The Study of Superior Quality Thin Films Derived from Liquid
               Combustion in a Thermal Plasma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9861324

Award Number: 9861324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry A. Luten hluten@ccvd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Chamblee, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9861324
     This SBIR Phase I project will investigate the fundamental physics
              and chemistry of the innovative combustion chemical vapor deposition (CCVD)
              process for thin film deposition. CCVD is an innovative, patented, atmospheric
              pressure, thermal plasma process that has been successfully utilized to deposit
              exceedingly high quality thin film materials at high rate and low cost. 
              Accordingly, it has enormous commercial potential. The CCVD process, generally,
              starts with a hydrocarbon solution containing a dissolved metal complex that is
              pumped under pressure into a torch like nozzle. The solution is submicron
              atomized via a proprietary nebulizer and injected into the plasma generated by
              the torch causing deposition of a thin film of the desired material onto a
              substrate. Epitaxial films can be deposited onto single crystal and oriented
              substrates. The high quality of the as deposited films is due to the ability of
              the CCVD process to atomize and combust the precursor solutions cleanly and
              efficiently. In order to  improve our understanding and control of the process,
              the fundamental dynamics of the thermal plasma, including dissociation
              chemistry and chemical transport will be studied by a number of physical and
              spectroscopic techniques including atomic emission spectroscopy and optical
              pyrometry. These fundamental data will be correlated with process performance
              for representative thin film manufacturing applications, specifically with
              respect to CCVD deposition rate, film quality and process economics.
    
              Deposition of high quality thin film materials for use in electronics,
              corrosion protection, optical coatings, nanopowders, superconductors, fuel
              cells as well as other applications yielding a potential multibillion dollar
              total market. Increased liquid combustion efficiencies relative to current
              technology.


