Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Thermal Treatment Process For Sewage Sludge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9861361

Award Number: 9861361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Klosky enertech1@mindspring.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : EnerTech Environmental Inc
	      739 Trabert Avenue, NW
	      Atlanta, GA  30318    404/355-3390

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1401,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9861361

     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is a
              feasibility study for economically producing and utilizing marketable fuels
              from sewage sludge. According to U.S. EPA s National Sewage Sludge Survey,
              approximately 7.8 million tons of sewage sludge (dry basis) are generated each
              year in the U.S. as a byproduct of municipal waste water treatment. Management
              of sewage sludge is a growing concern due to the increase in generated volumes
              of sludge, demand for lower pollutant discharges, and rise in disposal costs.
              The proposal develops the novel technology for sewage sludge carbonization and
              utilization. The carbonization process converts sewage sludge into a quality
              and pumpable slurry fuel at costs lower than traditional disposal processes.
              The carbonized slurry fuel can be utilized for co-firing or reburning in
              coal-fired utility boilers, with greatly reduced emissions compared to sludge
              incinerators. Objectives of this project include I) to convert a dilute sewage
              sludge to a uniform and pumpable slurry fuel with a heating value far greater
              than the original sludge, 2) to determine fuel characteristics of the
              carbonized sewage sludge versus process conditions, 3) to define emissions and
              ash characteristics from combustion of the carbonized sewage sludge, and 4) to
              evaluate cofiring and reburning as potential applications of the carbonized
              sewage sludge.
     It is anticipated that Phase I and II research will
              establish the combustion of carbonized sewage sludge as an economically and
              environmentally desirable method of disposal and utilization Research plans
              have been structured to compile the necessary data to construct an integrated
              demonstration facility in Phase III. The U S market size for carbonized sewage
              sludge is estimated to be approximately $2.3 billion per year.  Preliminary
              economic estimates demonstrate that the technology will be extremely
              competitive
in most geographic regions of the US.

