Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Turbulence Model for Transitional and Rotational Flows in
               Turbomachinery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9861114

Award Number: 9861114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsin-Hua Tsuei htsuei@conceptseti.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concepts ETI Inc
	      4 Billings Farms Road
	      White River Junction, VT  05001    802/296-2321

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1260,5371,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861114
    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project could
              greatly increase accuracy of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) calculations.
              Practical CFD calculations require models for approximating the effects of
              turbulent flow structure. Turbulence models exist, but there is a need for more
              robust, computationally efficient, and easy-to-use turbulence models applicable
              to wide classes of aerodynamic and aerothermodynamic flow problems. The
              proposed work addresses this need through the development and validation of a
              unique new approach to turbulence modeling to provide a step increase in the
              accuracy of CFD calculations with a computational cost comparable to much less
              vigorous existing turbulencemodels. The new turbulence model will be integrated
              with a proven turbomachinery CFD code and validation performed against
              published, measured, and DNS data, as well as laser velocimeter data to be
              collected from an annular diffuser test rig. This work will develop the model
              and validate its effectiveness specifically for turbomachinery flows. It is
              expected that this advanced turbulence model will also be applicable to a wide
              range of other flow conditions. These could include flows around airfranies,
              engine ducting, control surfaces, etc., plus general flows involving such
              phenomena as transition, rotation, separation, convection heat transfer, skin
              friction, mixing, and combustion.
    The proposer is an established publisher
              of design software tools for the turbomachinery industry, with users such as
              Pratt & Whitney, General Electric, AlliedSignal, and Nuovo Pignone. The subject
              turbulence model will first be commercialized through integration into an
              existing CFD product. In addition to direct software sales, other potential
              revenue sources are licensing fees and contract work to further improve and
              enhance the subject model and/or implement and test it in other solver/model
              combinations, including unstructured-grid solvers.



