Title       : SBIR Phase I: Integration and Distribution of Low-Jitter On-Chip Clock for
               High-Speed Analog-to-Digital Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9861554

Award Number: 9861554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepnarayan Gupta gupta@hypres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HYPRES, Inc.
	      175 Clearbrook Road
	      Elmsford, NY  10523    914/592-1190

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861554
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project proposes
              to integrate two superconducting technologies--rapid-single-flux-quantum (RSFQ)
              and long-Josephson-junction (LJJ) - to build a fast digitizer instrument with
              on-chip clocking. HYPRES has demonstrated transient pulse capture at 16
              GSamples/s with a flash analog-to-digital-converter (ADC) using an external
              clock. The ADC performance can be enhanced by replacing the external high-speed
              clock with an on-chip clock with very low timing jitter. The on-chip clock also
              simplifies the digitizer system by removing the requirement of external
              high-speed clock sources. A high-speed, frequency-tunable, single-flux-quantum
              (SFQ) clock with extremely narrow line width can be generated utilizing the
              resonant soliton modes of an underdamped long Josephson junction. In Phase I, a
              versatile multiple-frequency clock generator will be developed by combining the
              master long-junction clock with a new clock selector circuit and integrated
              with the wideband ADC. Two clock distribution schemes - through Josephson
              transmission lines (JTL) and ballistic transport on matched low-impedance
              micro-strip lines will be investigated. Successful integration of the
              long-junction on-chip clock with the flash ADC will lead to the demonstration
              of a simpler and lower cost transient digitizer instrument in Phase II.
     A
              transient digitizer instrument capable of sampling rates above 10 GSamples/s is
              not commercially available today, in spite of a growing demand in fields such
              as inertial confinement fusion and high-energy physics. HYPRES is developing
              such an instrument focusing on the $630M/year market for digitizer instruments.
              Elimination of expensive multi-GHz external clock generators will simplify the
              digitizer system and reduce its cost. A spin-off commercial application,
              employing the wideband ADC, is a communication signal processor, such as
              digital beam forming, targeted towards the satellite-communication hardware
              market of $500M/year.


