Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Indoor Air Quality Monitor and HVAC Controler Based on Infrared
               Sensing Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1998   
File        : a9861457

Award Number: 9861457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Techs Inc
	      2015 Ivy Road
	      Charlottesville, VA  229031733    804/970-2200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9861457
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused
              on research and development of a prototype of cost effective, efficient,
              commercializable indoor air quality monitor and HVAC controller based on a new
              middle infrared optical sensor. This detection system will be capable of
              measuring C02 level, temperature, time and room occupancy. A  solidstate
              optical sensor and a monitor will be designed, built, and tested, using
              premixed gases of known concentration of  C02. Preliminary tests show that the
              C02 sensor demonstrates promising accuracy and a fast response time, making it
              a good candidate for demand controlled ventilation (DCV) system applications.
              The solid state light source with no electromechanical parts reduces
              maintenance weight, size, and power requirements, and provides the potential
              for low cost relative to currently available sensors. A dual beam design using
              matched photodetectors reduces drift and calibration errors. C02 based Demand
              Controlled Ventilation offers a large potential to conserve energy in buildings
              while maintaining indoor air quality. Currently available optical sensors for
              C02 are bulky, and require frequent calibration and maintenance.  The
              architecture of a demand controlled ventilation system, using the proposed
              monitor and incorporating a humidity 	sensor will be developed in phase II.
  
                The indoor air quality monitor described in this proposal has application in
              any indoor environment where air quality and its effect on health is a concern.
              It will be particularly useful in large variable occupancy spaces and in
              buildings incorporating variable air volume ventilation systems and direct
              digital controls. Commercial applications could involve 	multiple units placed
              at strategic locations each connected through a common data network. This
              configuration would 	allow the developed indoor pollution control platform to
              become the key sensing component(s) of a larger demand controlled ventilation
              system which optimizes energy use while promoting the comfort, productivity and
              health of the building occupants. 


