Title       : SBIR Phase I: Integrated Microsensors for Detection of Aqueous and Gas Phase
               Volatile Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1998   
File        : a9861073

Award Number: 9861073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Peter Lo arcova@swva.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Rsrch Corp of VA
	      PO Box 3406
	      Radford, VA  241433406    540/731-0655

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9861073
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves
              the development of a novel integrated microsensor system that will accurately
              and rapidly measure low quantities of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) both in
              air and in aqueous environments. At present, no inexpensive sensor system is
              sufficiently sensitivity and rugged for use in continuously monitoring of VOCs
              in underground water streams, soil, effluent discharge, fugitive emissions and
              in spent liquid and vapor streams. To remedy this situation, this proposal
              suggests the development of low-cost continuous organic chemical microsensors
              based on the change of fluorescence and absorption of dyes embedded in polymer
              thin films. This program is innovative in combining sensitive diode
              laser-excited fluorescence with total internal reflection methods of analysis
              to provide a continuous monitor of VOCs. The Phase I Research Objectives
              include evaluation of polymers and near-infrared dyes for detection of volatile
              organic compounds, design and fabrication of micro-total internal reflection
              fluorescence sensors for improved chemical analysis, and acquisition of
              families of test data to provide information for instrument optimization and
              extensive field testing in Phase II of the program. This Phase I research
              program will result in an integrated microsensor platform that is sensitive,
              fast, reliable, robust and inexpensive for multicomponent analysis of VOCs.
  
                Successful completion of the program objectives would result in the
              development of fluorescent and absorption-based instrumentation for
              identification and quantification of volatile organic compounds and
              environmental pollutants in groundwater, soil, effluent discharge and fugitive
              emissions. A robust, high sensitivity, low-cost chemical analyzer has
              applications in environmental monitoring, and chemical analysis in the
              specialty chemicals, petroleum and energy industries.


