Title       : SBIR Phase I: Optically-Controlled Membrane-Mirror Wavefront Corrector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9861549

Award Number: 9861549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99783              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Ersen ali@optronsystems.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Optron Systems Inc
	      3 Preston Court
	      Bedford, MA  017302319    617/275-3100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1038,1218,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9861549
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              explore the feasibility of a novel, low-cost, optically-controlled,
              adaptive-optics wavefront corrector.  The chosen structure of the wavefront
              corrector is compatible with a Hartmann-Shack wavefront sensor. Such a phase
              estimator produces a focused optical signal in each subaperture whose position
              is dependent on the slope of the wavefront. The Optically-addressed
              Membrane-mirror Light Modulator (O-MLM) design uses a special structure that
              gives piston-only operation. The proposed concept offers the potential for
              extremely high actuator density, and its complexity does not scale as the
              number of subapertures increases. Under the Phase I program, device and system
              modeling studies will be conducted, component and prototype device fabrication
              will be accomplished, and device characterization and analysis will be carried
              out to determine feasibility of this novel wavefront corrector. The prototype
              modulator will be tested for optical sensitivity, phase modulation depth and
              speed. The Phase II program will demonstrate an all-optical, high-resolution
              wavefront correction system in a laboratory-controlled environment. The Phase
              II system will be designed with astronomical applications and commercial
              imaging systems in mind. In Phase III prototype adaptive optical systems will
              be built based on the Phase II results for the telescopes of both professional
              and amateur astronomers. It is expected that  the membrane-mirror wavefront
              corrector will offer tens of microseconds response time, and at least 8 radians
              of phase correction at visible wavelengths.
     The wavefront corrector
              system will find applications in amateur and professional astronomy as an
              affordable real-time unconventional adaptive optical accessory. It will also
              find markets in industrial inspection and machine vision, and medical imaging.
              Applications of the O-MLM device are in projection displays and optical signal
              processing markets.

