Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Micro-Pixelized Scintillator for Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9861538

Award Number: 9861538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivek Nagarkar vnargarkar@rmdinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radiation Mon Devices Inc
	      44 Hunt Street
	      Watertown, MA  024724699    617/926-1167

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9861538
     Structural biology is an eminent branch of biological science
              research where the three-dimensional structure of proteins and other
              macromolecules is determined and is related to the biological flinction of
              these molecules. Macro-molecular crystallography provides the 3D distribution
              of atoms, which is extremely important in the fields such as erizymology,
              immunology, protein assembly and bioengineering.  Synchrotron X-ray sources
              hold great promise for structural biology, however, they have not yet realized
              their potential as analytical tools because of the lack of appropriate position
              sensitive "area" detectors. Current detectors fail to meet the requirements of
              data collection for critical reasons related to spatial resolution, dynamic
              range, sensitivity, and speed of response. To address these limitations, we
              propose to develop a novel large area detector based on a new generation of
              micro-pixelized scintillator. The micro-pixelized scintillator will provide a
              unique combination of very high sensitivity, spatial resolution, and signal to
              noise ratios. When integrated with a large area digital optical detector it
              will allow a wide dynamic range and substantially enhanced throughput at
              relatively low costs.
     In addition to the structural biology application,
              the proposed large area micro-pixelized scintillator would find widespread use
              in instrumentation wherever high-resolution X-ray imaging is used. A novel
              imaging system formed by coupling these sensors to digital optical detectors
              may be applied to medical imaging, non-destructive testing, X-ray astronomy and
              basic physics experiments. Currently X-ray imaging market is estimated to be in
              hundreds of millions of dollars and substantial fraction of this market
              represents where the proposed high-resolution scintillator technology would
              have a significant impact.

