Title       : SBIR Phase I: Digital Cadaver - An Immersive Environment for the Direct
               Reconstruction of Anatomical Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9861000

Award Number: 9861000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas McCracken tmccracken@visiblep.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Visible Productions LLC
	      201 Linden Avenue, Suite 301
	      Fort Collins, CO  805242466    970/221-4256

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9861000
     Technology can provide students without access to individual
              cadaver dissection with an opportunity to experience realistic simulations of
              dissections that retain the intellectual and educational value of a hands-on
              laboratory experience.  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              from Visible Productions, LLC will focus on extending the technologies of a
              prototype system, which provide students with an opportunity to perform digital
              dissections, and on determining the feasibility of a robust Java-based
              implementation sufficient to support commercial scale use.  The implementation
              will consist of a Java client application tightly integrated into a Web-based
              interface to the image request server.  The integration of the Web interface
              and image server will allow for convenient image caching, retrieval, and
              management.  This architecture will provide a seamless interface, invisible to
              the user, between local computation and remote image generation.  In addition
              to offering a platform independent solution, the implementation of the client
              application in Java will be crucial to achieving this integration.  The project
              will involve research into several areas not addressed by the prototype system.
               Specifically, performance of improvement of the digital staining algorithm
              required for Java implementation; management of local segmentation documents
              and transparent transmittal with imaging request to the server; Web-based user
              interface allowing students private, authenticated access to and management of
              the images produced from their requests; and beta testing with a small group of
              students.
     This project proffers a pedagogically sound approach in the
              area of anatomy, which will combine laboratory computers with a high-end system
              through the Internet in such a way, that students can use this platform without
              requiring the institution to acquire high-end technology. 

