Title       : SBIR Phase I: Microminiature, High Resolution, Passive Peak Strain Detector for
               Smart Structures and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1998   
File        : a9861020

Award Number: 9861020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Arms info@microstrain.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MicroStrain Inc
	      294 North Winooski Avenue
	      Burlington, VT  054013680    802/862-6629

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1059,1445,5371,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9861020
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed
              at combining hermetically packaged differential variable reluctance transducers
              capable of peak strain detection (DVRT-PD's) with shape memory alloy (SMA)
              actuators to produce improved passive peak strain detectors which can withstand
              harsh environmental conditions (moisture, salt, and vibration) and can be reset
              for repeated uses.  Critical civil and military structures require "smart"
              sensors in order to report their strain histories; this can help to insure safe
              operation after exposure to potentially damaging loads (such as earthquakes,
              hurricanes, military action, etc.).  Sensors in smart structures generally
              require system power in order to operate, but if power outages occur, in a loss
              of key data may result.  Therefore, sensors which can record peak information
              without power (passively) are needed.  Previous passive peak strain detectors
              have relied on measuring the magnetic properties of transformation induced
              plasticity (TRIP) steels.  However, these devices have several drawbacks,
              including bulky size, low resolution, high nonlinearity, and a one time use
              limitation due to material yielding.  The research will address these problems
              by using modified, microminiature, DVRT PD's.  A Phase 0 study was performed
              using bonded resistance strain gauges as a standard; DVRT-PD's were found to be
              repeatable, fast, and accurate.  
     Health monitoring has the potential to
              greatly enhance the safety and life of military, aerospace, and civil
              structures.  Sensate structures equipped with passive networks of peak strain,
              acceleration, pressure, and torque measurement devices, could be interrogated
              for their response to test loads or potentially damaging events, and either
              replaced, or their embedded sensors reset for future interrogation. 
              Applications include health monitoring of composite structures, aircraft,
              bridges, dams, and buildings.  Military and commercial market potential for
              these systems is significant.

