Title       : SBIR Phase I: Digital Holographic Microscope for the Non-Destructive Evaluation
               of Micro-Mechanical Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9861253

Award Number: 9861253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99056              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gopalakrishna K. Bhat gbhat@erols.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Strainoptic Technologies
	      108 West Montgomery Ave.
	      North Wales, PA  194543440    215/279-3383

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9861253
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposal
              addresses the development of a digital holographic microscope, for the
              non-invasive inspection of micro-mechanical structures. Micro-mechanical
              systems are being employed in various commercial devices such as, pressure
              sensors, accelerometers, flow valves, switches, relays, micro-motors and
              micro-manipulators. Traditional methods used to evaluate the structural
              integrity of macro-mechanical structures can not be implemented with
              micro-mechanical structures. This problem calls for new non-destructive,
              non-invasive techniques for the inspection and quality control of
              micro-mechanical structures.  We propose to develop a digital holographic
              system, which can evaluate the structural integrity of micro-mechanical
              structures with minimum operator interaction and training. Structural integrity
              will be evaluated by studying the deformation of micro-structures under
              operating stresses. The instrument will employ the principle of holographic
              interferomery to measure deformation fields. lnterferograms will be recorded
              using a video camera and the deformation fields will be extracted from the
              interferograms using digital image processing techniques. Digital holography,
              when combined with digital image processing will yield full-field
              deformation/strain field information in quasi-real time.
     A digital
              holographic microscope will be highly beneficial tool for the design and
              inspection of micro-mechanical structures. We expect to have a high demand for
              this instrument in computer hardware, instrumentation and materials industries
              and also in academic and industrial research community. Specific areas of
              application include : (1) design and inspection of microelectro-mechanical
              systems (NIEMS), (2) deformation analysis of electronic substrates, and (3)
              micro-mechanics study of composite materials.


