Title       : SBIR Phase I: Real-Time SHIFT: A Complete Simulation and Deployment Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1998  
File        : a9861179

Award Number: 9861179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleks Gollu gollu@metax.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meta-X
	      2271 Cedar Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94709    510/548-1315

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Meta-X
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to
              design and implement a real-time extension to the SHIFT language. SHIFT
              mathematical model and language will be extended to formally represent the
              interaction between SHIFT generated control code and the real-time operating
              system environment. An end-to-end methodology will be specified for iterative
              system design, simulation, and progressive deployment with the SHIFT system.
              SHIFT is in use in a variety of applications including highway automation,
              autonomous submarines, chemical distillation column control, and air traffic
              management. This project should result in the actual deployment of control-code
              in a real-time operating system. Currently the transition from simulation to
              implementation is done via manual translation that is time consuming, error
              prone, and ad hoc. As a result SHIFT's value in iterative system design is
              limited.
     In the current market there is a lack of tools that support
              iterative and end-to-end simulation and deployment of real-time control
              systems. SHIFT is a powerful, domain-specific language used for simulation and
              hybrid system controller design. A tool formal extension of SHIFT makes it a
              commercially viable end-to-end design, simulation, and progressive deployment
              for automotive, aerospace, process control, and manufacturing industries.


