Title       : SBIR Phase I: Tunable Diode Laser Polariscope for Wide-Range Birefringence
               Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9861255

Award Number: 9861255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99354              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gopalakrishna K. Bhat gbhat@erols.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Strainoptic Technologies
	      108 West Montgomery Ave.
	      North Wales, PA  194543440    215/279-3383

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9861255
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I proposal aims to
              develop a polariscope employing a tunable diode laser as light source, which
              can measure optical retardations in a wide range.  Dynamic wavelength
              modulation will be used to measure very small retardations and static
              wavelength modulation will be used to measure large retardations.  The
              principle developed will be applicable not only for birefringence measurement,
              but also in many other fields of optical metrology. Birefringence measurement
              is a challenging problem in glass, polymer and ceramic industries.  Residual
              birefringence in these materials is introduced during the manufacturing
              process.  Birefringence is related to one or more of physical variables such as
              internal stress, molecular orientation, crystal arrangement, etc.  During the
              manufacturing process, residual birefringence is used as one of the quality
              control criteria.  The technique of photo-elasticity is generally employed to
              measure birefringence in transparent materials.  In photo-elasticity,
              birefringence is computed by measuring the retardation between two polarized
              light waves passing through the material.  The measurement process is not too
              involved when the retardation is farther from zero and smaller than one
              wavelength.  However, the measurement problem gets complicated when the
              retardation approaches zero or when it is more than one wavelength.  There is
              no commercial polariscope that can solve these two problems simultaneously.
  
                 The proposed instrument will be a highly beneficial tool for measuring
              birefringence in glass, plastic and ceramic products.  The polariscope can be
              used as a process/quality control device in various glass, plastic and ceramic
              industries.  Specific customers will include: manufacturers of high quality
              glass, optical fibers, ceramic crystals, plastic films/sheets, compact disk,
              consumer electronics industry, automotive and aircraft glass and plastic
              industry.


