Title       : Dating Mammalian Tooth Enamel using 4He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9903339

Award Number: 9903339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thure E. Cerling tcerling@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Thure Cerling will examine the
              potential of measuring the concentration of 4He in fossil tooth enamel as a
              method for absolute age determination. 4He is a decay product of Uranium and if
              4He is retained in the tooth, and no confounding variables are present, the
              amount should be time dependent. Preliminary work has yielded two very
              interesting results. First, there is no close relationship between the amounts
              of uranium and 4He present. Secondly, analysis of samples of known age
              indicates that the amount of 4He is very closely related to age. The cause of
              this apparent anomaly is not understood although Dr. Cerling postulates that
              although U is taken up in teeth  after burial, the resultant 4He is not tightly
              bound into the matrix and is thus lost. He will attempt to illuminate the
              mechanisms of 4He production and loss. To accomplish this he will analyze teeth
              of known age from a number of sites with different sedimentological and
              temperature histories. He will measure the distribution of 4He as well as 3He
              within these samples. He will compare samples which give accurate vs. aberrant
              dates to determine if selection criteria can be established. Cross sections of
              teeth will be autoradiographed to determine the distribution of uranium. In
              order to understand the adsorption and solubility of uranium in enamel,
              leaching tests will also be conducted.

This research is important because,
              if successful, it will lead to a dating technique of widespread use in
              paleoanthropology as well as geological and biological sciences.

