Title       : Workshop on Near-Land Shallow and Deep Ocean Research and Development in the
               Context of SFOMC, Boca Raton, Florida, March 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9903866

Award Number: 9903866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley E. Dunn dunn@oe.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903866
Dunn
For over 30 years the Navy has operated the South Florida Test
              Facility (SFTF) in south Florida.  Located at the closest position to the Gulf
              Stream along the US coast, the site is unique in its access to both shallow and
              deep water very near to a land.  More recently, Florida Atlantic University
              gained a shore side engineering laboratory at the south end of the SFTF
              underwater range.  With an emphasis on ocean sensors, acoustics and marine
              vehicles, the department has a natural synergy with NSWC-CD facility.  These
              factors, the natural congruency of their interests, and the inclusion of
              strongly interested parties from the University of Miami (UM-RASMAS), the
              University of South Florida's Department of Marine Science, NOAA-AOML in Miami,
              and Harbor Branch brought a consortium together in early 1997.  Included in
              this consortium are contributions of staff, equipment, operating support, and
              facilities.  In particular, the facilities include the SFTF underwater test
              range as well as the land campus resources of NSU, FAU, and NSRDC-CD.  The
              potential that this partnership created resulted in special funding being
              provided through ONR to support specific enhancements to the SFTF off-shore
              range instrumentation and to support a series of demonstration scientific and
              technology development programs designed to take advantage of the features of
              the area.  In essence this was a program to examine the efficacy of the SFOMC
              concept and how this range can be used by the interested academic
              community.

The program herein seeks to strengthen this unique effort through
              a workshop to discuss the benefits, challenges, thrusts, and potential results
              of this collaborative endeavor.  The focus of the workshop will be on the
              technological and scientific issues that SFOMC is suited to address as well as
              the manner in which SFOMC should best be organized and operated in order to
              realize its full potential.  In addition, it will be the purpose of the
              workshop to generalize the findings of the workshop where appropriate so as to
              derive lessons that can have value for potential similar efforts.  The result
              of the workshop will e a widely distributed report based on findings generated
              during the workshop by the participants.


