Title       : Turbo Coding for CPM Signals and ISI Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9903297

Award Number: 9903297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon L. Stuber stuber@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This research investigates new signaling techniques for power and bandwidth
              efficient digital communications.  Our approaches rely on the use of Turbo
              coding and iterative decoding principles which were first introduced in 1993.
              Turbo codes are remarkable because they can operate very close to the channel
              capacity (a theoretical limit on the maximum data rate for
              reliablecommunication over a given channel).  In this research, we are
              investigating the use of Turbo coding in conjunction with bandwidth-efficient
              modulation schemes that are suitable for satellite and land mobile radio
              communications.  Such schemes make efficient use of the limited bandwidth
              resources, while at the same time allowing communication at very low power
              levels, thereby conserving the battery power in mobile and portable terminals. 
              We are also investigating the application of Turbo codes to channels that
              exhibit time dispersion, such as wire-line channels used for voice band
              telephony and wireless channels used for cellular radio communications.  We are
              devising new signaling schemes and receiver structures, and performance
              analysis tools when Turbo codes are used on these types of channels.

Many
              practical systems like mobile satellite communications and land mobile
              communications employ non-linear amplifiers at the receiver and, therefore, 
              require a very small peak-to-average power ratio for the modulated signal. 
              Continuous phase modulation (CPM) is an attractive technique for such
              systems
because of its constant envelope and compact power density spectrum. 
              We are investigating the use of Turbo codes in combination with trellis coded
              modulation (TCM) and CPM.   Our objective is to achieve large coding gains
              without bandwidth expansion and a constant envelope for the modulated
              signal,
making our schemes ideal for use in power and bandwidth limited
              communication systems. Also many physical channels exhibit inter-symbol
              interference (ISI), including static (wire-line telephone) ISI channels, and
              fading (cellular and PCS) ISI channels. It is important to devise techniques to
              either combat
the effects of ISI through efficient equalizer structures, or,
              mitigate the effects of ISI through the use of techniques like orthogonal
              frequency division multiplexing (OFDM).  Recently, iterative equalization and
              decoding has been considered by some researchers and shown to provide large
              coding gains on static ISI channels.  We are considering the application of
              Turbo codes to fading ISI channels and developing analytical tools to evaluate
              the performance of Turbo coding on ISI channels.  Some specific problems that
              we are investigating include:
Novel approaches to the design and performance
              analysis of Turbo TCM schemes with CPM for AWGN, flat Rayleigh fading and flat
              Rician fading channels.
Receiver design for coherent and non-coherent
              reception of Turbo Trellis coded CPM.
Performance analysis of Turbo coded
              systems for ISI channels and receiver structures for joint equalization,
              decoding and channel estimation.
Practical receiver structures for Turbo-coded
              OFDM systems with adaptive parameter estimation.


