Title       : Chemical Phenotype Matching in Wild Parsnips and Parsnip Webworms: Causes and
               Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9903867

Award Number: 9903867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305340             (Estimated)
Investigator: May R. Berenbaum maybe@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur R. Zangerl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              "Chemical phenotype matching in wild parsnips and parsnip webworms: causes
and
              consequences"

Wild parsnips are attacked by few insect species because they
              produce toxins called furanocoumarins.  Parsnip webworms can feed on the plant
              because they can metabolize these toxins.  In different populations, the
              chemical defense profile of the plants closely resembles the detoxification
              enzyme profile of the webworms.  The close correspondence of biochemical
              profiles indicates that plants and insects coevolve, or act as reciprocal
              selective agents on each other. This project is aimed at understanding how
              chemical profiles come to match.  Many factors, such as the presence of
              alternate hostplants, mortality due to predators, and movement of webworms
              between populations, may influence the degree of chemical profile matching. 
              These factors and others will be examined in a series of naturally occuring
              populations in the midwest, as well as in artificially constructed "mismatched"
              populations, to determine ecological influences on the rate and extent of
              chemical profile matching. . The enzymes that synthesize the defenses in the
              plants and that dismantle the toxins in the webworm will be characterized at
              the molecular level, to determine the genetic mechanisms underlying this
              chemical profile matching.
Chemical profile matching resulting from
              coevolution is of importance in understanding plant-insect interactions in
              general.  This study will be potentially of value in developing applications
              aimed at breeding for insect resistance in crop plants, at predicting the rate
              at which insect pests evolve resistance to synthetic toxins such as
              insecticides, and at constructing conservation plans that take into account
              interactions between endangered plant and insect species.

