Title       : RUI: Studies on the Cell Physiology of Insect Ovarian Follicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a9903994

Award Number: 9903994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard I. Woodruff rwoodruff@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In many animals, early embryonic development is controlled by molecules
              positioned in the egg before fertilization.  The best known examples are the
              "head factors" found in the insect Drosophila, and the vertebrate amphibian
              Xenopus, where RNA messages (maternal messages) are positioned at the anterior
              end of the developing egg.  When activated after fertilization, they produce
              control proteins in that localized region, which anteriorization resulting in
              head formation.  However, localization of these and similar "messages" require
              a prior level of control factors which operate in the formation of the egg
              itself, insuring that it provides the proper milieu for maternal message
              localization.  In most animals this involves the formation of an ovarian
              follicle consisting of an oocyte and one or more sibling nurse cells, the
              latter being the site of synthesis for most of the RNA used during early
              development.

The objectives of this proposal, which extends research in
              continual progress for 27 years, focus on illuminating and understanding the
              physiological mechanisms which regulate and control egg formation (oogenesis),
              which in turn provide the framework into which the maternal messages can be
              inserted.  Of particular interest is the involvement of internal ionic Ca2+ in
              the regulatory process. Using microinjection, two dimensional gel
              electrophoresis and intracellular microelectrodes, this research explores the
              relationship between an internal Ca2+ current and the distribution of charged
              cytosolic proteins which may regulate cell functions.  Much of the proposal is
              based upon extending to Drosophila concepts originally demonstrated with eggs
              of Hyalophora cecropia, a moth which has frequently served as a research model.
               Specific objectives Drosophila include measurements of internal ion activities
              and ion pumps to better characterize the oocyte cell physiology of this
              organism so frequently used in research.  In addition it is proposed to
              determine the effects of changed ion physiology upon the distribution of
              endogenous cytosolic proteins and upon uridine incorporating activity by the
              oocyte nucleus.  Overall, this research seeks to increase understanding of the
              mechanisms which regulate egg production, with the expectation that they will
              apply not only to insects, but to vertebrate species as well.

