Title       : Morphological and Ecological Diversification In the Homobasidiomycetes: A
               Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9903835

Award Number: 9903835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Hibbett dhibbett@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Donoghue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903835
Hibbett and Donoghue
	Homobasidiomycetes include the mushroom-forming
              fungi and their relatives. About 13,500 species have been described, which is
              about 23% of all known species of fungi. The fruiting bodies of
              homobasidiomycetes include conspicuous, developmentally integrated structures
              such as mushrooms and puffballs, as well as very simple forms such as the
              crust-like fruiting bodies of "corticioid" fungi. Homobasidiomycetes play major
              roles in carbon cycling in terrestrial ecosystems; they comprise the majority
              of wood-decay fungi and ectomycorrhizal fungi (associated with tree roots); and
              they also include mycoparasites, insect symbionts, lichens, and litter
              decomposers. Although individual groups of these fungi have been studied
              intensively, their overall pattern of morphological and ecological evolution
              has not been determined because to date there has existed no broad
              well-supported phylogenetic framework for the group.
	Over the last few years,
              considerable progress has been made in understanding homobasidiomycete
              phylogeny through the use of new DNA sequence characters, particularly the
              genes encoding nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal RNA (rDNA). This project
              will expand the database of nuclear and mitochondrial rDNA sequences and add
              new data from protein-coding genes under study, such as the tubulins or RNA
              polymerases. Taxon sampling will target problematic groups such as the
              polyporoid, hymenochaetoid, and cantharelloid groups of fungi, whose
              relationships remain weakly supported by the existing molecular data.
              Conventional protocols for phylogenetic analyses will be employed, and in
              addition the investigators will explore the use of "supertrees" for combining
              or collating independent phylogenetic trees with overlapping sets of taxa in
              order to construct a composite phylogenetic hypothesis. The trees will be used
              to construct phylogenetic classifications and to study historical patterns of
              evolution in selected morphological and ecological characters. Specific
              characters to be investigated include: corticioid versus erect fruiting bodies;
              brown rot versus white rot modes of wood decay; and ectomycorrhizal versus
              saprotrophic and pathogenic modes of nutrition. A broad framework phylogeny for
              the homobasidiomycetes will facilitate, for example by identifying sister
              groups and nearest outgroups, more intensive analyses of morphological and
              physiological changes in these fungi.

