Title       : Phylogenetic Studies of Sunfishes and Basses, Family Centrarchidae, as Evidenced
               by Nuclear and Mitochondrial DNA Sequences and Morphological Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9903794

Award Number: 9903794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Mayden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip M. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Title: Phylogenetic Relationships of Sunfishes and Basses, Family Centrarchidae,
              as evidenced by Mitochondrial DNA sequences and Morphological
              Characteristics.

Mayden and Harris
9903794

	The Centrarchidae (sunfishes
              and basses) are a group of 31 species in nine genera found only in North
              America. This family constitutes a major component of the fish communities in
              most eastern North American warm-water ecosystems and are highly prized in
              recreational fisheries and aquaculture.  In addition, centrarchids have been
              the focus of many behavioral, developmental, ecological, evolutionary,
              functional morphological, genetic and host-parasite coevolution studies.  Given
              the popularity of these fish as model organisms across the disciplines listed
              above, it is surprising that genealogical relationships among species within
              the family have received minimal systematic attention, and those hypotheses
              that have been proposed either did not employ a phylogenetic methodology, were
              based on questionable character data, or failed to encompass all taxa within
              the family.  In addition, all attempts at phylogenetic reconstruction for
              centrarchids lack an appropriate outgroup, in part, because phylogenetic
              relationships within Perciformes remain largely unresolved.  Regardless, the
              existing hypotheses of relationships of these important fishes are
              confusing.
	A phylogenetic analysis of centrarchid relationships based on
              diverse morpholgical data sets by other researchers, and a new data set
              generated from the present study using mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
              sequences will provide an opportunity to establish the monophyly of the family,
              generate a phylogenetic hypothesis of  centrarchid species relationships, and
              determine the sister-group to the Centrarchidae.   In addition, we will
              re-evaluate the question of the use of ontogenetic information in polarizing
              and ordering characters.  Through separate and combined analyses of data sets
              that currently exist and against the background of the large DNA sequence data
              set, a study of character congruence (homoplasy) and taxonomic congruence among
              these independent data sets also is proposed.  These data sets will be used in
              parsimony analyses to reassess the efficacy of using ontogeny in assessing
              homology and character polarity, determine the extent to which data sets
              converge on a single phylogenetic hypothesis, and establish a stable
              classification for this family, and will be useful in studies of rates of
              evolution and modes of speciation, biogeography, evolution of functional
              morphology patterns, behaviors, ecologies, and host-parasite coevolution.


