Title       : Disordered Inorganic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9903706

Award Number: 9903706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1798250            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Pinnavaia pinnavai@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. D. Mahanti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Thorpe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mercouri G. Kanatzidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon  J. L. Billinge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative group award supporting the research of T.J. Pinnavaia, M.G.
              Kanatzidis, S.J.L. Billinge, S.D. Mahanti and M.F. Thorpe at Michigan State
              University is supported by the Chemistry Division.  The focus of the research
              is the design, synthesis, characterization and computational simulation of
              disordered inorganic nanostructures. Two types will be explored, oxides,
              typically silica and alumina, and non-oxidic mesoporous structures, typically
              chalcogenides. Hydrothermally stable oxide  mesostructures will be made by
              self-assembly using neutral surfactants as templates.  Framework structures and
              heirarchal particle structures, i.e. vesicles, thin films, and porous clay
              heterostructures, will be made and characterized as a function of the
              surfactant and processing conditions. Characterization will be by small angle
              x-ray (SAXS) and neutron scattering (SANS), transmission electron microscopy
              and atomic pair distribution function (PDF) analysis of powder diffraction
              patterns. Pillared lamellar chalcogenides will be prepared by templating metal
              sulfides around thiol-ligated gold particles. Transition metal chalcogenide
              frameworks prepared by surfactant templating  will combine semiconducting
              phenomena with accessibility by guest molecules.  Modeling of porous networks
              and simulations of the surfactant self-assembly process and diffusion and
              access in the mesostructures of interest will complement experimental
              studies.

Disordered inorganic oxide mesostructures with highly accessible
              framework pores and having high hydrothermal stability will likely find
              applications in liquid-phase catalysis and separations not achievable with
              conventional zeolites.
Metal chalcogenide mesostructures may be active
              hydrodesulfurization catalysts, electronic materials and sensor materials.


