Title       : Efficient and Scalable Streaming Techniques for Large-Scale Delivery of Stored
               VBR Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9903228

Award Number: 9903228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Li Zhang zhzhang@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many networked applications such as electronic commerce, distance learning,
              digital libraries, multimedia teleconferencing and on-line entertainment
              involve real-time delivery of  stored video  to a large number of clients
              across a heterogeneous internetwork.  For continuous playback at the client,
              quality-of-service (QoS) must be provided in an end-to-end manner.  The design
              of efficient large-scale video delivery systems is complicated by such
              challenging issues as the highly bursty variable-bit-rate (VBR) compressed
              video, the underlying heterogeneous networking environments, disparate client
              capabilities, and diverse client QoS requirements.  Solutions addressing these
              issues must be both efficient and scalable.

The main objective of the
              proposed research is to design and develop efficient and scalable streaming
              techniques for large-scale delivery of stored VBR video.  The project  relies
              on a novel distribution-tree based video delivery system architecture which
              employs a group of proxy servers strategically placed inside an internetwork to
              perform network-wide video streaming and distributed media control. Based on
              this system architecture, the researchers plan to develop and investigate
              efficient and scalable real-time video streaming mechanisms that can
              effectively accommodate the heterogeneity in both the underlying network
              environments as well as the client end systems, while providing flexible QoS
              supports to a large client population. In particular,                          
                                                                                             
                                             o The researchers will develop  network-wide
              video smoothing techniques which make use of the in-memory      buffers  at
              proxy servers and clients to reduce rate variability in video transmission and
              accommodate           network bandwidth constraints.

  o The researchers
              will develop  proxy video staging techniques which exploit the disk storage
              space of proxy      servers at network edges to achieve significant bandwidth
              reduction in the backbone wide-area network      (WAN).

  o The researchers
              will develop adaptive rate and error control mechanisms such as selective frame
              discard       and selective retransmission which leverage application-specific
              information to  meet diverse client QoS        requirements.

  o The
              researchers will also develop video stream synchronization and merging schemes
              which integrate          network-wide video streaming  with proxy-assisted
              video delivery in a synergistic manner.

The methodology the researcherse
              plan to use in the proposed research will be a combination of theoretical
              analysis, simulation study and experimental investigation. The end results
              produced from the proposed research will include new concepts, efficient and
              scalable mechanisms and algorithms for real-time video streaming, reports of
              simulation and experimental studies, and a prototyping video proxy server
              system.
