Title       : RUI: Predicting Transport Through Heterogeneous Facies Assemblages:
               Geostatistical Anatomy of Buried-Valley Aquifers III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9903067

Award Number: 9903067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Ritzi robert.ritzi@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Dominic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903067
Ritzi

These research tests the hypothesis that similarities exist in
              the physical heterogeneity among granular aquifers formed by similar
              depositional environments.  The physical heterogeneity of aquifers can be
              represented within a three-dimensional geostatistical model that represents
              both its structured and random aspects.  Because the subsurface at
              environmental sites is never exhaustively characterized, decisions must be made
              under uncertainty and risk-qualified models are needed.  Useful statistical
              models of aquifer heterogeneity will only come from many well-studied examples
              at data-rich sites, in a variety of depositional environments.  Our long-term
              research goal is to develop statistical models for the most relevant features
              of the heterogeneity in granular aquifer systems in specific depositional
              setting and to evaluate the level of detail necessary in simulating
              macrodispersive transport.  We have begun by looking at glacigenic
              buried-valley aquifers in the North American mid-continent.  These have
              heterogeneity ranging across several scales, from unimodal distributions of
              permeability within facies, to weakly multimodal distributions of permeability
              within architectural elements, to strongly multimodal heterogeneity at the
              scale of facies assemblages.  The objective of the project are to build data
              bases and compute facies proportions, variance in proportion with translation,
              mean length, variance in length, coefficient of embeddedness and transition
              probability.  Furthermore, we compute the geometric mean, variance, and
              correlation range of permeability within facies.  We refer to these statistics
              collectively, when related to features of the depositional environment, as a
              quantitative facies model.  We will compare quantitative facies models
              developed for four different buried-valley aquifers occurring across a broad
              region of the mid-continent.  Flow and transport modeling will be used to
              assess whether or not observed differences are relevant in environmental
              decision making.  This is an RUI proposal, and as in prior phases of funding,
              the project will have significant undergraduate involvement.  

