Title       : Doctoral Research: Patterns in Metal Selection and Processing in Middle Sican
               Copper Technology, AD 900-1100: Multi-Dimensional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9903215

Award Number: 9903215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph H. Simmons simmons@aml.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. David Kingery  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr David Kingery, MS Aniko Bezur will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will sample and analyze a series of copper
              artifacts which were manufactured during the Middle Sican period (900-1100 AD)
              on the northern coast of Peru. For a number of years an archaeological research
              project under the direction of Dr. Izumi Shimada has traced the rise and
              subsequent decline of the Sican state and has excavated large numbers of copper
              objects such as needles, tweezers and metal bells. Sican peoples mastered and
              refined the art of copper working and the project has uncovered remains of
              smelters and byproducts associated with this process. Through experimentation
              much of the manufacturing procedure has been reconstructed and MS Bezur will
              augment this work through the compositional analysis of finished products.
              Samples will be mounted in epoxy, polished and then analyzed by electron
              microprobe to determine the average composition of the sample surface.
              Variation of arsenic content within the microstructure will also be determined
              through elemental mapping. This information, along with optical images will
              provide insight into how original solidification took place as well as the
              history of thermal treatments that the artifact underwent during production.
              Neutron Activation Analysis will also be conducted at the University of
              Missouri reactor.

The project has several goals. It will help to determine
              the degrees of sophistication and control that Sican metallurgists possessed.
              Prior work has indicated that addition of small amounts of arsenic to copper
              can increase its performance capabilities and that percentage of arsenic varies
              among objects. However scientists do not know whether prehistoric artisans
              recognized the advantages which arsenic conferred and controlled the formula
              accordingly or whether arsenic is incorporated as an unintentional byproduct.
              It is possible that amount of arsenic varied by artifact type and MS Bezur will
              analyze a variety of kinds of tools for this reason. Archaeologists do not know
              how important a role metallurgy played in ancient Peru and the extent to which
              it contributed to the rise of early state level organizations in the region.
              Studies to date have focused on artifacts recovered in tombs and other ritual
              contexts only and its general usage is not understood. MS Bezur's research will
              set this technology in a broader cultural context.

This project is important
              for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists.
              It will increase understanding of the relationship between technological and
              social organization and assist in training a promising young scientist.

