Title       : Sequential Signal Processing by Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9903120

Award Number: 9903120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar M. Djuric djuric@ece.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Filtering, prediction, and smoothing are basic signal processing
              operations. They are all extremely important and are implemented in every radio
              and TV set, CD player, modem, telephone receiver, and practically any device
              that extracts information by processing data. Most of the research on these
              operations in the past has been related to "easy" problems, which are tractable
              and amenable to nice mathematical analyses. In reality, however, there are many
              situations where the standard methods of signal processing do not work well and
              require an altogether different, more general approach. This project is
              developing methods and techniques for a very wide range of difficult problems
              that arise in such situations. The areas that will benefit from the results of
              this research include communications, radar, sonar, seismology, robotics,
              financial engineering, and control. 

This research involves work with
              dynamic nonlinear and non-Gaussian models. The applied methodology is Bayesian,
              and the main role is played by the concept of sample filters. Their role is to
              propagate filtering densities, which are represented by samples drawn from
              these densities The method is implemented by generating samples from predictive
              densities, followed by drawing samples from posteriors. Sampling from the
              posteriors is challenging and will be implemented by perfect samplers. These
              are based on Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling and the concept of coupling from
              the past. Perfect sampling is a new concept, and not many results about it are
              available. It is even more so in the context of sampling from continuous
              spaces. Therefore, a significant component of the research will be on
              constructing efficient samplers that will fit the needs of the addressed
              application. The scope of work also includes performance analyses of the
              developed sample filters, work on case dynamic models, and development of
              general guidelines for the new filters.
 

