Title       : Collaborative Research: Documenting the Fine-Structure of Metamorphic Events and
               Ages in a Complex Polymetamorphic Orogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9903077

Award Number: 9903077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willis E. Hames hameswe@mallard.duc.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hames
9903077
In this collaborative project we will focus our research effort
              on the Taconic (Ordovician-Silurian) and Acadian (Devonian) metamorphic
              episodes in a transect from Westchester County, New York, to the western margin
              of the Bronson Hill terrane in Connecticut.  In the western area (NY), the
              Taconic rocks appear to be undisturbed by any Acadian thermal effects, whereas
              the Acadian is the only thermal event in the east (CT), with little or no
              evidence of any pre-Acadian thermal history. In between, highly complex
              textures and fabrics suggest there may be a variably intense Acadian overprint
              on earlier-metamorphosed Taconic rocks.  Alternatively, the rocks in the
              apparent overlap zone may contain no evidence for an earlier (Taconic) event,
              and in fact may not have been present at all in this location when the Taconic
              metamorphism occurred.  The two orogenic events in this region cover a range in
              age of about 100 Ma, from earliest documented Taconic activity at about 475 Ma
              to a peak at about 450 Ma, to an Acadian peak at 390 Ma followed by rapid
              post-Acadian decompression and unroofing at 375 - 355 Ma.  We propose to use
              petrologic, geochronologic and thermochronometric techniques to test the
              hypothesis that there is in fact an overlap zone with Taconic metamorphic rocks
              of middle amphibolite grade overprinted by another (Acadian) metamorphic event
              of similar grade about 60 Ma later.  This project will involve thorough
              integration of petrologic, thermobarometric, U-Pb geochronologic and 40Ar/39Ar
              thermochronometric analyses to deduce (1) the "fine structure" of the Taconic
              and Acadian metamorphisms, (2) the presence, nature and extent of Acadian
              overprint on the earlier Taconic orogen and (3) the ultimate cooling and
              unroofing history of the terrane.  In work primarily done at Virginia Tech
              (supervision of Tracy), detailed metamorphic reaction histories will be
              extracted from key samples and quantitative P-T estimates will be made with the
              maximum accuracy possible.  Zoned minerals will be compositionally imaged for
              major and trace elements for use both in reconstruction of the metamorphic
              reaction history and also as a guide to selection of appropriate material to
              sample for radiometric dating.  U-Pb dating of carefully chosen metamorphic
              porphyroblast minerals at SUNY-Stony Brook (supervision of Hanson) will provide
              key constraints on the timing of growth of these minerals.  40Ar/39Ar geo- and
              thermochronology will be done by W.E. Hames using various laser-extraction
              Argon laboratories (primarily that at MIT) to constrain the cooling histories
              for the entire orogenic belt and primary mineral growth ages for lower-grade
              (sub-500 degrees C) portions.

