Title       : FASEB Conference: Transport Atpases to be held in Snowmass, Colorado on July
               3-8, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9903531

Award Number: 9903531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Pedersen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernesto Carofoli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1158,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9903531
Pedersen
The FASEB conference on transport ATPases held at Snowmass
              Colorado, July 3 -8, 1999 brings together investigators throughout the world to
              discuss basic research findings relevant to the structure, function, and
              mechanism of these important enzymes, and their roles in numerous physiological
              processes. These include ion balance, the storage of hormones, the regulation
              of cell pH, bone formation, oxidative phosphorylation, and organelle
              biogenesis. Among the transport ATPases systems discussed are those which have
              been extensively studied, like the Na/K ATPase, the calcium ATPases, and the
              proton ATPases, and those which have come into the limelight only in recent
              years, e.g., the ABC transporter superfamily of ATPases, and the copper
              transporting ATPases. The focus will be on the newest developments at the
              cutting edge of transport ATPase research, which will include much work in
              progress that is still unpublished. The meeting is designed to have a good
              mixture of lectures, discussion, and poster presentations, which will include
              established investigators, junior investigators commencing their careers, and
              postdoctoral fellows and graduate students working in the field. The
              co-chairman of the meeting are Ernesto Carafoli, Professor, Swiss Federal
              Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland, and Peter Pedersen, Professor,
              Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
     
This conference brings
              together junior, mid-career, and senior investigators from throughout the
              world, and a number of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students in the U.S.
              Transport ATPase are proteins that are located in the membranes of animal,
              plant, and bacterial cells. They help move nutrients into and out of cells and
              subcellular compartments.  Significantly, moving (transporting) requires
              energy.  In biological systems this energy is stored in a molecule called ATP
              (adenosine triphosphate). When ATP binds to the transport protein it releases
              its energy which helps drive the nutrients into cells and their compartments
              and other substances out of their compartments and out of the cells. There are
              many types of nutrients that living cells need to survive.  Therefore, some
              transport ATPases may transport sodium, others calcium, and still others
              phosphate. The meeting is designed to have a good mixture of lectures,
              discussion, and Poster presentations. The experiments to be discussed have
              considerable relevance to agriculture, e.g. to increasing crop yields and to
              improving animal nutrition. 


