Title       : GOALI: Model and Experimental Studies of the Evolution of the Excitable Gap for
               Improved Anti-Tachycardia Pacing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9903466

Award Number: 9903466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew E. Pollard pollard@crml.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Girouard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,5342,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903466
Pollard
The introduction of implantable cardioverter defibrillators
              (ICDs) into patients surviving myocardial infarction (MI) makes up a $2 billion
              per year industry. As a result, there is considerable interest in improving
              ICDs' ability to manage life-threatening arrhythmias. ICDs sense heart rate,
              and when appropriate they either deliver a high-energy defibrillation shock to
              resynchronize the heart's electrical activity or they deliver trains of
              low-energy anti-tachycardia pacing (ATP) stimuli. Since ATP obviates the need
              for shocks, battery depletion and pain from the shock are both minimized. While
              ATP can be highly effective, the individual stimuli must be applied during the
              arrhythmia's excitable gap, when tissue adjacent to the pacing electrode has
              had sufficient time to recover excitability from the preceding cycle but has
              not yet been excited in the present cycle. A basic understanding of how the
              excitable gap evolves during arrhythmias with variable complexity would
              therefore be advantageous for improved ATP because that understanding could be
              used to insure pacing in the excitable gap. We hypothesize improved ATP
              efficacy with stimuli that:  (i) occur early, near the onset of the arrhythmia,
              when the excitable gap is relatively large; and (ii) come from multiple sites,
              increasing the likelihood that excitable tissue can be captured. While improved
              rate sensing capabilities of ICDs can facilitate early ATP and the introduction
              of left-sided leads can facilitate multiple site ATP, there is a clear need to
              demonstrate improved efficacy before such approaches become generally accepted.
              We will: (1) develop a numerical approach to estimate the evolution of the
              excitable gap for arrhythmia substrates of increasing complexity. Excitable gap
              will be assessed in comprehensive simulations that will allow careful
              determination of the relationship between the MIs' geometric properties and
              arrhythmia formation in a setting where the arrhythmias will be undeniably
              repeatable; (2) develop an experimental approach to measure the evolution of
              the excitable gap for arrhythmia substrates of increasing complexity.
              Arrhythmia induction by programmed pacing will be performed in a rabbit freeze
              lesion model in which the endocardium and mid-myocardium are rapidly
              cryoablated and an anatomic obstacle is introduced epicardially (simple
              substrate), a 48h MI model with cryoablated endocardium (intermediate
              complexity), and a 48h MI model (realistic substrate). We will map the
              excitable gap in these arrhythmia substrates to document its evolution during
              ventricular tachycardia (VT); and (3) quantify early, late, single site and
              multiple site ATP efficacy in substrates of increasing complexity. Using the
              computer simulations and the animal experiments, such quantification will allow
              tests of our main hypotheses. This Industry-University Collaborative project
              will be performed by a research team made up of academic scientists from the
              University of Alabama at Birmingham and industry scientists from Guidant Corp.,
              Cardiac Pacemakers, Inc.

