Title       : The Role of Unbalanced Motion in the Upper Troposphere and Stratosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9903514

Award Number: 9903514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Dunkerton tim@nwra.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903514
Dunkerton, NWRA
"The Role of Unbalanced Motion in the Upper
              Troposphere and Stratosphere"

	The unbalanced component of motion -
              consisting of gravity waves, inertial instabilities and forced circulations -
              is essential to the evolution of large-scale balanced flow in the atmosphere. 
              The principal investigator and colleagues will examine several aspects of
              unbalanced dynamics relevant to the tropical troposphere, stratosphere, and
              mesosphere as well as the extratropical upper troposphere and stratosphere in
              an attempt to understand how these unbalanced motions are produced.  The PI
              will examine:
(1) the stability of the near-equatorial Rossby-wave critical
              layer to unbalanced flow instabilities, including inertial and divergent
              barotropic instability.  Local instabilities occur as planetary Rossby waves
              from midlatitudes draw anomalous potential vorticity (PV) into the winter
              hemisphere while setting up a reversed meridional gradient of PV.  The
              structure and growth rate of local instabilities will be explored for realistic
              distributions of potential vorticity.
(2) the role of gravity waves in the
              quasi-biennial and semiannual oscillations.  The PI will use a new
              parameterization for gravity wave induced force for this study, and a
              diagnostic measure of gravity wave momentum flux in mean vertical shear will be
              extended to equatorially trapped modes.  
(3) the effect of body forces on the
              Hadley circulations.  
(4) the excitation of inertia-gravity waves (IGWs) in
              an idealized baroclinic lifecycle using a numerical model in which type of
              baroclinic instability is varied over a wider range of lifecycles.  
(5) the
              nature of observed shallow disturbances near the jetstream.  Observations from
              the Middle and Upper Atmosphere (MU) radar and Japanese rawinsonde observations
              of velocity layers will be analyzed in a collaborative study with Dr. Kaoru
              Sato of Kyoto University.  
(6) the role of inertia-gravity waves in transport
              near the tropopause.  This also will be done in collaboration with Dr. Sato and
              will use simulations from a high-resolution general circulation model.

