Title       : NSF/CONACyT Cooperative Research: Global Thermodynamics Phase Diagrams of Binary
               Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9903536

Award Number: 9903536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley I. Sandler sandler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9903536
Stanley I. Sandler/U. of Del.


The accurate
              calculation or prediction of phase equilibria of mixtures by a thermodynamic
              model is important for applications in the chemical, energy and petroleum
              industry.  Such information is also of interest in developing new
              thermodynamics models, and by combining a thermodynamic model with experimental
              data, minimizing the amount of data that must be measured.  Current
              thermodynamic models (equations of state, EOS) are satisfactory for many
              industrial applications, but the description of highly non-ideal mixtures over
              large range of temperatures and pressure is still a difficult problem.

This
              research will:

A) Develop methods for the correlation and/or prediction of
              global phase diagrams (the analysis of  the  mathematical topology) of  binary
              mixtures with equal and dissimilar types of molecules using:
I. Two parameter
              cubic van der Waals EOS and related mixing rules.
II. A three parameter cubic
              der Waals EOS which will be implemented with extended Wong Sandler type mixing
              rules to be developed for such equations.
III. A theoretical EOS (like COR
              chain of rotators, or any other theoretically-based EOS) with new mixing rules.
               This part of the work will be focused on the analysis of the mathematical
              topology of EOS and their mixing rules, it will show which kind of binary phase
              diagrams can be predicted and whether there exist some that not have yet been
              encountered.
B) Experimental determination of PVT (pressure, volume,
              temperature) properties and equilibrium phase behavior of selected binary
              mixtures; the diagrams of will be predicted by the models, specifically mixture
              of water with alcohols (1-propanol, 1-butanol, 2-butanol,..., 1-decanol).

C)
               To provide information for the development of a new equation of state and
              their mixing rule to improve the prediction of global phase behavior of
              mixtures of industrial
