Title       : Systematic, Intensive Surface-Survey at Sisupalgarh: First-Millennium Urbanism
               and Economic in India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a9903399

Award Number: 9903399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Monica Smith will conduct two
              seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of Sisupalgarh, located in the
              state of Orissa, India. Occupied during the early historic period, this city
              covers 130 hectares and is enclosed by a large brick and mud rampart with eight
              gateways. Buildings were constructed in both stone as well as brick and
              monolithic pillars testify to the monumental architecture present. Prior work
              has indicated a rich and varied artifact repertoire including metal objects
              (nails, rings, projectile points, sickles) ornaments, coins, beads of ivory and
              stone as well as abundant ceramics. Four distinct periods spanning the 300 BC
              to 350 AD period of occupation have been identified. With NSF  support Dr.
              Smith and her colleagues will conduct a systematic archaeological surface
              survey of the site to provide data on economic, social and political
              activities. A detailed topographic map will be prepared and a grid of 50 x 50
              meter squares established. This will provide the base for a systematic
              non-aligned random collection. The data gathered through the two-year field
              season will be analyzed using GIS to examine how different production and
              consumption indicators are spatially distributed. On this basis it will be
              possible to determine the range of activities, commercial and domestic, and how
              these were integrated into broader economic, social and political
              systems.

The goal of the project is to evaluate the economic and social
              configuration of a city under conditions of increasing sociopolitical
              complexity. Unlike regions of the world in which the emergence of cities is
              closely linked to broader state level political organization, the Indian
              subcontinent presents an archaeological record of cities without states.
              Sisupalgarh and other Indian cities thrived in a period in which political
              organization was relatively weak and urban zones appear to have been the
              largest consistent unit of territorial integration in which political leaders
              invested any surplus in highly visible landscape modifications such as
              fortifications and monumental architecture.  This project will provide insight
              into how these unusual entities functioned and how they developed and changed
              over time. The project is also important because it will assist the career
              development of a promising young scientist.

