Title       : Earliest Middle Paleolithic Humans in the Levant: Final Two Years of Research at
               Hayonim Cave Israel.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9903576

Award Number: 9903576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Ofer Bar- Yosef and a 
              large multinational group of collaborators will  continue National Science
              Foundation supported  archaeological  research at the site of Hayonim Cave
              located in Israel. Hayonim  contains deposits  rich in lithics and faunal
              remains - as well as  fragmentary human skeletal material - which span the 
              time range  of ca 200,000 - 80,000 years ago. In this final two years of the
              project, xcavation and analysis will  proceed with a series of related goals. 
              Extensive exposure of layer E, the lowest level of the site will permit
              recording and examination of hearths  and spatial distributions of artifacts
              and bones. It will significantly increase samples sizes. Each of these  classes
              will be analyzed. Reseachers will reconstruct the lithic  operational sequences
              employed for tool manufacture and microwear  analysis will be conducted to
              determine tool function. Fauna will be studied to reconstruct subsistence
              strategies as well as the intensity of site occupation. Results of sediment
              mineralogy and diagenesis will be synthesized and applied to distributional
              analysis of lithic and faunal material.     

Data from a number of sources
              suggest that anatomically and  behaviorally modern humans first appeared in
              Africa perhaps 200,000 years ago and spread sequentially to other parts of the
              world.  The Near East, as the gateway from Africa may provide essential 
              information on this expansion. Work to date indicates that for a long  span of
              time both modern humans and earlier `Neanderthal` forms  either coexisted or
              alternated presence in the area. Just when  the first modern humans arrived
              however is unknown and Dr. Bar  Yosef's research directly examines the
              suspected period. Hayonim  cave is worthy of concerted research because its
              deposits not  only cover this time range but also contain well preserved faunal
               and lithic remains. This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide  data of interest to a large number of anthropologists. It will  shed
              light on the emergence of modern humans and increase our  knowledge of a little
              understood period of time.	1

