Title       : Trading off Predator- and Competitor-Induced Responses in Larval Anurans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9903761

Award Number: 9903761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142639             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond D. Semlitsch SemlitschR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick A. Relyea  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-9903761

Trading off predator- and competitor-induced responses in larval
              anurans

Raymond D. Semlitsch and Rick A. Relyea

Division of Biological
              Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211

PROJECT ABSTRACT
	This
              project focuses on an apparent tradeoff between competitive ability and
              predation resistance in animal populations.  The research seeks to understand
              how this tradeoff may have shaped the variability in behavior and morphology
              seen among natural populations and the ecological consequences of such changes
              on the community. The first objective is to examine how larval anurans respond
              to varying predator and competitor densities using experimental ponds.  The
              second goal is to determine whether predator-induced phenotypes are better at
              resisting predation but have low competitive ability while competitor-induced
              phenotypes are have high competitive ability but are poor at resisting
              predation.  The third goal is to quantify the genetic variation that underlies
              the production of predator- and competitor-phenotypes. The final goal is to
              examine the ecological consequences of predator- and competitor-induced
              variation by determining whether changes in behavior and morphology in one
              species can affect the performance of other species.
	The results of this
              research will illustrate how predators and competitors not only alter the
              phenotypes and performance of other individuals in a population, but also how
              they impact community structure. Explaining the regulation of community
              structure is a primary goal in ecology and is critical to understanding species
              diversity. This research is important because it can reveal the underlying
              processes leading to the level and distribution of species diversity, and hence
              direct conservation efforts towards underlying natural processes that can
              maintain rich ecosystems for future generations.

