Title       : Microfronts 1995 and Cases 1999: Boundary Layer Influences on Fronts and
               Inertial Oscillations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9903645

Award Number: 9903645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Lundquist jkl@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Blumen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Processes that occur in the Earth's boundary layer, the relatively shallow layer
              in contact with the ground, often have a significant effect on atmospheric
              fronts and are a source of wave motions and atmospheric oscillations.  Data
              available from a previous field investigation in Kansas in 1995 (MICROFRONTS)
              consists of high frequency hot-wire anemometer winds and both wind and
              temperature from sonic anemometers mounted on 10 meter tower arrays.  Three
              frontal passages occurred when the instruments were operative.  These data, and
              other lower frequency observations, will continue to be analyzed to determine
              the kinetic energy dissipation rate and turbulence characteristics that
              characterize fronts.  These motions occur on subgrid spatial and temporal
              scales of numerical atmospheric models.  The turbulent dissipative
              contributions are either not prescribed or handled ineffectively by all or most
              models.  The present aim is to provide the necessary data analysis and
              theoretical understanding that is required to ultimately parameterize turbulent
              dissipation associated with fronts.

The passage of fronts and the relatively
              abrupt change in the height of the boundary layer near sunset appear to be
              sources for the initiation of internal gravity waves and inertial oscillations.
              Four years of data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
              wind profiler network, and from three profilers maintained in Kansas by the
              Argonne National Laboratory, will be analyzed by the rotary spectrum technique.
               The purpose is to extract properties of atmospheric inertial oscillations, and
              to develop boundary layer models that will establish the relative importance of
              fronts and boundary layer depth changes in their occurrence.  The role of these
              oscillations on the dynamics of fronts will continue to be investigated by use
              of frontogenesis models.  The source and characteristics of these oscillations
              has also been recognized as important for long-range modeling of atmospheric
              dispersion.  Ongoing model development for this purpose is of considerable
              importance in the prediction of urban air quality.

The current data bases
              will be expanded by participation in a field program to be carried out in
              southern Kansas in October 1999 (Cooperative Atmosphere-Surface Exchange Study
              -- 1999). These data will be used with ongoing model developments to both
              improve and to verify model predictions.  The observational arrays are expected
              to be suitable to acquire data that is required to isolate boundary layer
              sources for both inertial oscillations and for internal gravity waves.
