Title       : The Kinetics of Silica Dissolution: An Integrated Experimental Investigation of
               Quartz and Amorphous Silica Reactivity in the Mixed Solute Compositions of
               Natural Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9903349

Award Number: 9903349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Dove   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903349
Dove
The dissolution kinetics of the two most abundant SiO2
              polymorphs, quartz and amorphous silica, have important controls on silica
              partitioning within major reservoirs of Earth environments.  Fluids throughout
              these systems typically contain significant concentrations of the major
              solutes, sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium.  These cations greatly
              enhance SiO2 dissolution rates over those measured in pure (deionized) water. 
              In contrast, micromolar levels of aluminum exhibit an opposing rate-inhibition
              of silica dissolution at near-neutral to weakly-acidic pH.  A quantitative and
              mechanistic understanding of rate-mediating effects is essential to the
              accuracy of numerical models which predict silica mobility.  This study will
              answer a first order question:  How do dissolved constituents act in concert as
              a solute mixture to control net rates of silica dissolution in the complex
              fluids of natural environments? Using an experimental approach that integrates
              techniques from geochemical kinetics and surface science, this study will
              quantify rates of quartz and amorphous silica dissolution (30-300 degrees C) in
              carefully designed solutions that contain solutes as single salts and mixtures
              as a function of concentration and pH.  Rates will be determined using our
              hydrothermal mixed flow reactor system over a range of reaction affinity by
              adjusting steady state silica concentrations.  Parallel investigations of
              selected silica surfaces will be conducted using in situ Atomic Force
              Microscopy, surface titrations, and ex situ XPS and Auger analyses.  The
              findings will allow us to construct a quantitative model for how solutes
              control the reactivity of crystalline and amorphous silica in solutions that
              begin to approximate real-world fluids.


