Title       : Self-Assembled Polvdomain Ferroelectric Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a9903279

Award Number: 9903279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Roytburd roytburd@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manfred R. Wuttig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamoorthy Ramesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative theoretical and experimental project to study
              ferroelectric polydomain heterostructures with the objective of achieving
              greater materials physics understanding and the ability to model and engineer
              heterostructures with controlled self-assembled polydomain architecture of
              oxide ferroelectric films for enhanced electrical and mechanical properties.
              Heterostructures with polytwins (90 deg.-domains) will be considered first.
              Graphoepitaxial methods will be used to engineer polydomain architectures with
              controlled domain fractions and periods. Characterization will include
              information on internal stresses and dislocations. The focus will be to
              understand how structural characteristics affect the evolution of polarization.
              A natural extension is the study of ferroelectric heterophase polydomain
              heterostructures. The rhombohedral-tetragonal phase transformation in relaxor
              type single crystalline films offers an excellent opportunity to do so. This
              transformation is accompanied by a significant strain. Therefore, elastic
              interactions will determine the architecture of the two-phase polydomain state.
              It is planned to create these architectures and study their electro-mechanical
              properties as well.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of materials science having high potential technological
              relevance. An important feature of this collaborative, interdisciplinary
              program is the combined theoretical and experimental approach, and the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.  
***

