Title       : Increasing Transparency of Transmission Constraints on the Electricity Trading
               Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9903824

Award Number: 9903824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Tomsovic tomsovic@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anjan Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Podmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EEC-9903824
Tomsovic


This project is supported under the initiative on
              "Research Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D."  The study concerns joint
              research between the Power Systems Engineering Research Center (PSerc), an
              IUCRC headquartered at Cornell University that includes Washington State
              University (WSU) as a partner, and Incremental Systems Corp., a small firm
              located in Issaquah, WA.  The objective is to develop and transfer to industry
              the techniques that can translate the detailed real-time data to the simple
              power flow data required by the electricity traders. The methods will allow for
              viewing in near real-time the data necessary to determine if trades fall within
              operational limits. WSU will formulate a data model that is sufficiently robust
              to allow mapping from the Common Infromation Model (CIM) to the load flow
              model, and will develop appropriate state estimation approaches based on the
              state-of-the-art methods for bad measurement detection, topology determination
              and parameter estimation.  In addition, WSU will design and implement database
              software that can project the real time data (output of the state estimator)
              from the CIM onto a standard load flow data model, such as, PTI.  Incremental
              Systems will provide industrial expertise, advise and critique on the
              methodology as well as provide support on the design and application of the the
              methods.  While WSU will write the software, Incremental Systems' knowledge of
              the database software will be integral to the software implementation and most
              of their effort in hours is expected to fall under this task.  Furthermore,
              Incremental systems will test software through simulation using the the
              Operator Training Simulator for a practical system with an emphasis on
              exercising data failures, bus splits, equipment outages and other data
              difficulties. WSU will run the cases studies, evaluate the performance based on
              criteria from Incremental Systems and make any necessary changes to the
              software.

