Title       : Sub-Microsecond RHEED Investigation of Pulsed Laser Deposition Film Growth
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9903460

Award Number: 9903460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim P. Zheng zheng@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Durbin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses surface processes during PLD(pulsed laser deposition)film
              formation. The approach incorporates a sub-microsecond time-resolved reflection
              high- energy electron diffraction (RHEED) analysis capability into a PLD
              system. A fast intensified CCD imaging system will be used to capture full-
              pattern RHEED images of the substrate to permit resolution of the laser
              ablation plume(10 to 100 us). The system is expected to provide a detailed
              picture of the changing surface structure of the film before, during and
              immediately after the arrival of the ablation plume ejected from the target, as
              well as during the relaxation time between laser pulses. 
The investigation
              will concentrate primarily on silicon homoepitaxy using (100) and (111)
              substrates. In order to examine details of multiple component depositions,
              silicon-germanium film growth will also be studied by sub-microsecond
              time-resolved RHEED, and the velocity distributions of both silicon and
              germanium will be measured by optical time-of-flight. The correlation of
              observed transient RHEED patterns and measured velocity distributions will be
              used to gain insight into film formation including the relaxation time of
              energetic species, nucleation behavior and the possible formation of
              short-lived metastable alloy structures.
%%%
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having potential
              technological relevance. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance of
              microelectronic devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding
              and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  A variety of fundamental issues are to be addressed in these
              investigations.  An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area; the project is cited at an HBCU institution. 
              
***

