Title       : Cost Effective Risk Based Corrective Action Design for Contaminated Groundwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9903889

Award Number: 9903889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Minsker minsker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a coupled optimization and
              simulation risk management model for investigating the relationships between
              human health risk and corrective action design under conditions of uncertainty.
               The methodology will identify optimal risk-based corrective action (RBCA)
              design options ranging from natural attenuation to engineered plume control and
              remediation, as well as combinations of these approaches. Theoretical
              advancements for improving computational efficiency of the model will be
              explored so that large-scale field sites can be considered.  A noisy genetic
              algorithm will be coupled with comprehensive flow and fate and transport
              simulation models called Modflow and RT3D.  Noisy genetic algorithms are
              similar to genetic algorithms, but the fitness (worth) of each candidate
              solution is evaluated through sampling from probability distributions.  For
              this application, probability distributions represent uncertainty in
              spatially-variable hydraulic conductivity measurements and variability in
              parameters used to estimate human health risks.  Methods for improving
              computational efficiency of the model to be investigated include developing
              efficient and effective sampling strategies, testing the implications of
              sampling tolerance on grid approximations in the numerical models and
              investigating the performance of an injection island genetic algorithm that
              uses multiple populations of solutions at multiple resolutions to efficiently
              identify and fine-tune strong solutions.  The proposed work is expected to
              result in a valuable risk management tool for both regulators and the regulated
              community, identifying risk reduction strategies that are both cost-effective
              and sufficiently protective of human health.
