Title       : Whole Field Deformation Measurements of the Heart with CASI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9903516

Award Number: 9903516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fu-Pen Chiang fu-pen.chiang@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irvin B. Krukenkamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903516
Chiang
Physiological changes in the myocardium, whether due to blood
              flow, drugs, temperature, or other events affect the material properties of the
              myocardium. Currently used parameters such as contractility, stiffness,
              elastance, and other relationships are dependent on these material properties.
              However, these properties are very difficult to determine and they may vary
              from region to region. The application of a novel technique, known as the
              "computer aided speckle interferometry" (CASI), provides a major advance in
              defining the deformation of the myocardium in response to intracavitary
              pressure. This technique allows the determination of full field deformation
              over a large area of myocardium with extreme spatial resolution. It is the
              objective of this proposal to fully develop this technique as applied to
              measuring myocardial deformation. Subsequently, this technique will be used to
              determine the response of the myocardium due to ischemia. And the correlation
              between the changes of the material properties and permanent tissue damage
              (infarction) will be studied.

Specifically, the objectives of this proposal
              are:
To develop the "CASI technique" to measure regional deformation in the
              heart;
To correlate epicardial regional area strain with intracavitary
              pressure, hence to develop a pressure-strain relationship for different regions
              of the heart;
To measure epicardial regional area deformation simultaneously
              in three distinct regions; namely ischemic, non-ischemic, and border
              regions;
To develop a method, based on measured epicardial regional area
              deformation, of predicting the extent of perfusion (i.e., ischemic,
              non-ischemic, border region).

The CASI technique employs a random dot
              pattern, called speckles, created on the surface of a specimen. Upon
              deformation the speckles move accordingly. Instead of tracking the movement of
              individual particles, a speckle correlation calculation is used to monitor the
              displacement of a cluster of speckles. The speckle pattern before and after
              deformation is captured and digitized using a CCD (charge coupled device)
              camera. The image is sub-divided into subimages. Each subimage represents a
              "point" whose displacement is calculated using the CASI software. To
              demonstrate its applicability to measuring strain in the heart, a pilot study
              using three rabbit hearts was performed. Silicon carbide particles were
              dispersed onto the myocardium in regions ranging from 5 x 5 mm to 10 x 10 mm.
              Two ultrasonic transducers were implanted just outside the region of interest
              and strains obtained by sonomicrometry were compared to that calculated by
              CASI.  The techniques produced essentially the same results (r2= 0.997). 
              However, CASI has many advantages.  First, it gives a whole field strain
              distribution that covers a large area of the heart.  Second, the resolution is
              at least two orders of magnitude better than techniques currently used as
              evident by pilot studies that have shown a spatial resolution of 0.1 x 0.1 mm. 
              And with a new CCD camera, a further increase in resolution can be achieved. 
              Third, the speckle technique does not damage the heart tissue, as the
              implanting of sono-transducers will do, for example. 

In another set of
              pilot studies, CASI was used to determine deformation in perfused, non-beating
              hearts. Significant differences in the same heart were found between the
              perfused and non-perfused states in response to passive loading. In another
              heart, a portion of the heart was made ischemic. Deformation in the heart
              showed significant changes between the ischemic and perfused regions. The final
              pilot study involved mapping the deformation in a beating heart. Changes in
              myocardial deformation could be seen corresponding to the contraction and
              relaxation stages of the heartbeat.

These pilot studies have shown that CASI
              is a useful technique to measure function in the myocardium in various regions
              of the heart.  This has importance clinically, as the heterogeneous
              consequences of coronary artery disease on myocardium performance render
              precise assessment of regional function imperative. This proposal will refine
              the CASI technique and apply it to useful clinical scenarios.  The accuracy of
              the technique will be improved by optimizing the creation and processing of the
              speckle pattern, which is a function of speckle size, speckle contrast, and CCD
              camera resolution, among other factors. The effects of regional ischemic on the
              beating heart, which has important clinical implications, will also be
              investigated.  In summary, this proposal will developed a technique to
              accurately measure regional functional changes simultaneously over many small
              regions of the heart.

