Title       : Systematics of subtribe Galinsoginae (Asteraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9903800

Award Number: 9903800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82533              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose L. Panero panero@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903800
Panero
The sunflower family Asteraceae is one of the largest families
              of flowering plants.  They are ubiquitous in many areas of the world,
              especially those dominated by seasonally dry climatic conditions.  The American
              continents have approximately half of the species of the family and most of the
              species of tribe Heliantheae.  The tribe contains several economically
              important crops (sunflower oil) and many genera of horticultural value such as
              dahlias, marigolds, and zinnias.  Taxonomic work on members of tribe
              Heliantheae has produced a wealth of information that has been recently
              synthesized by several authors in the form of major classifications for the
              tribe.  These classifications disguise the fact that we still know very little
              about the ecology, evolution, and morphology of the major genera of the tribe
              and some of its subtribes.  Subtribe Galinsoginae has approximately 125 species
              distributed mainly in Mexico, and further south to Ecuador in South America.  
              There is little agreement on generic concepts in the group, with a consequent
              multiplicity of shifting species assignments; and the problem is compounded by
              the superficial similarity of some species to members of other tribes.  
Dr.
              Panero at the University of Texas is amassing molecular DNA evidence and
              morphological information for as many of the ca. 115 species of the subtribe as
              possible, in order to construct a phylogenetic framework for the group and to
              determine reliable morphological features for the lineages recognized as genera
              and subgenera. Field collecting in Mexico south to Ecuador will provide new
              materials for molecular, cytological, and morphological investigations, in
              association with foreign colleagues. The use of both nuclear and maternally
              inherited chloroplast genes in the analyses will help disentangle cases of
              suspected hybridization, which is also likely to relate to the known polyploids
              in the subtribe. A taxonomic monograph of the group, integrating molecular and
              morphological studies, is one goal, along with associated materials being
              posted to the website maintained at the U-Texas Herbarium.


