Title       : Collaborative Resarch: Cetacean Phylogeny: A Reconciliation of Fossil and
               Neontological Data and the Importance of Taxonomic Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a9903964

Award Number: 9903964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen A. O'Leary moleary@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903964
O'Leary

	Biologists hypothesize that cetaceans (whales) evolved from
              terrestrial land mammals as many as 60 million years ago or more.  This
              evolutionary transformation is one of the most remarkable known because it
              involved dramatic changes in size and shape.  If we can understand this
              evolutionary transition it may serve as a model problem describing how
              evolutionary novelties appear.  
Fossils, like Ambulocetus, are excellent
              evidence that whales once had legs and walked on land.  During their long
              evolutionary history whales have, however, lost their hind limbs and hair,
              developed specialized skulls to feed and hear underwater, and in some cases
              exceeded the largest dinosaur in body size relative to their ancestors of over
              50 million years ago.  In order to understand the details of how, why and when
              this evolutionary transformation occurred, it is important to develop a
              well-corroborated phylogenetic tree (family history) for whales and their close
              relatives.  Ideally it would be of interest to study the anatomy and molecular
              biology of all species that are closely related to whales.  These include
              living and extinct groups:  Artiodactyla, or even-toed hoofed mammals (camels,
              pigs, ruminants, hippopotamids and relatives), Perissodactyla, or odd-toed
              hoofed mammals (horses, rhinos, tapirs and relatives), as well as Procreodi,
              Condylarthra and Mesonychia, completely extinct groups of hoofed mammals.  In
              particular among the extinct groups, Mesonychia may be very closely related to
              cetaceans.
	Most of the taxa (> 90%) that make up the group of interest
              outlined above are extinct.  As a result, scientists trying to generate a
              phylogenetic tree for whales are forced to work with only part of the data
              whether they study living animals or extinct animals.  Those working on living
              animals (neontologists) draw on very detailed biological characters (e.g., all
              of the organisms' anatomy, molecular biology, histology, etc) but only in one
              instant of time:  the present.  Those working on extinct species
              (paleontologists) draw on fossil evidence which almost exclusively comprises
              skeletal data.  However, these data can be scored for many more species, some
              of which may more closely approximate the ancestral condition of the earliest
              whales.
	Here we propose to integrate neontological and paleontological data,
              to better examine the phylogenetic tree of cetaceans.  This is critical to do
              at this time because scientists working on different data types continue to
              find different answers as to who is the closest relative of whales:  living
              taxa indicate that it is the hippopotamus and extinct taxa indicate that it is
              mesonychians.  We aim 1) to increase the taxon and character sampling for both
              extinct and living whales and relatives, and 2) to examine how and why certain
              biological attributes (e.g., molecules, morphology) have evolutionary histories
              that do not appear to match the overall family tree.  We aim to make the
              results of our morphological work as standardized as possible with published
              illustrations.
	The data collection aspect of this project is large and we
              will use this as an opportunity to mentor high school and undergraduate
              students who may be interested in research in evolution and systematics and who
              can be taught laboratory, computer, and data analysis skills as well as
              evolutionary theory.

