Title       : STTR Phase I: Enhanced Cooling Using a Fluid Containing Magnetic Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9903582

Award Number: 9903582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tahir Cader tcader@energyint.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Energy Intl Inc
	      127 Bellevue Way SE Suite 200
	      Bellevue, WA  980046229    206/453-9595

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This  Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will
              investigate turbulent flow of magnetic fluids (ferrofluids) used to enhance the
              cooling of oil-immersed electromagnetic devices such as power transformers. As
              an additive, an optimized ferrofluid will significantly extend the lifespans of
              millions of aging installed transformers. As a new technology, ferrofluid
              transformers will be smaller and possess improved dielectric capabilities. In
              Phase I, combined theory and experiments will develop the basics necessary for
              rational design of a ferrofluid transformer. Oscillating magnetic fields set
              the magnetic nanoparticles into rotation, the fluid's viscous stress tensor
              becomes asymmetric, and this gives the fluid unique cooling capabilities not
              seen with other fluids. A key objective will be to fundamentally understand the
              effect of the transformer's oscillating magnetic field on the nanoparticles.
              Anticipated results include identifying the relative contributions of the
              various terms describing the turbulent diffusion of spinning nanoparticles
              across magnetic field gradients and their wall boundary condition, and
              evaluating the viscosity and diffusion coefficients describing the interaction
              of the nanoparticles with surrounding fluid. Advances will be implemented into
              the first turbulent ferrofluid finite element CFD code. Phase II will model
              ferrofluid transformers prior to design evaluation, and eventual
              commercialization in Phase III.
       The electric industry is a $200+
              billion industry, and ferrofluid technology is targeted squarely at this
              industry. Potential commercial applications of ferrofluids used for cooling
              include transformers ($300 million), voltage regulators, switching devices, and
              large motors and generators. In space, this technology may be used for
              magnetically driven convective cooling on the space station and on unmanned
              spacecraft. Additional applications include printers, optical devices, and
              medical.


