Title       : Validities of Standards-Based Science Inquiry Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9903287

Award Number: 9903287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $986823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edys S. Quellmalz edys.quellmalz@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva D. Haertel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The proposed research examines the validities of a sample of item formats and
              performance tasks used in three large-scale science assessments: NAEP, TIMSS,
              and New Standards and in a set of curriculum-embedded assessments. Qualitative
              analyses will be used to clarify the alignment of formats used in these
              assessments with the National Science Education Standards and also to analyze
              the cognitive demands of the varying  assessment formats.  Similarly,
              quantitative methods will supply empirical comparisons of student performance
              on a sample of different types of items and performance tasks to provide
              evidence of their validity as measures of scientific inquiry. A conceptual map
              for understanding and designing balanced indicator systems of science
              achievement will be developed.  The research will offer recommendations for
              enhancing large-scale science assessment systems .

Key Features of the
              Research

The "Validities of Standards-based Science Inquiry Assessments: A
              Study of Multi-Method Indicator Systems" addresses a timely and important
              issue:  "Just how complete and accurate a picture of science achievement is
              portrayed by today's high-visibility reference exams such as the Third
              International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMMS), the National Assessment of
              Educational Progress (NAEP), or the New Standards Science Assessment? " Despite
              the substantial investment in the development of high standards and
              "minds-on/hands-on science curricula" there is limited empirical evidence that
              large-scale science assessment programs adequately test what students know and
              can do.  If current reference exams are not testing many of the deeper and
              critical learning outcomes identified in the National Science Education
              Standards (NSES), the validity of their scores as evidence in support of
              policies shaping educational programs is questionable.  

The study will
              mount three integrated lines of research to study the validities of science
              assessments: (1) a study of the alignment  of a sample of assessment question
              and exercise formats in the reference exams with with National Science
              Education Standards, (2) a study of the cognitive demands placed on learners
              when solving different types of items/tasks drawn from the assessments, and (3)
              an empirical study of the validities of student scores on combinations of
              different types of assessment formats drawn from these tests.  

To provide
              advice on the conduct of these three research studies, SRI International has
              assembled a team of nationally recognized experts in the fields of science
              education, cognitive psychology, and educational measurement. The cognitive
              analysis, alignment, and empirical strands of the proposed research aim to
              integrate evidence about intended task demands, actual task elicitations, and
              confirmatory performance.  

Two critical outcomes of the project will be: a
              conceptual framework for characterizing the design features of item/task
              formats that aim to elicit different types of science learning; and
              recommendations for the design of multi-level assessment systems that would
              provide more comprehensive measures of students' science knowledge and inquiry
              strategies. In sum, this research will help to build a map for understanding
              and designing balanced indicator systems of science achievement.

