Title       : Creation and Evaluation of the National Engineering Projects in Community
               Service (EPICS) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a9903195

Award Number: 9903195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Coyle coyle@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leah H. Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Oakes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903195
Coyle

The Engineering Projects in community Service (EPICS) Program
              is unique and meets current educational and societal needs is confirmed by its
              selection for (1) the ASEE's 1997 Chester F. Carlson Award for Innovation in
              Engineering Education, and (2) finalist in the 1998 Boeing Outstanding Educator
              Award Competition.  Evidence of the compelling nature of EPICS includes (1)
              participation in EPICS at Purdue by the Schools of Civil, Electrical and
              Computer, and Mechanical Engineering and the School of Liberal Arts, and (2)
              the creation within the last year of EPICS Programs at Notre Dame and Iowa
              State.

In EPICS, teams of 10 to 15 engineering undergraduates earn academic
              credit for multi-year projects that solve challenging technology-based problems
              for local community organizations.  Each EPICS project team is a mix of
              freshmen, sophomores, juniors, ard seniors, and each student may participate on
              a team for up to seven semesters.  This structure makes a long-term,
              real-world, define-design-build-test-deploy--support experience an integral
              part of the student's entire academic career.  It also provides the continuity
              required to complete large-scale, multidisciplinary projects.

EPICS provides
              the real-life context, the time, and the personal mentoring by faculty
              necessary for students to: execute the design process from initial discussions
              with a customer through delivery of a functioning system for daily use by the
              customer; learn how to approach and solve challenging problems; learn how to
              write well and speak effectively; work as part of, and eventually lead, a team;
              apply knowledge gained in classes; identify and acquire knowledge not available
              in classes that is critical for technical progress on projects; determine and
              operate within legal and economic constraints; and learn the importance and
              role of other disciplines in solving complex problems.  EPICS also enables
              students to develop first-hand knowledge of the role that engineering and
              technology can play in solving social problems.

Proposed to extend the
              benefits of the EPICS Program from the local to the national level, thus
              achieving systemic reform of engineering- education include expansion and
              Dissemination of the EPICS Program.  Purdue and Notre Dame will continue to
              expand and improve their EPICS Programs and to increase industrial
              participation.  Georgia Tech and the University of Wisconsin-Madison will
              initiate EPICS programs.

