Title       : Assessing Underrepresented Minority Student Experiences and Success in Doctoral
               Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9903080

Award Number: 9903080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Nettles nettlesm@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Although African Americans and Hispanics continue to be underrepresented in
              graduate school enrollments and even more severely among degree recipients, a
              growing number are attending the nation's highest quality doctoral degree
              programs in the sciences as well as in other disciplines. As with earlier
              stages in the education pipeline, access and representation of minority
              students are only part of the challenge facing graduate schools in the United
              States. In addition to being underrepresented, minority students in doctoral
              programs are also perceived to be lagging behind their majority counterparts on
              many indicators of success.
	This research focuses upon measuring the relative
              success of underrepresented minority students who are enrolled in the nation's
              leading doctoral programs and identifying factors that may lead to even greater
              success. Success in this research is broad ranging and includes acquiring
              teaching and research skills, developing the skills and experience of scholarly
              inquiry, publishing both independently and in collaboration with professors,
              performing in course work, making steady progress toward receiving a degree,
              and being socialized to succeed in a chosen profession after completing their
              doctoral programs.
This research is centered upon a new database that has been
              developed from a representative sample of 14,020 doctoral students from 21 of
              the nation's most prestigious doctoral granting universities. The database is
              made up of a diverse sample of students who had completed at least one year of
              their doctoral programs, were enrolled in one of eleven science and non-science
              fields of study, and were registered for at least six credit hours in the fall
              of 1996. The Survey of Doctoral Student Finances, Experiences, and Achievements
              was used to collect the data for the study. A 70 percent response rate was
              achieved. The data will be analyzed using descriptive, comparative, and
              relational (regression) analyses to address the four questions. The research
              addresses the following questions:
 1. What are the overall and relative
              quality of performance, experiences, and professional training and development
              achieved by underrepresented minority doctoral students?
2. How do various
              types and amounts of indebtedness and financial assistance relate to the
              success of doctoral students of various racial/ethnic and social class
              backgrounds?
3. How do such factors as academic and personal background
              characteristics and educational preparation relate to the quality of the
              support, experiences, achievements, and professional development of
              underrepresented minority doctoral students? And
4. How do graduate
              institutions ensure the success of minority doctoral students in the sciences
              and other disciplines?

