Title       : Modeling and Control for Next-Gerneration Integrated-Services Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9903495

Award Number: 9903495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takis Konstantopoulos takis@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The investigator proposes to analyze the behavior and study control and
              management issues for next generation networks by means of non-traditional
              modeling and analysis.  In future integrated services networks, congestion
              phenomena are likely to be quite different in nature than those in more
              traditional systems such as the Internet.  The reason is that, at the cell
              level, the phenomena of long-range dependence and high variability are going to
              play a major role in the way we analyze, design and provide services over a
              network.  While these phenomena have already been observed and statistically
              analyzed in existing systems, integration of services is expected to amplify
              them.  The first part of the proposed research deals with
a further
              justification of the investigator's recent findings that explain how Levy
              processes arise as
macroscopic models of certain types of long-range dependent
              traffic.  The justification is done by rigorously deriving macroscopic
              approximations of the probability distributions of the traffic processes.  In
              addition, comparison with and further analysis and simulation of fractional
              Brownian motions is also proposed.
The investigator also proposes to
              explicitly study the consequences of these models (and, in particular Levy
              processes) to performance and control.  He proposes to use sample path formulas
              and conservation laws in order to derive explicit solutions of solvable
              systems.  Networks in tandem with stable-Levy motions inputs are promising
              candidates for explicit solvability. In the sequel, and in order to deal with
              non-solvable situations, he proposes to examine extremes of distributions and
              delays.  The tasks involved here call for extensions of large deviations
              results and applications to networks with feedback.  The impact of this study
              will be the understanding of the way that congestions occur in highly variable
              environments and will,
as in risk theory, help prevent catastrophes in
              networks.  The proposed control methods involve stochastic
differential
              equations that can also be explained as arising from long-range dependent
              systems.  By studying
optimal control problems, the investigator proposes to
              tackle buffer management schemes.  Finally, he proposes to examine the impact
              of imposing deterministic or shaping regulatory constraints on stochastic
              traffic, derive worst-case scenaria and combine statistical and deterministic
              descriptors.  The impact of this study will lead to further standardization of
              descriptors for next generation networks.  Such descriptors
are invaluable for
              the provision of services and the design of correct pricing schemes.  A rather
              significant aspect of the proposed research lies in its fundamental character
              in that it re-examines the performance models and opts for simple and tractable
              paradigms that can be communicated to students but also used by the industry.

