Title       : Species-Level Systematics and Phylogeny of Pseudomyrmecine Ants (Hymenoptera:
               Formicidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9903650

Award Number: 9903650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Ward psward@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB 9903650
Ward
Univ. California

This project is concerned with improving
              our knowledge and understanding of ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), a group of
              insects that is ecologically important, and rich in behavioral and biological
              diversity.  The focus of this project is on ant systematics and classification,
              i.e., the discovery and description of new species, the provision of
              identification keys, and the elucidation of the phylogenetic relationships
              among species.  This is achieved through a combination of fieldwork,
              morphological study, and analysis of molecular data (DNA sequences).  Most of
              the research is targeted on the ant genus Pseudomyrmex, which is a large and
              successful group in the New World tropics.  Many of these ant species have
              developed mutually beneficial associations with specialized tropical trees: the
              plants provide nesting sites for the ants, and in return the ants protect their
              host plant from herbivores by patrolling the plant and stinging intruders.  The
              sting gland venom of one species, Pseudomyrmex triplarinus, has proved
              efficacious in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

An improved
              classification of these ants will help us to understand important features
              about their biology.  For example, in the realm of ant/plant mutualisms, we can
              address such questions as:  How many times have ants evolved close associations
              with plants? What factors predispose the development of such relationships? 
              What are the special characteristics of plant-protecting ants, and can these
              qualities be exploited for the protection of plants valuable to man?  With
              respect to the possible use of these ants for treatment of medical ailments, a
              reliable taxonomy and phylogeny allows more accurate prediction about which
              species to target for investigation.  Finally, an improved taxonomy of these
              ants permits them to be used, along with other organisms such as birds and
              butterflies, as "indicator taxa" that provide information about the health of
              the environment.  Many of these ant species occur only in tropical rainforests.
               Loss of ant species diversity will go undetected unless we can actually
              identify and recognize the individual species.


