Title       : Intelligent Web Prefetching to Reduce Client Latencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a9903052

Award Number: 9903052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haym Hirsh hirsh@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1087,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Delays on the World-Wide Web are a well-known problem for users. Caching of web
              objects closer to clients is a technique shown to improve performance because
              requested objects that are in the cache can be presented to the client without
              traversing sometimes slow network connections to a possibly overloaded web
              server. Prefetching, in advance of their need, soon-to-be-requested objects
              that are not in the cache can improve performance even further. Such objects
              can often be predicted from a range of information sources, such as client and
              server histories as well as the contents of the objects currently and
              previously retrieved by the client. In this work, the researcher proposes to
              develop intelligent prefetching algorithms that use machine learning techniques
              to develop models that make predictions based on past experience, and to test
              their implementation in a proxy cache with the goal of reducing user-perceived
              latency. Moreover, adding prefetching to a cache raises some subtle problems
              for evaluation methods, and so the researcher proposes a new methodology for
              proxy cache evaluation that can also handle prefetching systems. The high-level
              goals of this research are to propose and implement both prefetching algorithms
              and a sufficient evaluation methodology for such algorithms. This evaluation
              methodology will then be used to measure the progress made toward the ultimate
              objective of reducing user latencies.
