Title       : Technology-Enhanced Learning of Geometry in Elementary Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9903409

Award Number: 9903409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $815751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Watt dwatt@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Lehrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Bjork  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Clements  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project will investigate and document how, and in which circumstances,
              technology-enhanced curricula allow students in grades K-5 to engage in
              learning challenges and experimentation that support the development and
              application of important geometric concepts and principles.  The project will
              focus on a related subset of important aspects of geometric thinking: units,
              patterns, and repetition-the ways that patterns and shapes result from the
              repetition of units; transformations of shapes; and symmetries as outcomes of
              particular kinds of compositions and transformations of units.  These ideas
              underlie understanding of many of the topics traditionally taught in elementary
              geometry and form the basis for understanding of other topics in mathematics,
              science, and the arts.  The technology-enhanced curricula that are the focus of
              the research include conceptually designed microworlds designed to embody
              specific mathematical concepts in age-appropriate ways.  The research will take
              place in classroom contexts that integrate several elements individually
              associated with improved student learning:  software-based activities, concrete
              manipulatives, activities supporting a variety of learning modalities, examples
              and applications from students' daily lives, and effective instruction by
              knowledgeable teachers.  
	The outcomes of the research will include
              documentation of how these classroom environments influence learning of the
              targeted geometry concepts; how use of the software in particular influences
              student learning; how the software interacts with other learning activities;
              and how learning of geometry concepts develops across the K-5 age ranges in
              technology-enhanced classroom contexts.  Student learning outcomes in the
              research classrooms will be compared to student outcomes in non-participating
              classrooms and to a national sample of student outcomes.  The results of this
              research will inform future efforts to develop technology-enhanced learning
              environments and provide insights about changes in pedagogy that may be needed
              to support effective learning.  In addition, the assessment tasks that will be
              developed as part of the research to measure development of students' geometric
              understandings will be made available for use as classroom assessment
              tasks.
	The project will be a collaboration among investigators from three
              institutions-Education Development Center (EDC), Inc., University of Wisconsin,
              and State University of New York at Buffalo-that have been pioneers in research
              on the development of geometric thinking and in applied research leading to
              elementary mathematics software and curriculum development.  The three partner
              organizations will work together to develop and implement a coherent research
              design across all research sites, and will offer the same training and
              equivalent ongoing support for the 18 participating teachers (6 at each site).
              Participating schools have the appropriate technical infrastructure, and
              teachers will be experienced in using technology in classroom instruction. EDC
              will provide overall management and coordination for the research effort. 

