Title       : Economy and Land Use: The Gordion Regional Survey Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9903149

Award Number: 9903149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155255             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa K. Kealhofer lkealhofer@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lisa Kealhofer and her colleagues
              will conduct two seasons of archaeological and paleoevironmental research in
              the region surrounding the site of Gordian. This major site, located on the
              central Anatolian plateau, was originally occupied at ca. 2,300 BC and
              documents a succession of cultures from the Bronze Age to the Romans. The
              massive mound which dominates the surrounding plain has been the focus of
              archaeological investigation for decades and its cultural sequence is well
              known. A site of this type however can only be understood within a broader
              regional and environmental context since, in the absence of long distance
              transport of foodstuffs, it must rely on this broader area for sustenance. Very
              little is known either about settlement or agricultural practices and these
              issues provide the focus for Dr. Kealhofer's research. During the Early Iron
              Age (ca. 950-750 BC) Gordion formed part of a larger Hittite empire whose
              heartland lay further to the East. Gordion likely occupied a peripheral
              position. At the close of this period, iron first came into widespread use at
              Gordion and at approximately this time the empire itself collapsed. In the
              succeeding period the site lay at the heart of the Phrygian empire. Dr.
              Kealhofer will examine changes in agricultural land use and subsistence
              strategy across this time interval and attempt to relate political
              organization, technology and agricultural projection. She believes that with
              the advent of iron and its use in plows, previously untilled areas because
              accessible to cultivation and that increased productivity in peripheral Hittite
              areas such as Gordion led to greater regional independence and the ultimate
              collapse of the kingdom. To collect the necessary data Dr. Kealhofer and her
              colleagues must reconstruct past settlement pattern and she will do this
              through intensive regional survey. It is also necessary to map the extent of
              prehistoric field systems and this is extremely difficult to accomplish because
              many relevant land surfaces are either buried or eroded. Preliminary fieldwork
              has pinpointed promising areas and sediment cores will now be collected.  Thus
              the nature of land use over time will be assessed. The sequence of land use
              changes will be tied to settlement organization changes on the basis of
              radiocarbon dates and recovered cultural material. These data will allow the
              reconstruction of agricultural patterns associated with both settlement pattern
              changes and with known changes in the political organization.

This research
              is important because it will shed new light on how complex societies both rise
              and decline. It will provide a model for examining human behavior in an
              environmental context over long time spans and methodology and data will be of
              interest to many archaeologists.

