Title       : Basic Investigation of Controlled Periodic Illumination Effects on
               Photocatalytic Reactions and Selectivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9903511

Award Number: 9903511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Noble nobler@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Koval  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal Title:		Basic Investigation of Controlled Periodic
              Illumination
			Effects on Photocatalytic Reactions and Selectivity
Proposal
              Number:		CTS-9903511
Principal Investigator:	Richard
              Noble
Institution:		University of Colorado

Semiconductor photocatalysis is
              a promising method for environmental applications.  Illuminated semiconductors
              have been successfully used in environmental remediation for a wide range of
              organic compounds and heavy metals in aqueous solution.  This ambient
              temperature process catalyzes oxidation and reduction reactions when TiO2 is
              illuminated with ultraviolet light.  The efficiency of these reactions is
              improved through controlled periodic illumination (CPI).  The goals of this
              study are to evaluate the use of CPI in TiO2 photocatalysis to improve yields
              and selectivity for chemical production and to test the hypothesis that oxygen
              sorption/electron transfer is the rate-limiting reaction step when using CPI in
              oxygen reduction reactions.  The photocatalytic cyclization of L-lysine to form
              L-pipecolinic acid will be studied.  The mechanism has been proposed to follow
              two pathways: one forming the desired L-isomer and the other forming a racemic
              mixture of pipecolinic acid.  The initial step in the proposed mechanism is the
              selective oxidation of one of the amino groups by the photogenerated holes. 
              CPI may affect the selectivity through changes in the initial oxidation or
              through changes in the relative rates of the remaining steps in the proposed
              pathways.  In a second series of experiments with oxygen reduction, operating
              conditions will be changed so that effects of oxygen adsorption and transfer of
              the conduction band electron to the adsorbed oxygen can be determined.  Changes
              in oxygen pressure and platinum loading will also be used to determine
              rate-limiting effects.

