Title       : Adaptive Protocols For Cellular Networks: Modeling & Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9903240

Award Number: 9903240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunil M. Shende   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Cellular networks, used in wireless and mobile communications under multiple
              access conditions, depend upon good protocols to (a) allocate spectral
              bandwidth in the presence of interference, (b) control access among
              participating users and (c) support robust quality of service in a seamless
              manner.  This proposal addresses a common underlying goal of resource
              management protocols, viz. the provision of guarantees on performance measured
              in terms of network indicators such as spectral efficiency, rate of call loss
              or call blocking, fraction of successful handoffs and the complexity of control
              mechanisms.  Naturally, these performance guarantees are subject to the service
              quality factors and to the radio interference constraints in the modeled
              topology of the network.

The researcher proposes the design and analysis of
              new, distributed protocols to adaptively allocate spectrum resources, implement
              call admission and support handoffs while simultaneously trying to optimize one
              or more desireable performance factors, e.g. maximizing spectral utilization,
              minimizing interference, maintaining acceptable service quality etc.  The work
              is further expected to focus on strategies that react quickly to changing local
              conditions and that try to avoid centralized planning and control as much as
              possible.  Building upon encouraging preliminary results, this proposal will
              use a general approach that consists of formulating such protocol design
              problems as instances of online, approximation algorithms competing with
              unknown but optimal "adversarial" protocols.

The overall goals of this work
              are two-fold.  First the researcher will develop a suite of protocols in
              conjunction with realistic models that account for constraints as faithfully as
              possible, while guaranteeing theoretically derived bounds on performance.  In
              addition, the work will be complemented by collaborations with undergraduate
              students to develop a comprehensive web-based visualization tool that can be
              used to validate the protocols through extensive empirical testing on both
              systhesized and real-world network traffic data.
                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
