Title       : The Conceptual Learning and Interpersonal Behavior of Individuals Learning
               Mechanics in Small Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a9903309

Award Number: 9903309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald K. Thornton cmst@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Do students who learn concepts act and interact differently from those who
              don't?  To answer this question we, the Center for Science and Mathematics
              Teaching at Tufts University, wish to identify student behavior, personal and
              interpersonal, associated with conceptual learning and also those behaviors
              associated with little or no conceptual learning.  To this end we have
              videotaped an entire semester of students working in groups of three learning
              mechanics in a university introductory physics laboratory.  The students'
              conceptual learning was measured independently of their performance in the
              course using the reliable Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation (FMCE),
              developed by the Center with NSF support. The students were following a
              guided-discovery curriculum (RealTime Physics Mechanics) intended to help them
              learn force and motion concepts and were exploring the behavior of the physical
              world using real-time data logging (MBL) hardware and software (LoggerPro) to
              display the results of experiments. More than 80% of students learn fundamental
              concepts in this environment (as opposed to only 7-20% in traditional
              environments).  Students were also exposed to traditional physics instruction
              in the lecture part of the course.
Analysis of video tapes of students engaged
              in this process throughout a semester will be used to determine why most
              students learn effectively while some do not.  The interactions of individual
              students to be studied include these: (1) with the MBL environment; (2) with
              the group members; and (3) with the instructors.  The study of student behavior
              will be carried out over the entire semester and will use the methodology
              developed at the Center called Concept Talk analysis as well as standard
              methods of discourse analysis developed in the fields of socio-linguistics and
              cognitive psychology.  To improve our analysis, we will incorporate knowlege
              from other disciplines by collaborating with Jim Gee and his associates in the
              Education Department of the University of Wisconsin.
We expect the
              understandings we gain to apply to conceptual learning in general and not to be
              limited to learning in physics.  But to the extent that this project is
              successful in developing guidelines for identifying students early on who learn
              less well, we will also seek clues to formulate appropriate specific learning
              interventions for them.
For more information: //http.ase.tufts.edu/csmt/

