Title       : SGER: Exploratory Research on A New Survivable, Scalable, and Self-Adapting
               Network Architecture Based on Biological Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9903247

Award Number: 9903247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatsuya Suda suda@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Bio-Networking Architecture that the PI proposes in this project is inspired
              by the observation that the biological world has already developed the
              mechanisms necessary to achieve such key requirements for the Next Generation
              Internet (NGI) as scalability, heterogeneity and dynamicity, security,
              survivability, and simplicity.  In the biological world, each individual entity
              (e.g., a bee in a bee colony) follows a simple set of
behavior rules (e.g.,
              migration, reproduction, energy exchange, mutation, and death), yet a group of
              entities (e.g. a bee colony) exhibits complex, emergent behavior (e.g.,
              adaptation, evolution, security, urvivability).
Therefore, if services and
              applications adopt biological concepts and mechanisms, they too may be able to
              achieve the key requirements of NGI.

The researcher proposes to apply key
              concepts and mechanisms from the biological world to design, implement, and
              empirically evaluate a new network architecture called the Bio-Networking
              Architecture.  In the Bio-Networking Architecture, services and applications
              are implemented by a collection of multiple entities called cyberentities (as a
              bee colony consists of multiple bees).  These cyberentities have functionality
              related to their service or application and follow simple behavior rules (e.g.,
              migration, reproduction, energy exchange, mutation, death) similar to
              biological entities. In the Bio-Networking Architecture, useful emergent
              behaviors (e.g., adaptation, evolution, security, and survivability) result
              when individual cyberentities interact.  The Bio-Networking Architecture can be
              applied to a variety of
NGI applications and services, including information
              dissemination, data storage, resource discovery, or public key
              infrastructure.

The innovative claims of the proposed project are:

   
              The proposed Bio-Networking Architecture is the first attempt to apply the
   
              biological concepts of emergent behavior, autonomous control, and adaptation
 
                and evolution to a broad and general class of network services and
   
              applications.  Previous studies of biological architectures were for the
   
              purpose of understanding biological processes, simulating life or emergent
   
              behavior, distributed computation, or robotics.

    The Bio-Networking
              Architecture enables the construction of services and
    applications which
              meet the key requirements of NGI.  Scalability is
    achieved because
              cyberentities act autonomously, and on a local basis using
    only local
              information.  Construction of the service or application is
    simplified
              because only relatively simple behaviors at the cyberentity level
    need to
              be designed.  The other requirements of adaptation, security, and
   
              survivability are simply the emergent behavior of the cyberentities
   
              interacting as a whole.

    Services and applications designed using the
              Bio-Networking Architecture
    adapt to heterogeneous and dynamically
              changing network conditions through
    the autonomous actions of their
              cyberentities, each exhibiting simple
    behaviors.  They also evolve to more
              desirable behaviors through the
    mutation and natural selection mechanisms
              of the Bio-Networking
    Architecture.  Current network services must be
              manually configured and
    optimized to network conditions.

    The
              Bio-Networking Architecture has features which can be used as
    additional
              layers of defense against attacks.  Services and applications can
    use, in
              addition to traditional security techniques such as authentication
    and
              encryption, features of Bio-Networking Architecture such as intrusion
   
              detection, autonomous replication, algorithmic diversity, and dispersion of
  
               the cyberentities, as additional layers.  These features increase the
   
              probability that the service or application can detect, survive, and recover
 
                from coordinated attacks by insiders, terrorists, or nations.  Current
   
              network services and applications have only one layer of defense, so they
   
              are unlikely to survive a coordinated attack.
