Title       : Paleoseismological Investigations on the Kamchatka Peninsula, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9903341

Award Number: 9903341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne Bourgeois jbourgeo@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The Pacific coast of the southern Kamchatka Peninsula offers a unique
              opportunity to study in detail the history of a subduction zone over several
              thousand years.  The long-term goal of this investigation is to examine the
              possible segmentation and episodicity of seismicity associated with this
              subduction zone.  Specifically, this study will use frequency of tsunami
              deposits as a proxy for seismic activity.  Because tephra (volcanic ash layers)
              are abundantly preserved in Kamchatka, coastal zone stratigraphy, correlation
              and age dating of tsunami deposits are eminently feasible.  Holocene shoreline
              history is recorded in modern and uplifted coastal terraces, which can also be
              dated and correlated using tephrostratigraphy.  The Kamchatka coast has
              experienced little occupation or human alteration, so that deposits are well
              preserved and rarely disturbed.  This award supports a combined U. S.-Russian
              team to conduct detailed studies near the northern end of the subduction zone
              (Cape Kamchatskiy).  This pilot study involves an extended field program of
              mapping, trenching, and stratigraphic description; samples of ash layers and
              tsunami deposits will then be analyzed chemically and granulometrically.  To
              improve already existing tephrochronology, radiocarbon dates will be acquired
              from associated peat layers.   Composite sections can then be constructed and
              analyzed statistically to examine the long-term history of tsunamigenic events
              in this region.  In addition, this work will help reconstruct a detailed,
              short-term history of tsunamis associated with the Kamchatka subduction
              zone.





