Title       : An International Collaborative Investigation of Khoy Ophiolite, NW, Iran
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9903249

Award Number: 9903249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110505             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Mohamad Ghazi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan A. Babaie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903249
Ghazi
The ophiolites of the Bitlis-Zagros Suture Zone zone form a
              discontinuous linear belt of Tethyan oceanic fragments which form a bridge
              between the Samail Ophiolite in Oman and the Troodos ophiolite in Cyprus. The
              Iranian ophiolites of the Bitlis-Zagros Suture Zone include complexes at
              Neyriz, Kermanshah and possibly at Khoy.  Currently there is an immense gap in
              our knowledge about many fundamental aspects of genesis of these ophiolites
              (e.g., the mantle sources, the petrogenetic origin, the tectonic environment
              and timing of formation, timing and mechanism of emplacement) and thus in our
              understanding of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic geology of the Middle East and Eastern
              Mediterranean regions as well as of Tethyan paleogeography.  The Khoy ophiolite
              of northwestern Iran is especially suitable to study because; 1) it is one of
              the largest intact complexes in the region with a mappable ophiolite
              pseudostratigraphy, 2) it has a well-defined metamorphic sole whose rocks show
              effects of an inverse thermal gradient from amphibolite facies to greenschist
              facies, 3) it is located at an important junction between the belts of
              Mediterranean and Middle Eastern ophiolites along the Arabian promontory, and
              4) it has been overlooked in tectonic models for reconstruction of closure of
              the Tethys Ocean. The results of this study will advance understanding of the
              physiochemical processes involved in magmatism at oceanic spreading centers,
              formation of oceanic crust, and ophiolite genesis and emplacement.  Ultimately,
              we hope to generate a modern, high-quality geochemical database and evaluate
              ancient tectonomagmatic processes in this little-studied region and answer some
              of the fundamental questions about Tethyan and Indian Ocean magmatism, timing
              and tectonics of ocean closure and the evolution of geochemical domains within
              the upper mantle, and ophiolite genesis in general. 

