Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Global Behavior of Solutions to Singular
               Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9903562

Award Number: 9903562
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill E. Hemmati   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5937,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903562
Hemmati
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide support for a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Jill E. Hemmati to work with Dr. Harold S.
              Shapiro at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden.
During her
              tenure in Sweden, Dr. Hemmati will join the research group, Holomorphic Partial
              Differential Equations and Potential Theory.  She will participate in the
              group's seminar and work on problems concerning the occurrence and propagation
              of singularities of solutions to certain types of partial differential
              equations in Cn.  In addition, she will attend seminars of the Mittag-Leffler
              Institute, whose program for the year is being directed by two members of the
              Royal Institute's research group.
Shapiro's research group has established
              itself as one at the forefront in this field.  For the year that Dr. Hemmati
              will be in Sweden, the Mittag-Leffler Institute will be studying the topic
              "Potential Theory and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations," making
              Stockholm the center of the world for this period of time for those working in
              that field.
***

