Title       : Lithium Isotope Compositions of Hawaiian Lavas: A Study of Source Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9903197

Award Number: 9903197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lui-Heung Chan lchan@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903197
Chan
The Hawaiian chain is an important example of hot spot volcanism.
              Shield
lavas exhibit considerable variation in chemical and isotopic
              composition.
The compositional diversity reflects distinct source components
              in the
mantle and interaction of the mantle plume with lithosphere and the
              upper
mantle.  This project introduces lithium isotopes as a new isotopic
              tracer
for the study of ocean island basalts.  Recent developments of
              mass
spectrometric techniques have led to precise characterization of
              lithium
isotope compositions of marine reservoirs.  Lithium isotopic data
              of
seawater, fresh and altered ocean crust, marine sediments, and
              mantle
peridotite are available to evaluate the origin of Hawaiian lavas. 
              The
proposed study will focus on lavas from four volcanoes: Koolau, Mauna
              Kea,
Mauna Loa and Kilauea. Koolau and Mauna Kea are considered to be
              extreme
compositional endmembers in Hawaiian volcanoes.  Isotopic evidence
              suggests
that Koolau lavas represent plume material enriched with recycled
              oceanic
crust and sediments , whereas Mauna Kea lavas has incorporated melts
              of
recycled hydrothermally altered lower crust. The objectives of the
              lithium
isotope study are to identify source material in the Hawaiian
              plume,
including recycled components from the subducted oceanic lithosphere
              and
sediments, and to trace the isotopic evolution of the magmas with
              time
using drill core samples.  In a broader sense, this study addresses
              the
issues of isotopic heterogeneity in the mantle,
              melt-lithosphere
interaction, and recycling of subducted crustal material.


