Title       : A New Method for Identification of Preferential Flow Paths at Sites of
               Groundwater Contamination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9903103

Award Number: 9903103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226538             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Butler jbutler@kgs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lili Zheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl D. McElwee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey C. Bohling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9150,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903103
Butler

The spatial distribution of hydraulic conductivity is a
              significant control on the movement of contaminants in the subsurface.  A
              number of theories have been developed to quantify the influence of spatial
              variations of hydraulic conductivity on contaminant transport by using
              stochastic processes or fractal representations to model the conductivity
              variations.  It is becoming increasingly apparent; however, that the modeling
              of the conductivity variations at a site be inadequate may have significant
              limitations in units composed of a complex mixture of lithologies.  Clearly
              site-specific hydraulic conductivity distribution at a larger scale need to be
              quantified to reliably predicts contaminant movement in such systems.  In
              particular, knowledge on laterally contiguous zones of high hydraulic
              conductivity, which serve as preferential flow paths, is often critical. The
              field identification of such zones, however, has proven difficult. 
              Conventional field techniques provide information of a highly averaged nature
              or restricted to the vicinity of the test well. This research would develop a
              new field method for the estimation of spatial in hydraulic conductivity
              between wells.  Although developed for the general task of estimation of
              hydraulic conductivity variations in saturated formations and this effective
              for the identify of preferential flow paths.  This methodology involves three
              primary elements:  1) a recently proposed method for hydraulic tomography, 2)
              low-cost pressure sensors for drawdown measurements in the tubing used in
              multilevel sampling wells, and 3) geophysical survey data for stratigraphic
              control.  Hydraulic tomography has the potential to produce images of the
              hydraulic conductivity distribution between wells at most detail than
              previously possible.  Detailed information about vertical variations in
              pumping-induced head changes would be at obtained from the low-cost pressure
              sensors. Nonuniqueness would be addressed by using cross-hole
              ground-penetrating radar surveys to constrain the inversion process.  The
              primary purpose of the research is a thorough theoretical and field assessment
              of this promising new methodology.     The incorporation of such features into
              a site model should dramatically improve the quality of model predictions, thus
              leading to more reliable risk assessments and a more efficient allocation of
              resources for site characterization and remediation activities.  The
              descriptions of hydraulic conductivity variations in the subsurface would have
              a level of detail that has not previously been possible.     In addition, the
              information should help better relate hydraulic conductivity variations to
              their geologic origins and thus facilitate incorporation of geologic
              information into hydrogeologic investigations.
9903103
Butler

The spatial
              distribution of hydraulic conductivity is a significant control on the movement
              of contaminants in the subsurface.  A number of theories have been developed to
              quantify the influence of spatial variations of hydraulic conductivity on
              contaminant transport by using stochastic processes or fractal representations
              to model the conductivity variations.  It is becoming increasingly apparent;
              however, that the modeling of the conductivity variations at a site be
              inadequate may have significant limitations in units composed of a complex
              mixture of lithologies.  Clearly site-specific hydraulic conductivity
              distribution at a larger scale need to be quantified to reliably predicts
              contaminant movement in such systems.  In particular, knowledge on laterally
              contiguous zones of high hydraulic conductivity, which serve as preferential
              flow paths, is often critical. The field identification of such zones, however,
              has proven difficult.  Conventional field techniques provide information of a
              highly averaged nature or restricted to the vicinity of the test well. This
              research would develop a new field method for the estimation of spatial in
              hydraulic conductivity between wells.  Although developed for the general task
              of estimation of hydraulic conductivity variations in saturated formations and
              this effective for the identify of preferential flow paths.  This methodology
              involves three primary elements:  1) a recently proposed method for hydraulic
              tomography, 2) low-cost pressure sensors for drawdown measurements in the
              tubing used in multilevel sampling wells, and 3) geophysical survey data for
              stratigraphic control.  Hydraulic tomography has the potential to produce
              images of the hydraulic conductivity distribution between wells at most detail
              than previously possible.  Detailed information about vertical variations in
              pumping-induced head changes would be at obtained from the low-cost pressure
              sensors. Nonuniqueness would be addressed by using cross-hole
              ground-penetrating radar surveys to constrain the inversion process.  The
              primary purpose of the research is a thorough theoretical and field assessment
              of this promising new methodology.     The incorporation of such features into
              a site model should dramatically improve the quality of model predictions, thus
              leading to more reliable risk assessments and a more efficient allocation of
              resources for site characterization and remediation activities.  The
              descriptions of hydraulic conductivity variations in the subsurface would have
              a level of detail that has not previously been possible.     In addition, the
              information should help better relate hydraulic conductivity variations to
              their geologic origins and thus facilitate incorporation of geologic
              information into hydrogeologic investigations.

