Title       : STTR Phase I: Low Cost, Nano-Crystalline Sensors, for Real-Time Monitoring of
               Carbon Monoxide and Volatile Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9903739

Award Number: 9903739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Smilanich Nsmilanich@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sensor Development Corp.
	      3449 Delmar Drive
	      Rocky River, OH  44116    440/895-9520

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                      This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to
              use a proprietary nano-crystalline metal oxide as a unique sensing material.  A
              step function improvement in stability and capability for rapid measurements of
              CO and formaldehyde with ultra-sensitivity should be achieved resulting in an
              increase in the number of active sites inherent in the nano-structure
              materials.  The Phase I effort will use a unique completely integrated effort
              to make the material and to apply it to the sensor. The fabrication focus will
              be for devices demonstrating a high degree of sensitivity and low unit cost. 
              The proposer will establish tile criteria for the electronic integration of the
              sensor as an array into Heating Ventilating and Air Conditioning manufactured
              systems.  Phase II will focus on developing and demonstrating a high degree of
              selectivity for sensing multiple VOC's and the electronic interface needed for
              commercialization. Public concern about environmental quality encompasses the
              area where people work and live-the indoor air environment.  Carbon monoxide
              (CO) and formaldehyde often accumulate in this environment.  An unmet need
              exists for improved methods for cost-effective in-situ onsite measurement and
              monitoring of these constituents.
        The systematic investigation of the
              relationship between the microstructure and property will lead to the
              development of novel metal oxides with exotic characteristics.  Applications
              involving environmental monitoring, oil refining, chemical manufacturing,
              automotive control, and industrial process control are among the potential
              uses.
