Title       : GOALI: Preparation, Characterization and Kinetic Behavior of Unique Carbon
               Supported Bimetallic Cu Catalysts for the Selective Dehydrogenation of Alcohols
               and Diols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9903559

Award Number: 9903559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Albert Vannice mavche@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry R. Ebner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor M. Albert Vannice at Penn Sate University, in collaboration with Prof.
              Baker at Northeastern University, and Drs. Friedman and Ebner at Monsanto
              Corporation, will study the preparation and characterization of bimetallic Cu-
              (Pt, Pd, Rh) particles supported on carbon (in the activated, graphitic fiber,
              and diamond forms).  They will determine the kinetics and catalytic mechanisms
              of vapor-phase and liquid-phase dehydrogenation of alcohols to alkenes,
              reactions that are relevant to industrial processes utilized by Monsanto.  A
              broad motivation for the research is the potential replacement of
              environmentally hazardous copper chromite catalysts used in those processes. 
              Also environmentally important is the development of highly selective,
              wasteless processes.  At the fundamental level there is outstanding need for
              better understanding of bimetallic nanoparticles properties.  In particular for
              alcohol dehydrogenation, the catalytic property dependence on composition,
              structure, solid phases, morphology, electronic state, and dispersion of
              bimetallic nanoparticles supported on various types carbon substrates is poorly
              known or little understood.  Differences of behavior for vapor and liquid phase
              catalysis have not been investigated.  Drs. Baker and Vannice will prepare the
              novel catalysts.  Dr. Vannice will characterize particle size and
              surface-functional composition by XRD, IR, TEM and chemisorption while Dr.
              Baker will provide morphology and chemical state of the bimetallic particles by
              Controlled Atmosphere Electron Microscopy and TEM.  Drs. Friendman Ebner will
              provide additional chemical composition and structural information by XPS and
              EXAFS. Dr. Vannice will provide catalytic kinetics measurements for the
              vapor-phase dehydrogenation of n-butanol, 3-methylbutanol, crotyl alcohol and
              isopropanol, while Monsanto will do similar determinations for the liquid-phase
              reactions.
