Title       : STTR Phase I: Nano-Layered Composites as High-Temperature Hard Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9903698

Award Number: 9903698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilwon Kim iwkim@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Applied Thin Films
	      Evanston Business & Tech Center
	      Evanston, IL  602013135    847/491-2447

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This Phase I SmallBusiness Technology Transfer (STTR) project aims to
              investigate high-temperature properties of nano-layered coatings.  A specific
              material system is chosen that optimizes key properties including hardness,
              thermal expansion match with cemented-carbide tools, stability against
              dissolution into steel workpieces, and oxidation resistance.  The strong
              dislocation confinement in nano-layers will lead to better high-temperature
              hardness retention than in monolithic coatings.  The oxidation resistance of
              the coatings will be evaluated.  The stability of the nano-layered coatings
              will be investigated through annealing experiments with subsequent
              characterization by x-ray diffraction.  There is a high level of interest in
              cutting-tool coatings that perform well over a range of temperatures (RT to
              1100 C) because of the desire to cut at higher rates and increasing
              environmental concerns over the use of coolants during machining. However,
              traditional coating materials do not perform well, primarily because their
              hardnesses decrease rapidly as temperature rises.  The proposer has recently
              developed a new class of coatings, combining many alternating nanometer-scale
              layers of BCC metals and rocksalt-structure nitrides, e.g. Mo/NbN.  Results
              show that nano-layering provides substantial hardness enhancements. Hardnesses
              > 30 GPa are maintained at high temperatures providing an opportunity to
              explore new high-temperature stable coatings.  
       Nano-layer-coated
              cutting tools have the potential to make dry cutting a practical alternative to
              traditional wet cutting methods.  In addition, they can improve we-machining
              economics by allowing higher cutting speeds.

