Title       : Manipulation of Surface Reactions for Growth of Ultra-Thin Films (1-20ML)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9903704

Award Number: 9903704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Osgood osgood@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is gaining greater understanding of surface chemistry
              for new approaches to the growth of ultrathin layers, i.e. a monolayer of Group
              III metals or semiconductor bilayers. The scope includes both potential
              transition layers between substrate and epitaxial overlayers, and ultrathin
              layers between two epitaxial films. The project builds on recent advances in
              fundamental semiconductor thermal and nonequilibrium chemistry. The materials
              chemistry studied relates to both conventional molecular-based growth and new
              approaches to growth. Ultrahigh vacuum probes will be used to understand
              surface chemistry details, including, for example, the composition, bonding,
              and ordering of surface ligands and the reaction pathways of precursor
              molecules and surface species. In addition, ways of manipulating surface
              ligands will be examined, including irradiation with optical and electron
              beams, and by rapid temperature changes in the substrate. The UHV system will
              be equipped with dosers, in situ probes, and a variable-temperature substrate
              holder. Chemistries for forming single nitride bilayers and for forming a
              transition monolayer between two epitaxial thin-film systems, e.g. Si/ZnS, etc.
              will be studied. Additional research will examine the application of new
              diagnostic tools, such as near edge x--ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS)
              for determining the surface chemistry in molecule-based epitaxial growth
              systems.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science having high potential technological relevance. The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new
              aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  Experimental tools are now available
              to allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes which when
              better understood allow advances in fundamental science and technology. The
              basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and
              circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
              producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature
              of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
              area.
***

