Title       : The Origin and Diversification of Vaccinieae: Using Molecular and Morphological
               Data to Determine Major Clades of the Blueberry Tribe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9903719

Award Number: 9903719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Kron kronka@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Luteyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kron and Luteyn 9903719

The Vaccinieae (the blueberry tribe, in the heather
              and rhododendron family) are a diverse group of temperate and tropical woody
              plants found on all continents except Antarctica.  The temperate members of
              this group are the familiar blueberries and bilberries.  The lesser known
              tropical members of the Vaccinieae are extremely diverse in floral morphology
              and form a major component of many montane tropical forests (e.g., cloud
              forests).  This project will address evolutionary relationships within the
              blueberry tribe using DNA sequence data from three regions in the chloroplast
              and nuclear genomes, and morphological data.  The collaboration of a molecular
              systematist (PI-Kron) with the expert in tropical blueberry morphology and
              field work (coPI-Luteyn) is a powerful approach to such a large scale study and
              is key to the success of the project.
	The blueberries are an excellent model
              for testing the commonly held assumption that taxa that are most diverse in the
              tropics must have originated in the tropics.  Because of the morphological
              diversity, large size (>1000 spp.) and widespread geographic distribution of
              this taxon, evolutionary studies of relationships within Vaccinieae will
              provide an important window on the general evolutionary history of the earth. 
              The results of this study will contribute to a broader understanding of the
              common historical factors that have contributed to the amazing diversity in the
              Neotropics.  These comparisons will contribute to a more complete understanding
              of causes and patterns of diversification in some of the most diverse
              ecosystems in the world.


