Title       : Design and Synthesis of Thermoplastic Elastomers with Liquid Crystalline Soft
               Segments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a9903380

Award Number: 9903380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula T. Hammond hammond@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9903380
Hammond

The newest frontier in the field of polymer science is the
              exploration and manipulation of self-assembly - the inherent tendency of some
              materials to self-arrange due to thermodynamic driving forces and non-covalent
              secondary interactions.  Many of the important advances in materials science
              will rely on the ability to control structure and order on the length scales of
              nanometers to microns.  The ability to self assembly will lead to the
              advancement of new nanolithography and display technologies, and
              electro-optical and photonic systems.  Block copolymers are materials which can
              form nanometer sized domains or regions of one polymer type within another
              polymer.  Here we approach the control of nanostructured materials by
              introducing a second level of order within block copolymer domains - liquid
              crystalline order.  This research has three basic objectives in the furthered
              development of these materials.  Newly developed synthetic approaches have
              allowed the creation of block copolymers with a polystyrene and a
              functionalizable polysiloxane block which are the first to exhibit an LC phase
              glass transition considerably lower than room temperature, while maintaining a
              high Tg glassy block.  The proposed work will further explore and optimize the
              design of these materials to ultimately form stable, mechanically cohesive LC
              materials which are active at room temperature.  Multi-block copolymers with
              flexible side chain LC soft segments can be used to form elastomeric materials
              which exhibit a number of interesting mechano-optical, electromechanical or
              piezoelectric properties.  Proposed work includes the examination of optical
              and mechanical properties of these materials, and further development of these
              materials for actuator, damping and electro- or magnetoresponsive mechanical
              systems.

This proposal is based on newly developed block and segmented
              copolymers which contain side chain liquid crystalline blocks, and rigid or
              glassy blocks, with an interest in electro-optical and mechano-optical
              properties for display, sensor, actuator, and memory applications.  Final
              applications include thin plastic displays with improved contrast and high
              impact resistance, smart optical coatings, and even new approaches to the
              formation of nanostructures without the use of lithography.  The coupling of
              liquid crystal and elastomeric properties could lead to the development of new
              electromechanical systems potentially useful for sensors, actuators, and
              artificial muscle systems.  Educational objectives include the training of new
              graduate students in the field of polymers and materials science, as well as
              the incorporation of the above concepts in course development.

