Title       : Over-complete Signal Decomposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9903368

Award Number: 9903368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avideh Zakhor avz@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9903368
Zakhor


Efficient compression of image and moving video is
              becoming increasingly more important in a wide range of emerging applications.
              These applications can be classified by the bit rates they require. A broadcast
              quality video-on-demand system might require several megabits per second, while
              a commercial video conferencing system might use only a few hundred kilobits
              per second. At the extreme low end of the scale, video telephone and wireless
              communication systems are often restricted to rates below 20 kilobits per
              second. The hybrid motion-compensated Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) structure
              is a part of nearly all existing video coding standards such as H.263 and
              MPEG-1,2,4, and commercially available video compression systems. In applying
              DCT to very low bit rate video coding, blocking artifacts become quite
              pronounced. This research is focused on non-block oriented decomposition
              techniques to replace DCT in today's video coding systems.


One such scheme
              recently developed at the VIP group at U.C. Berkeley involves signal
              decomposition over a larger, more flexible over-complete basis set based on
              Gabor dictionary. It uses the greedy, matching pursuit algorithm from the
              statistics literature in order to find the expansion coefficients. This
              approach is found to result in significant PSNR and visual quality improvement
              over DCT based schemes. In addition, since there are no constraints on the
              overcomplete set of basis functions over which the signal decomposition is
              carried out, the elements of the set can be chosen to be free of blocking
              artifacts, resulting in artifact free reconstructed frames, with no need for
              compute expensive post processing. The main goal of this research is to
              investigate signal decomposition along overcomplete dictionaries with
              applications to video coding. In particular the issues to be addressed
              regarding video coding systems based on over complete signal expansion include:
              fundamental bounds on performance, optimum amplitude and position coding
              algorithms, non-block based motion compensation techniques to match the
              non-blocky nature of the basis set, dictionary design, decomposition and search
              strategies, and extension to: (a) spatio-temporal scalability, (b) still image
              coding, (c) multiple description coding and (d) synthetic
              video/imagery/graphics. 


Level of Effort Statement: At the recommended
              level of support, the PI will make every attempt to meet the original scope and
              level of the project. 

