Title       : STTR Phase I: Magneto-Rheological Fluids for Sensor Actuator Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9903714

Award Number: 9903714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raja Kalyanaraman raja@matmod.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Modification Inc
	      2721-D Merrilee Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220310113    703/560-1371

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 1505,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                       This  Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project
              addresses the key requirement for the large diameter dish antennas, which is
              the ability to switch rapidly between positions of various satellites in the
              sky with minimum structural vibration.  In order to minimize signal distortions
              due to vibrations various damping mechanisms are employed, which include
              material damping, friction damping, viscoelastic damping and viscous damping. 
              A present method of reducing the vibration involves modifying the mass and
              stiffness of the structure by using polymer-based composites.  Similarly in
              wind turbines, structural distortions due to aerodynamic effect in combination
              with the vibration related to the spinning of the blade reduce the efficiency
              of energy generation.  Conventional hydraulic dampers and springs are not the
              best solutions for these applications. The proposer will use MR fluid based
              'smart sensor' based actuator systems to reduce vibrations in structures
              similar to the ones mentioned above.  Magneto-rheological (MR) fluids exhibit
              rapid change in viscosity (0 to 105) as a function of applied magnetic field. 
              Their speed of response is of the order of millisecond, which make them the
              ideal fluids for 'smart actuators' or dampers.  MR fluid based actuators are
              simple in construction and are compact.  
         MR fluid based actuator
              will find wide application in damping vibrations in bridges, dish antennas,
              wind turbines, gas turbines.  They can also replace shock absorbers in car and
              trucks to reduce vibration and tilting of the automobile during turning.  Since
              the viscosity of these fluids can be controlled as a function of current they
              can also be used in variable resistance fitness or exercise machines.

