Title       : Dissertation Research: Imperial Political Economy and Resource Exploitation in
               the Cotahuasi Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9903508

Award Number: 9903508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber schreibk@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. Justin Jennings will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Jennings has conducted preliminary
              archaeological survey in the Cotahuasi Valley located in the Andes Mountains in
              southern Peru and with National Science Foundation support he will return for
              an intensive twelve month field season. While very remote and difficult of
              access, the valley's rich mineral resources which include gold, silver and rock
              salt make it an important location and the Spanish as well as preceding empires
              incorporated the region into their political systems. The goal of Mr. Jennings
              research is to compare the organization of Cotahuasi during three cultural
              periods. The region was first a part of the Wari empire which had its core in
              the southern Peruvian highlands. After Wari's eclipse the Valley was ruled by
              the Inca and finally by the Spanish in early historic times. "Empires" by
              definition consist of a ruling core  which through a combination of force and
              other means subjugate other ethnic groups to bring them under centralized rule.
              The methods of control and means for incorporation may vary greatly. In some
              instances subjugation was primarily through tightly organized trade, in others
              through a system of indirect rule and in others through direct local oversight
              and military force. Through comparison of various methods in one region during
              three time periods it should be possible to gain insight into the nature of
              decision making within empires and the organizational constraints imposed by
              geographic distance and cultural perspective.

Mr. Jennings has constructed a
              model which describes the material correlates likely to accompany differing
              methods of control and will determine through field research which most closely
              fits the data for each time period. He will conduct a large scale surface
              survey and will use remains of buildings  and other features, their location
              and artifactual evidence - mostly ceramics - associated with them to
              reconstruct settlement patterns for each period. In particular he will look for
              intrusive styles which denote the presence of outsiders. He will also attempt
              to reconstruct the organization of resource extraction to determine whether
              this changes in intensity over time. 

This research is important for several
              reasons. It is cross cultural in nature and will provide an opportunity to
              compare, in a controlled geographic context, European and non-European systems
              of political and economic organization. It will provide archaeological data
              from a poorly known part of South America which will be of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

