Title       : Machining of Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9903838

Award Number: 9903838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hocken hocken@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Patten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harischandra P. Cherukuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hocken
EEC-9903838

This project is funded as a part of the EEC initiative on
              Research Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D.  The cooperating partners are
              the University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC) - Center for Precision
              Metrology, and Third Wave Systems, Inc., a small firm headquartered in
              Minneapolis, MN that provides simulation technology for the metal processing
              industry.  The Center and the small firm will jointly develop the science and
              technology base to machine and model the cutting of ceramic materials.  These
              results will be useful to help manufacturers produce ceramic components for
              their products.  The Center will contribute its expertise in the areas of
              precision machining and metrology, materials characterization, and finite
              element analysis.  Third Wave will provide the Center with its software for
              this project and provide training as part of their in-kind contribution to the
              project.   Third Wave has extensive experience with modeling metal cutting
              operations.  However, Third Wave does not have experience with modeling the
              machining of ceramics such as silicon nitride.  The collaborative R&D will
              afford Third Wave the opportunity to be directly involved in the research
              effort to develop a machining simulation package for ceramic workpieces such as
              silicon nitride.    The work is an outgrowth of over two years of discussion
              between UNC and Third Wave to establish a joint collaborative effort.  The
              interest has always been and continues to be very high, but the hurdles from
              both the small firm and the university have been sufficiently high to prevent
              any progress.  The usual problems such as lack of financial resources and
              personnel availability have kept us from realizing any advances towards a
              viable research program.  Two of the Center's affiliates, Caterpillar and
              Cummins, have expressed an interest in the modeling of ceramic machining.  Both
              companies have contributed to the Center's ceramic machining project. 

