Title       : Morphology of the Anterior Vertebral Regions and Otophysic Systems of
               Clupeomorphs and Ostariophysans, with Phylogenetic Implications for the
               Clueocephala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9903533

Award Number: 9903533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry C. Grande tgrande@orion.it.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario C. dePinna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903533
Grande and dePinna
The overall goal of this project is to examine the
              historical relationship between the Clupeomorpha (e.g., herrings and anchovies)
              and the Ostariophysi (e.g., carps, minnows, catfishes) with some intriguing new
              character information. We will conduct a comparative study focusing on the
              anterior vertebral-otophysic complexes of these fishes.   Our rationale for
              examining the anterior vertebral regions of these fishes is that, from our
              preliminary investigations, and from those of other researchers, this region
              appears to be a source of phylogenetic information potentially fundamental to
              understanding the relationships of several major clupeocephalan groups.  One
              important fish group that we will focus on is the Pristigasteroidea.  This is
              an important group scientifically because it appears to have the diagnostic
              clupeiform mechanics used to enhance near-field hearing.  Further, the skeletal
              modifications are strikingly similar to those used by ostariophysans to
              transmit high frequency sound vibrations.  The Pristigasteroidea may thus hold
              the key to understanding the origin of clupeomorphs and ostariophysans, two of
              the largest fish groups in existence today.  If clupeomorphs and ostariophysans
              are related, then so, too, are their otophysic modifications.  In this study
              the P.I.s will survey all genera of pristigasteroid fishes for modifications of
              the anterior vertebrae-gasbladder complex, and describe this morphology in
              detail for the first time. We will survey and examine representatives of all
              major clupeomorph subgroups for modifications of the anterior vertebral column
              as seen in pristigasteroids, and to assess their anterior vertebral
              modifications. They will construct a data matrix of their findings based on
              their survey of clupeomorph and ostariophysan taxa.  As a test of character
              congruence, and to truly test the monophyly of Clupeomorpha, this new character
              set will be added to those characters already proposed in the literature and
              analyzed cladistically. 

