Title       : Artist Paints With Improved Durability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9903813

Award Number: 9903813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank N. Jones frank.jones@emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marek W. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Jones/Urban - Eastern Michigan U. 
EEC-9903813

This project is supported
              under the initiative on "Research Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D." 
              The study concerns joint research between the NSF IUCRC in Coatings and Golden
              Artist Colors, Inc., a small firm located in New Berlin, NY.  The Center,
              headquartered at Eastern Michigan University, is operated jointly by the
              University and North Dakota State University.  The primary objective of the
              present project is to develop well-documented acrylic polymers that can be
              formulated into artist paints with better durability than those in use today. 
              Associated objectives are to better understand how polymer structure and paint
              formulation affect long-term durability of artist paints, to develop analytical
              and test protocols for latex-based paint durability, and to initiate long-term
              testing of well-documented benchmark paints.  The project will focus on artist
              paints made from acrylic latex polymers, the largest market segment.  The
              polymers currently used in such paints are acrylic latexes that were designed
              for other, larger-scale uses, typically for exterior house paints.  Unlike
              previous studies of artist paints, this project will use latexes whose
              synthesis procedures and compositions are well documented, laying a foundation
              for future research.  The project will be effected in four or five overlapping
              stages with close coordination among Golden and Center researchers.  The stages
              are (1) synthesis of all-acrylic latexes, formulation of paints, and comparison
              with contemporary commercial acrylic latexes using conventional test methods,
              (2) analysis of paints and development of test protocols for detecting early
              change in artist paints, comparing experimental latexes with commercial
              latexes, (3) optimization of benchmark latexes and formulations for artist
              paints, (4) scale-up and distribution of an optimized latex and paints for
              long-term testing, and (5), if time permits, exploration of alternative
              approaches to artist paints.  The project will benefit the Center by expanding
              its research capacity and aiding member recruitment.  It will benefit Golden
              Artist Colors by improving product quality and enlarging its markets

