Title       : Dynamic Resource Allocation for Wireless Multimedia DS-CDMA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9903055

Award Number: 9903055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Honig mh@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with techniques for supporting integrated services
              over a wireless cellular network.  A fundamental problem is how to allocate
              radio resources to different users to optimize an overall network objective
              criterion while satisfying Quality of Service constraints.  Wireless networks
              based on Direct-Sequence (DS)-Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) networks are
              considered, since DS-CDMA is a strong contender for next generation cellular
              systems.  Radio ``resources'' in a DS-CDMA network include transmitted powers,
              processing gains, and number of assigned codes.  The focus of this research is
              on Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) in the presence of time-varying user
              requests.  The goals are to (1) Develop techniques for DRA given multiple
              traffic flows with different Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, and (2)
              Characterize performance/complexity tradeoffs associated with
these techniques
              given simple traffic and propagation models.

The investigators consider a
              series of problems and approaches for DRA  in a CDMA network based on
              progressive refinements of the system model. First, they consider a single
              class of data traffic flows within an isolated cell.  Reliability is assumed to
              be guaranteed through retransmissions, and DRA is studied
in the presence of
              time-selective fading. Two traffic flows, representative of voice and data, are
              then introduced (in the absence of fading), and the relationship between
              reassignment of resources and admission control is studied.  DRA in a
              multi-cell system is also considered taking into account measurement-based
              power constraints which limit interference to other cells.  Finally, pricing is
              investigated as a method for DRA which accounts for user utilities. Methods for
              dynamic pricing are studied in the context of the models previously
              described.


