Title       : Ecological Mechanisms Underlying Differences in Agonistic behavior Among Females
               in Two Cercopithecine Primate Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9903949

Award Number: 9903949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne A. Isbell laisbell@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will elucidate the ecological mechanisms that are
              ultimately responsible for differences between vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus
              aethiops) and patas monkeys (Erythrocebus patas) in female agonistic
              relationships within groups.  Despite their sympatry and phylogenetically close
              relationship, vervets and patas differ in their expression of female
              competitive relationships: female vervets have stable, linear dominance
              hierarchies whereas female patas have less stable, non-linear dominance
              hierarchies.  

Although theoretical and empirical evidence suggests that
              these behavioral differences can be explained ultimately by differences in some
              quality of food resources, the critical characteristic of food that is
              responsible for variation in female competitive behavior in primates still
              eludes us.  Spatial distribution of foods has long been the leading contender
              as the critical characteristic.  Recent research on this population of vervets
              and patas suggests, however, that the critical characteristic is actually
              feeding site depletion time, which is determined by food size and handling
              time.  Although the foods of patas are more widely spaced than the foods of
              vervets, they also have shorter depletion times.  More revealing is that when
              vervets forage in two adjacent habitats, they eat foods that do not differ in
              their spatial distribution but that do differ in their depletion times, and
              agonistic interactions occur more frequently in the habitat with foods having
              the longer depletion times.  Foods that are depleted slowly may be easier to
              usurp than foods that are depleted quickly.  

This project will clarify the
              roles of feeding site depletion time and interfood distance in determining the
              differences between vervets and patas in female agonistic relationships. 
              Feeding site depletion time and interfood distance will be systematically
              manipulated in a series of field experiments to determine the temporal and
              spatial threshold levels of usurpability for vervets and patas.  The thresholds
              of usurpability obtained in the experiments will then be compared to interfood
              distances and depletion times of wild foods to assess whether the thresholds
              can predict agonistic behavior over foods under natural conditions.  

