Title       : Mechanisms of Extended Defect Nucleation During PVT Growth of Silicon Carbide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9903702

Award Number: 9903702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek Skowronski ms3s@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shariar Motakef  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project represents a collaborative effort between researchers at
              Carnegie Mellon University, SUNY (Stony Brook), and Cape Simulations Inc.,
              together with crystal growth companies: Cree Research, Inc., Epitronics, Inc.,
              Northrop Grumman Corp., Airtron-Litton Corp., and II-VI, Inc. to investigate
              nucleation mechanisms of crystalline defects in SiC. The objectives of the
              project are to advance the understanding of processes responsible for
              nucleation and evolution of extended defects in SiC boules. In particular basal
              plane and screw dislocations, stacking faults, micropipes, and low angle domain
              boundaries will be investigated. The approach consists of three thrusts:(i)
              Modeling of silicon carbide Physical Vapor Transport growth with emphasis on
              thermoelastic stresses at different stages of growth. Local stress fields
              around small second phase inclusions common in PVT growth will also be modeled.
              (ii) SiC PVT growth experiments will be performed in a small scale PVT system
              in carefully optimized conditions selected to minimize defect nucleation.
              Critical process parameters will be adjusted to test models of defect
              nucleation and multiplication. Growth will be interrupted at different stages
              (in particular early seeding stages), followed by ex situ structural
              characterization. (iii) Structural characterization of SiC crystals will be
              performed by synchrotron white beam x-ray topography (SWBXT), Atomic Force
              Microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy, etching and high resolution
              x-ray diffraction (HRXRD). Density of basal plane dislocations and total
              bending of basal plane will be determined and correlated with macroscopic
              stress distributions. Nucleation of screw dislocations at early stages of
              growth and their association with stacking disorder and inclusions will be
              observed by x-ray topography and TEM. Misorientation components across low
              angle grain boundaries revealed by etching will be measured by HRXRD and their
              origin interpreted.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of materials science having high potential technological
              relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
              fundamental level to bulk crystal growth important to electronics/photonics.
              The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute to improving the cost, perform-ance and stability of advanced
              devices.  An important feature of the program is the integration of research
              and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. Graduate students participating in this
              project will gain multifaceted experience collaborating with team members. They
              will work with and improve process simulation tools, grow and characterize SiC
              crystals, take part in technology transfer, and will be exposed to work in both
              academic and industrial environments. The project is co-supported by the
              DMR/Electronic Materials program and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities).
***

