Title       : Development and Application of Size and Charge Resolved NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a9903723

Award Number: 9903723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Johnson charles johnson@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Charles Johnson of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is supported
              by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue the development of
              diffusion ordered and mobility ordered NMR methods for the resolution of
              molecules on the basis of molecular size and charge.  A major effort will be
              directed toward implementing toroid cavity detectors (TCDs) for high resolution
              NMR combined with imaging of diffusion and flow.  Experiments and computer
              simulations will be used to investigate manifestations of static field
              inhomogeneities, off-resonance effects, incomplete relaxation, and radiation
              damping that are unique to TCD images and line shapes.  Both traditional and
              TCD methods will be focused on two collaborative applications: (1) studies of
              interactions of specially designed surface active polymers in liquid and
              supercritical carbon dioxide, and  (2) studies of recently synthesized
              isolable, water soluble gold clusters protected by monolayers of tiopronin. The
              first set of experiments is motivated by the growing importance of
              liquid/supercritical carbon dioxide as a solvent system for polymerization
              reactions resulting from the environmentally driven needed to phase out
              chlorofluorocarbons, to avoid emission of volatile organic compounds, and to
              reduce aqueous waste streams.  The second set of experiments provides a testing
              ground for electrophoretic NMR methods as well as the opportunity to model
              electrokinetic properties of particles in which core radius, layer thickness of
              ligands, and degree of polydispersity can be varied.  

This project involves
              the development of novel experiments using nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy, and the application of these new techniques to significant
              chemical problems.  Environmentally benign carbon dioxide is growing in
              importance as a solvent for polymer synthesis and cleaning processes, and
              outcomes from this project will enhance the understanding needed for effective
              practical use of liquid and supercritical carbon dioxide.  Gold clusters
              protected by monolayers of organic compounds have potential applications in
              nanoscale electronic devices, chemical sensors, and biosensors, and the present
              studies will provide insights into the properties of these cluster systems. 

