Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Geochemistry at Caltech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9903699

Award Number: 9903699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204830             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Eiler eiler@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903699
Eiler

This grant provides partial support for the costs of acquiring
              a gas-source, isotope-ratio mass spectrometer and Excimer laser ablation system
              for in situ sampling of geological materials, both of which will be used in the
              geochemistry laboratory in the Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences at
              the California Institute of Technology.  The PI, John Eiler, recently began an
              appointment to the professorial faculty at Caltech and the instruments
              supported by this grant will form the core to the laboratories he supervises. 
              In addition to Eiler, the supported instruments will be used in collaborations
              including several other faculty at Caltech (including Drs. Adkins, Blake,
              Farley, Rossman, Stolper, and Yung) and with Dr. Martin Shoell (Chevron).
The
              supported instruments will provide new analytical capabilities for the PI's
              ongoing research in stable isotope geochemistry and opportunities for
              development of new research programs; in addition, they will be key components
              to a larger geochemistry laboratory integrating noble-gas and ICP mass
              spectrometers already at Caltech.  The following areas of research will be
              pursued by the PI using the supported instruments: 1) Mantle geochemistry,
              including the oxygen- and hydrogen-isotope and trace-element geochemistry of
              mantle minerals and mantle derived melts, 2) Experimental studies of isotope
              partitioning among low-temperature volatiles, to serve as a basis for studying
              the stable isotope geochemistry of the Earth's upper atmosphere, and the
              atmospheres of Mars and the Jovian satellites, and 3) compound-specific
              hydrogen isotope analysis of organic matter in meteorites and terrestrial
              sediments.  Additional research to be conducted through collaboration with
              other Caltech scientists and using the supported instruments includes: 1) study
              of the nitrogen-isotope geochemistry of atmospheric N2O, 2) U-Th-He
              thermochronometry, 3) the carbon isotope geochemistry of CO2 in urban air
              masses, and 4) oxygen and carbon isotope geochemistry of deep-sea
              corals.

***

