Title       : Pathways to Teaching Science for Understanding in Diverse Schools: Merging
               Inquiry-Based Science and Sociocultural Constructivism with Multicultural
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9903328

Award Number: 9903328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alberto Rodriguez  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the last twenty years, we have seen increasing evidence that
teacher
              education programs have little or no impact on preservice teachers'
original
              conceptions of teaching and learning. Therefore, it is imperative
that
              preservice teachers are offered better opportunities to connect what
they
              learn in the university context to the school context. This issue is
even more
              urgent in science education when one considers the calls for
finding effective
              ways to prepare secondary science teachers to meet the
needs of an
              increasingly diverse pupil population.
	Hence, the study proposed here seeks
              to explore the following
research questions:

1. What are the difficulties
              cooperating and preservice teachers encounter
while trying to implement a
              sociotransformative constructivist orientation
in diverse middle school
              classrooms (i.e., an orientation that intersects
inquiry-based science
              teaching with sociocultural constructivism and
multicultural education)?
2.
              In what ways does a sociotransformative constructivist orientation to
teaching
              enhance cooperating and preservice teachers' abilities to teach
science for
              diversity and for understanding?
3. In what ways does a sociotransformative
              constructivist orientation to
teaching enhance pupils' attitudes toward and
              academic performance in
science?
	To explore these research questions, a
              three-year longitudinal
study will be conducted, and will include three parts.
              The first part
consists of a two-week summer institute for twenty middle
              school teachers.
The hands-on and minds-on activities offered at the institute
              will be used
to illustrate how a sociotransformative constructivist
              orientation can be
implemented in the classroom. The principal investigator
              and two master
teachers (from the local area) will offer instruction. The
              second part of
the project will consist of pairing preservice teachers with
              the teachers
who participated in the summer workshop. By this time, the
              preservice
teachers would have completed a required science methods class
              based on the
same theoretical frameworks that guided the summer institute. The
              third
part of the project will consist of a follow-up study of the
              preservice
teachers after they graduate and secure teaching jobs. The new
              graduates
will be followed up for the first two years of teaching. Two
              summer
conferences will be held with cooperating and novice teachers to
              strengthen
the on-going efforts for mentorship and professional
              development.
	Data for all stages of the study will be analyzed using
              an
ethnographic approach. Thus, cooperating and preservice science
              teachers
and a focus group of their pupils will be visited regularly by the
              research
team, and on-going in-depth interviews and classroom observations
              will be
conducted. Some lessons will be videotaped and a variety of teacher-
              and
student-produced work will be gathered to add more context
              and
opportunities to contrast emerging themes and categories.
	The results of
              this study should enrich our understanding of how to
effectively prepare
              science teachers to teach for understanding in
increasingly diverse schools.
              Similarly, this study will add insights on
how to enhance the academic
              performance and attitude toward science of
diverse middle school pupils.



