Title       : Navigating Mathematical Transitions: Students' Adjustments to Fundamental
               Changes in Cirriculum and Pedagogy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9903264

Award Number: 9903264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $910921             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Smith JSmith@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


Navigating Mathematical Transitions: 
Students' Adjustments to
              Fundamental Changes in Curriculum and Pedagogy 
Principal Investigator: Jack
              Smith, Michigan State University 

Students can experience mathematical
              transitions when they move from classrooms where one perspective on doing and
              thinking about mathematics is illustrated and practiced to others where quite
              different perspectives dominate. Such discontinuities in expectations can
              seriously challenges students, who must make sense of and adjust to them.
              Mathematical transitions are now more likely given the uneven implementation of
              curricula and teaching practices inspired by the NCTM Standards. Two important
              places to search for and examine these transitions are introductory algebra (in
              middle and high school) and calculus. Curricular materials in these content
              areas and the teaching practices suggested by them can vary dramatically
              according to: (1) the fundamental objects and processes of study (equations and
              symbol manipulation procedures vs. functions, multiple representations, and
              solutions in each representation); (2) the typical problems presented to
              students (commands to manipulate symbols vs. questions about varying quantities
              in context); and (3) the organization of classroom learning (teacher
              presentation and individual problem-solving vs. these in combination with small
              group work and whole class discussion).  
	This project will develop a working
              conceptualization of mathematical transitions (i.e., major factors and how they
              interact) and analyze high school and college students' passage through them.
              Three main questions will be addressed: (1) What are the characteristics of
              successful (and unsuccessful) mathematical transitions?; (2) How do students
              navigate them?; and (3) What kinds of resources ("internal" and "external" to
              the student) support more successful transitions? Four school sites (two high
              schools and two universities) will participate. At two sites (1 high school and
              1 college, curricula and teaching practices shift from the study of equations
              and their solution, practice with many problems, individual study, and teacher
              presentation to the study of functions in multiple representations, verbal and
              numerical "answers," work on contextualized problems, and small group and whole
              group work. At the other two sites, these conditions are reversed. The project
              will select 100 students (25 per site) and track their progress through 2+
              years of mathematics. It will assess and analyze the change in their emerging
              career and educational goals, mathematics achievement, content learning,
              beliefs about mathematics and themselves as learners, daily experience and
              reactions to their work, and strategies for adjusting to different
              expectations. The project will produce a composite portrait of the experience
              and learning of the entire sample and a representative set of detailed case
              studies to illuminate the dynamics of students' experience. It will attempt to
              present its findings to teachers, parents, and administrators, as well as
              researchers. 


