Title       : Collaborative Research: Long Term Diapause and Spreading of Risk Across the Life
               Cycle.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9903814

Award Number: 9903814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia Gumpertz gumpertz@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Ellner  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903814
Ellner

This research project is an investigation of the
              characteristics that permit organisms to survive in environments that vary
              though time.  This issue will be explored for two populations of freshwater
              crustaceans (copepods) that experience year-to-year changes in the depths of
              the lakes in which they live.  Previous studies have shown that the copepods
              are of two kinds:  those with a long-term dormancy that makes it possible for
              them to survive harsh periods; and those possessing a low-risk life history
              while they are active in the water column.  This project asks under what
              conditions these two "strategies" should be expected to coexist, and whether
              the organisms possessing them differ genetically.  The work involves
              collections of active animals and dormant eggs from lakes, combined with
              laboratory breeding experiments.  The data will then be compared with
              theoretical predictions to gain a fuller understanding of organism survival in
              changing environments.

One projected effect of global environmental change
              is an increase in climate variation among years.  This temporal variation is a
              special challenge for organisms because characters that work well under one set
              of conditions may not work under another.   According to theory, organisms may
              be expected to evolve compromise, or "bet-hedging" life histories that permit
              them to survive under such conditions.  This project asks if the
              characteristics organisms possess are in fact those predicted by theory.  The
              answer will help in understanding the long-term and short-term responses of
              organisms to changing environments.

 

