Title       : STTR Phase I: In Situ Species and Temperature Sensor for Harsh Industrial
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9903624

Award Number: 9903624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99656              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Segall jsegall@metrolaserinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MetroLaser, Inc.
	      2572 White Road
	      Irvine, CA  927146236    949/553-0688

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to
              produce compact, rugged sensors capable of direct, non-intrusive, real-time
              measurements of chemical concentrations and local temperature in hostile
              environments such as gas turbine engines and other high- temperature and
              pressure industrial processes. This would permit greater control and
              optimization of those processes than is currently possible. Most current sensor
              technologies must rely on extractive sampling systems that have slow response
              times, require considerable maintenance and may also complicate interpretation
              of sensor data. Near-infrared tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy
              (TDLAS) is a rapidly maturing technique for the quantitative determination of
              trace species concentrations and gas temperature. To date, its use has been
              limited to measurements in environments at or below 1 atmosphere. However,
              recent innovations have demonstrated that quantitative TDLAS measurements can
              be performed at higher pressures (up to 20 atm) and at elevated temperatures.
              We propose to develop this novel technology to produce an in situ sensor for
              harsh industrial environments. 
     The proposed sensor will incorporate
              near- infrared, room-temperature diode lasers, fiber-optics, and absorption
              spectroscopy techniques to enable in situ measurements of species
              concentrations and gas temperature. The fiber-coupled diode-laser sensor will
              be easy to implement and enable wavelength multiplexing for simultaneous
              multi-species measurements at multiple locations.  The proposed sensor may be
              applied for real-time in situ measurements of chemical concentrations and gas
              temperature for monitoring and control of gas turbine combustors, waste
              incinerators, advanced propulsion systems and other high temperature, high
              pressure industrial processes.


