Title       : Carboxylate Salt Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9903917

Award Number: 9903917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley D. Smith smith.115@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project explores various aspects of carboxylate salt receptors, including
              membranes selective for specific aromatic acid salts, NMR studies of membrane
              diffusion, and receptors for dipeptides peculiar to bacterial membranes. 
              Salt-specific liquid membranes would allow for a low-energy, continuous, and
              environmentally benign method for separation of carboxylic acid products from
              their hydrocarbon feedstocks.  Pulsed field-gradient NMR has shown that
              membrane diffusion constant is not always independent of the identity of the
              metal cation.  Natural carboxylic ionophores will be studied to determine the
              extent and nature of this effect.  Combinatorial methods will permit the
              identification of molecules that bind selective with the C-terminus of
              dipeptides that, by extension, will provide mimics for such important
              antibiotics as vancomycin.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program continues support for the research project of Professor
              Bradley D. Smith of The University of Notre Dame.  Professor Smith explores the
              ability of membrane-bound molecules to identify specific carboxylic acids and
              to bind to them.  This phenomenon is important because of potential industrial
              applications  for the selective isolation of specific substances by their
              preferential transport across a membrane.  Additionally, a better understanding
              of bacterial membranes and the nature of certain antibiotic molecules will be
              gained.



