Title       : Toxicology, Insect Specificity, and Chemistry of a Novel Peptidic Insecticide -
               TMOF
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9903837

Award Number: 9903837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Stinner Ron Stinner@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              david a. schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest Hodgson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Linderman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
EEC-9903837
Stinner/North Carolina State U.

This project is supported
              under the initiative on "Research Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D." 
              The study concerns joint research between the Center for Integrated Pest
              Management, an NSF IUCRC, and Insect Biotechnology, Inc., a small firm in
              Durham, NC.  Insect Biotechnology, Inc. (IBI) is developing a new, biorational
              insecticide technology (Trypsin Modulating Oostatic Factor, TMOF) that is
              target specific, nontoxic to nontarget organisms, and biodegradable with a
              short half-life in the environment.  In the present study, techniques will be
              developed to ascertain the presence of the TMOF mechanism in a given insect
              species, to perform bioassays for the TMOF compound(s) and isolate and
              characterize the active TMOF chemical species. Chemical compounds designed to
              mimic these new TMOFs will be synthesized and tested for activity.  IBI will
              assign one postdoctoral trainee to work in the Center.  Personnel of the Center
              and IBI will hold bimonthly meetings.  IBI will prepare and assay TMOF peptide
              analogues. This technology represents a new pest control tool with wide
              applicability, coupled with environmental and health safety and is a key to
              management options under the new Food Quality Protection Act regulations being
              promulgated by EPA.  This project offers IBI the opportunity to interact with
              key corporate members of the Center (and vice versa) to enhance the
              incorporation of IBI's technology into new management schemes and older
              mainstream products.  The firm's peptide-based technology has a potential to be
              one of the next generation of biorational, safe insecticides.

