Title       : Fundamental Understanding of Superplasticity in Nanocrystalline Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9903321

Award Number: 9903321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amiya K. Mukherjee akmukherjee@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9903321
Mukherjee

Exploring a combination of methods for producing
              nanocrystalline materials, this experimental program examines superplastic
              deformation of nanostructured metals and intermetallic alloys.  Previous
              experimental investigations have revealed high flow stress, extensive strain
              hardening, and correlation between microstructural instability and
              superplasticity in nanostructured materials.  A specially designed and
              instrumented tensile testing device has been constructed for conducting
              precision mechanical tests.  The nanostructure existing before and after
              deformation is investigated using transmission electron microscopy, x-ray
              diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry and internal friction methods. 
              The scientific goal is to correlate the microstructural information with the
              mechanical data obtained to improve theoretical models of superplasticity. 
              Special emphasis is given to the difficulty of intragranular dislocation
              generation within the matrix of nanoscaled metals and its implication to slip
              accommodation processes in current models of superplasticity.  The state of
              grain boundary structure and the role of grain boundary dislocations in the
              interface sliding process are examined as the grain size decreases to nanoscale
              dimensions.  A related aspect is considered, whether an observed increase in
              superplastic strain rate and/or decrease in superplastic temperature with
              decreasing grain size are a general phenomenon.
%%%
This is a renewal
              proposal designed to gain fundamental understanding of superplasticity in
              nanocrystalline materials.  The phenomenon of sliding along the grain
              interfaces is one of the dominant rheological characteristics in
              superplasticity.  Ultrafine grained nanocrystalline materials contain a large
              density of interfaces and, therefore, offer a unique opportunity to study the
              structural state of grain boundaries and their role in superplasticity.
***

