Title       : Concepts And Algorithms For Power Network Reliability Evaluation Using
               Self-Organizing Maps And New Insights Into The Structure Of State Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a9903747

Award Number: 9903747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chanan Singh singh@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to investigate and develop concepts and
              methods for reliability analysis of power networks.  The emphasis is both on
              system and nodal reliability.  The terms node and area are used interchangeably
              in this proposal to represent a single major load or generation injection point
              or a collection. of such points.  The research conducted under the previous NSF
              support has led to several insights.  The proposed research is based on these
              insights as well as new concepts for investigation.  Following will be the
              major thrusts of this investigation.

Several properties of the multi-node
              power networks have been identified.  These properties of the multi-node power
              systems will be rigorously proven and used to improve the existing algorithms
              as well as develop more efficient methods of reliability analysis of power
              systems.  

The basic idea of boundary point method has been proposed on
              these properties.  This ideal will be investigated to find means to make it a
              computationally efficient method.

Three concepts have been proposed for
              developing more efficient methods of multi-node reliability analysis.  These
              concepts have been identified based on the insights that we have obtained
              during our previous investigation .  These concepts will be explored in detail
              and more techniques will be developed.  

Often there is an area of interest
              for investigation and one would like to obtain reliability of this
              area
efficiently.  A method is proposed for determining the reliability of a
              node of interest without analyzing the whole system.  This method will be
              explored, implemented and tested.  

The self-organizing maps (SOM) provide
              the capability to compress data and extract relationships.  The SOM concept
              will be investigated for multi-node reliability evaluation.  It appears that
              combination of SOM and Monte Carlo Simulation could result in a new way of
              analyzing the reliability of power networks.  

Power systems are capacitated
              networks.  The developed techniques will also be investigated for applications
              to other capacitated networks such as telecommunication, gas-flow and
              water-flow networks.     

