Title       : Dissertation Research: Species Boundaries and Conservation Units in the Family
               Lemuridae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9903782

Award Number: 9903782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5930               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeSalle desalle@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eleanor J. Sterling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The researchers will use diagnostic molecular techniques to investigate species
              boundaries, hybrid zones, and conservation units in three endangered species
              from the family Lemuridae, Eulemur fulvus (brown lemur),
Eulemur macaco 
              (black lemur), and Varecia variegata variegata (black and white ruffed lemur).
              Diagnosis is an objective methodology which allows for the straightforward
              assessment of fixed differences between populations. In order for diagnosis to
              be achieved, fixed and different attributes must be found between populations.
              These attributes will be used to characterize populations as distinct from one
              another which can help in the researchers' exploration of evolutionary
              processes that impact species boundaries, hybrid zones, and conservation units.
              In this study, the researchers will use rapidly evolving DNA as their source
              for diagnostic characters.

Diagnosis will be used to assess the impact
              hybrid zones have on two species in the genus Eulemur.  Purported hybrids
              between E. f. fulvus  and E. m. macaco  in the northwest of Madagascar and
              between E. f. albocollaris
(white-collared lemur) and E. f. rufus 
              (red-fronted lemur) in the southeast of the island will be examined using the
              maternal mitochondrial (d-loop, cytochrome - b and 12S) and maternal and
              paternal nuclear markers.Diagnostic mitochondrial DNA (d-loop) will also be
              used to determine conservation units in Varecia variegata variegata , to
              determine which wild caught individuals should be introduced into the captive
              population, and to determine the most genetically appropriate animals for
              introduction into a
small wild Varecia variegata variegata  population.

