Title       : Paleonanthropological Research in the Laetoli Area, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9903434

Award Number: 9903434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry Harrison terry.harrison@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Paleontological research over the past fifty years or so has demonstrated
in
              spectacular fashion the significance of sites in East Africa for
documenting
              the earliest stages in human evolution.  Laetoli in northern
Tanzania is
              renowned as one of the most important of these sites.  Previous
research at
              Laetoli by Mary Leakey in the late 1970s and early 1980s led to
major new
              discoveries that have contributed significantly to an improved
understanding
              of the evolutionary history of humans and of African faunas
in general. 
              Although this research has laid an excellent foundation for
geological and
              paleontological investigations in the region, it is evident
that there is
              still a great deal that can be learned about the course and
context of human
              evolution from continued studies at Laetoli.
        The aim of this project
              is to continue with a long-term program of
geological and paleontological
              research at Pliocene localities in the
Laetoli area that was initiated by the
              PI in the summer of 1998.  The main
objectives are to recover additional
              fossil hominids and to obtain more
detailed contextual information on the
              paleontology, geology, dating, and
paleoecology.  The proposed program of
              field research and exploration in
the Laetoli area offers the potential to
              yield new data that will
contribute significantly to a better understanding of
              the fossil evidence
for human evolution and its paleoecological context. 
              Results from these
investigations will be used to address several key problems
              in the study of
paleoanthropology: (1) clarification of the phylogenetic
              relationships and
taxonomy of early hominids; (2) a better appreciation of the
              anatomy and
paleobiology of Australopithecus afarensis - a pivotal species in
              the
interpretation of the early evolutionary history of humans, and (3)
              the
development of a more detailed and critical assessment of
              the
paleoecological associations of the Laetoli hominids in order to
              identify
factors that may have contributed to the initial divergence and
              subsequent
diversification of early hominids in Africa.

