Title       : GOALI: Novel Flame Retardant Phenolic-Epoxy Resins Processable via Rapid
               Fabrication Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9903672

Award Number: 9903672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy S. Riffle judyriffle@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Lesko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Puckett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1589,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9903672
Riffle

Polymer matrix composites are potential alternatives to steel
              and concrete for civil and industrial structures such as tunnels, mass transit
              facilities, bridges, chemical and processing plant facilities, off-shore oil
              drilling rigs, etc. where light weight and long term corrosion resistance are
              major needs.  One major obstacle, however, limiting the use of organic
              materials in public structures is their flammability.  There are currently no
              polymer matrix candidates which meet the combined requirements of
              non-flammability, good toughness and strength, processability into continuous
              fiber reinforced composites by cost effective, rapid methods such as pultrusion
              or  pressure injection molding, and low materials' costs.  Phenolic resins are
              high volume materials widely utilized for many purposes, including structural
              adhesives, composites, coatings, etc.  They are also well known to provide fire
              resistance in many applications.  Pilot studies have demonstrated that the
              reaction of selected high functionality phenolic novolac oligomers with a
              stoichiometrically deficient amount of a diepoxide can produce void free,
              relatively tough, flame retardant, tough, phenolic-epoxy thermosets from
              precursors processable into composites by rapid continuous processes, and to
              investigate the relationships between chemical structure and flame performance
              of their composites.  The research will be conducted jointly between
              researchers at Virginia Tech and the Dow Chemical Co.  Particular features
              include:  (1) Development of new epoxy crosslinking reagents containing
              phoshpine oxides and polysiloxanes for improved fire resistance without the use
              of halogenated aromatics (which lead to toxic smoke generation), (2) A study of
              the generation of controlled novolac oligomers with selective endgroup
              reactivity for preparing tough, void-free, phenolic-epoxy networks with minor
              amounts of the epoxy components, (3) Development of latent nucleophilic
              catalysts to tailor curing kinetics for continuous processing operations,
              notably pultrusion and rapid pressure injection, (4) A fundamental study of the
              relationships between chemical and network structure, and mechanical properties
              and flame resistance, and (5) The generation of continuous fiber reinforced
              composites to study relationships between resin properties and composite
              properties, including residual strength measurements after exposure to
              controlled burning to evaluated damage progression kinetics.

Cost effective,
              non-flammable polymer composites could fill a critical need for structural
              components in buildings, transportation, and other construction projects where
              confined spaces make rapid evacuation in case of fire impossible.  This
              approach could also be used to pre-fabricate components for efficient on-site
              construction.  Particular needs exist in off-shore oil platforms, navy topside
              structures and submarines, mine shafts, and mass transit facilities where both
              lightweight and reliable structural performance are essential.  This research
              addresses the development and fundamental understanding of lightweight, flame
              retardant materials, their incorporation into structural composites, and their
              performance in a fire.

