Title       : STTR Phase I: Cold Gas Dynamic Spray Processing of Bioactive
               Nano-hydroxyapatite/Titanium Nanocomposite Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9903626

Award Number: 9903626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. McCandlish mccandlish@ceramare.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ceramare Corporation
	      12-D Jules Lane
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/937-8260

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                      This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) project will test
              the feasibility of making bioactive coatings from hydrothermal nanostructured
              hydroxyapatite (n-HA) and micron-size titanium.  The two components will be
              processed by attritor milling or mechanofusion to make a nanocomposite feed
              stock. Cold Gas Dynamic Spray (CGDS) processing will be used to form a porous
              titanium coating on titanium substrates that contain a high volume fraction of
              n-HA crystallites. It is expected that such coatings on bioimplants, for
              example, would promote the in-growth of natural bone, facilitating attachment
              of the implant to surrounding bone material.  CGDS processing is a new way to
              form functional coatings from powder feedstocks.  Powder particles are
              accelerated to supersonic speeds (Mach 2) achieving high kinetic energy
              sufficient to form a dense coating upon impact with a substrate.  CGDS
              processing differs from conventional spray processes in that it does not rely
              on thermal energy to melt the feed powder or to promote bonding. Instant
              bonding is due solely to the dissipation of kinetic energy on a time scale of
              <1 microsecond.  Since the processing temperature is typically <200 C, CGDS
              processing is ideal for maintaining the nanograin-size and temperature
              sensitive crystal chemistries such as in n-HA biomaterials.  
        The CGDS
              process will prove to be a versatile, cost-effective way to fabricate
              functional surfaces that exploit the properties of nanostructured powders. 
              Since CGDS can coat large areas, complex shapes, and can be applied to a
              variety of materials it will have wide commercial impact applications for human
              medical and veterinary prosthetic implants.

