Title       : Controller Synthesis Subject to Structure and Order Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9903488

Award Number: 9903488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aniruddha Datta datta@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. P. Bhattacharyya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal aim of the research outlined in this proposal is to develop a
              systematic theory for the design of fixed order controllers.  Specifically, we
              plan to focus on characterizing the set of  all controllers of a prescribed
              order that stabilize a given plant and then optimize various design criteria
              over that stabilizing set. 

The above problem which is motivated from our
              earlier research and recent interactions with industry, is probably one of the
              most outstanding unsolved problems in the area of automatic control.  Control
              Theory has witnessed tremendous theoretical advances during the last four
              decades-the largely adhoc classical design procedures of the 1940's and 50's
              have given way to the development of elegant control synthesis techniques such
              as H2, Hoo, L1, and u.  However,  most of  these design methods cannot be
              applied to many industrial situations, such as in process control, where low
              order and fixed structure controllers such as PID's are the preferred
              controllers of choice.  This, of course, is not surprising given the fact that
              the modern approaches for designing optimal and robust controllers cannot
              incorporate the controller structure and/or order constraints into their design
              methods.  To make matters worse, some of the adhoc design methods currently
              used in industry, in lieu of the modern approaches, can lead to designs that
              are dangerously close to instability.  Thus there is a very critical need for
              developing a systematic theory for optimal and robust controller design subject
              to constraints on the controller order and structure.  We believe that the
              research being proposed here will fulfill this need.  

Preliminary results,
              indicating a clear research direction, have already been obtained. 
              Specifically, we have obtained a fundamental result generalizing the classical
              Hermit-Biehler Theorem.  Furthermore, using this result, significant strides
              have been made in solving some specific cases of the fixed order and structure
              stabilization and design problems.  Based on these, we are confident that the
              proposed research is very promising and will lead to the development of
              fundamental theory that is immediately applicable in an industrial setting. 
              

In  addition to the main thrust outlined above, we also plan to focus on
              extending our earlier unconstrained, single-input  single-output results on
              adaptive internal model control to the domain of multivariable systems,
              outlinear systems and systems subject to constraints.  This topic is of
              independent interest, especially to the process control industries. 
              Nevertheless, it fits in very naturally within the broad scope of our projects
              since internal model control is itself a popular strategy for designing PID
              controllers.  



