Title       : POWRE: Problems in Complex Hyperbolic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9903490

Award Number: 9903490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanna M. Sandler sandler@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal involves several problems in complex hyperbolic geometry.  The
              first problem involves  an
alternate proof of a discreteness result for
              complex hyperbolic ideal triangle groups which was recently
proved by Richard
              Schwartz after being conjectured by Goldman/Parker.  The proposed proof uses
              estimates of exponential sums which arise from certain trace identities.  The
              geometric interpretation of these
estimates should become apparent from
              Schwartz's computer software for visualizing the boundary of complex hyperbolic
              2-space.  Such a proof might lead to a new approach for attacking other
              discreteness problems.

The other proposed problems are related and use an
              approach involving hermitian matrices which has been utilized in several recent
              papers written by the PI and Jeff Hakim.  The first of these problems is to
              find algebraic invariants which characterize the holomorphic isometry classes
              of m-tuples of points in hyperbolic n-space  by generalizing the approach
              already implemented to establish the critical case of
m= n+1.   The algebraic
              invariants may then be used to show that the holomorphic isometry classes
may
              also be characterized by the various side lengths, together with additional
              geometric invariants.  Such a geometric description would provide a convenient
              coordinate system for studying the theory of linkages in (real or
              complex)hyperbolic space.  A possible application to discrete subgroups of
              U(n,1) is the
characterization of the finite configurations of the bisectors
              which bound Dirichlet fundamental domains.  Applying our methods over finite
              fields, one can count both the size and number of the isometry classes. 
              This
should yield interesting functions of n and the characteristic p which
              may have unanticipated combinatorial properties.  The latter properties could
              reveal new structure which also occurs over infinite fields.

The proposed
              research is to be carried out at the University of Maryland.  This POWRE
              project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
