Title       : SGER: Examining the Impact of Land-Use on Offshore Sediment Transport and Reef
               Degradation during a Category Five Hurricane on a Mountainous Caribbean Island:
               Roatan, Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9903922

Award Number: 9903922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Young rsyoung@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Young   OCE 9903922


Although there has been a general understanding that
              development may have a variety of negative impacts on nearshore reef
              ecosystems, researchers have had difficulty tying specific land use practices
              directly to changes in the physical environment, and ultimately to reef
              degradation.  This project will use previously collected physical and
              biological data, combined with new data collected after Hurricane Mitch (the
              largest storm in the region this century) to examine how various land use
              practices impact coastal storm processes along a developing, mountainous
              Caribbean shoreline.  The island of Roatan is the largest of the Bay Islands, a
              chain of islands roughly 60 km off the north coast of Honduras.  The Bay
              Islands are a part of the Belize Reef System, the second longest coral reef
              tract on the globe.  In response to the certainty of increased development, a
              long-term monitoring program was initiated in the summer of 1998.  This program
              involves the monitoring of sediment accumulation, sediment spatial
              distribution, terrigenous sediment input, percent live coral, water quality,
              and fecal coliform bacteria.  Roatan is a mountainous island that can be
              divided into distinct watersheds with distinct nearshore ecosystems that have
              little apparent exchange along shore of sediment or other physical
              characteristics.  This provides a natural setting to study the impacts of
              particular land-use practices on offshore physical parameters, and ultimately
              on the reef.  Monitoring stations were placed to monitor conditions immediately
              offshore of watersheds with varying types of land use, varying drainage, and
              varying human impact.  For example, there is a site offshore of a steep
              watershed that has little development, but it has been cleared for grazing
              cattle.  There is a site offshore of a similar watershed that is being
              subdivided and developed and a control site offshore of a similar drainage
              where there has been no human impact at all.  We hope to be able to directly
              tie particular land-use practices to storm-induced changes in offshore physical
              parameters, and then assess any impact to coral mortality.  Because baseline
              data were collected so soon before the hurricane, and there were no other
              events between site placement and the storm's passage, there should be an
              excellent record of storm-caused damage.  This study will provide the first
              good approximation of the relative impact of varying land use on coral
              mortality in response to the passage of a large tropical system.  The data
              gathered will be of important scientific and management interest.



