Title       : Theoretical Studies of the Chemical Composition of the Earth's Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9903529

Award Number: 9903529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. McElroy mbm@io.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project involves the use of numerical models to address key issues in
              tropospheric and stratospheric chemistry.  In terms of tropospheric chemistry,
              the focus is on understanding the factors controlling the global atmospheric
              methane burden.  During the past 250 years, there has been a major increase in
              the atmospheric concentration of methane.  Over the past two decades, the
              growth rate has slowed and it has been suggested that methane is approaching
              steady state in the atmosphere.  A three-dimensional chemical transport model
              driven by assimilated meteorological observations will be used to investigate
              the budgets of methane and the related species carbon monoxide and hydrogen. 
              The chemical transport model will be used in conjunction with a 4-box model to
              derive a history of methane emissions over longer time scales.   In terms of
              stratospheric chemistry, the focus of this project is on understanding the role
              of horizontal and vertical mixing in determining the distribution of
              stratospheric ozone.  Specifically, measurements will be compared with results
              of a two dimensional model with high vertical resolution to examine the effect
              of various assumptions about mixing and gravity wave induced drag.  A second
              goal is to study the effect of planetary waves emanating from the troposphere
              on the distribution of stratospheric ozone.  This effort involves the use of
              model simulations to infer the magnitude of changes in circulation required to
              reproduce observed change in total ozone and temperature at midlatitudes. 
              These results will be compared with the changes diagnosed from the NCAR/NCEP
              analysis of planetary wave forcing. 
