Title       : Traffic Control for Networks with Aggregate Quality-of-Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9903001

Award Number: 9903001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Patek sdp5f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorg Liebeherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the Internet continues to expand into new application domains, there is a
              growing demand for differentiated services that provide varying degrees of
              Quality of Service (QoS).  Until recently, the approach for service
              differentiation in the Internet has focused on providing QoS guarantees to
              individual traffic flows.  This per-flow model has not been widely embraced,
              largely due to the vast amount of state information that needs to be maintained
              in the network.  As a consequence, the network community is currently
              redefining the notion 
of QoS for the Internet, leading to a new service model
              where guarantees are made to appropriate flows, rather than to individual
              flows.

The notions of aggregate QoS which are being defined, e.g., by the
              Differentiated Services (DiffServ) working group in the IETF, are very
              different from traditional networking concepts and require novel 
algorithms
              for traffic control and provisioning.  The objective of the proposed research
              is to give fundamental insights into the nature and delivery of QoS to traffic
              aggregates, henceforth called aggregate QoS.

A central feature of service
              models for aggregate QoS is that there is no requirement for users to specify
              the composition or the destination of traffic.  This significantly complicates
              the provisioning of network resources and suggests that new, feedback-intensive
              traffic control algorithms must be developed to 
mitigate uncertainty about
              network loading.  At present there is little or no theory available to guide
              the development of such algorithms.  The proposed research will remedy this
              situation by developing analytical tools that will make aggregate QoS possible
              for the next-generation Internet.

The three main research components of this
              proposal involve development of analysis techniques and computational
              simulation experimentation.

1. The projectl proposes to develop a novel
              fluid-flow, network-optimization model that will facilitate (a) rapid analysis
              of aggregate QoS networks and (b) improved routing, based on feedback about
              network 
traffic patterns.

2. Using a new construct of so-called effective
              envelopes, the project will develop a method for computing the statistical
              multiplexing gain in a network with aggregate QoS.  Knowledge of the
              statistical multiplexing gain is essential for determining the amount of
              traffic with aggregate QoS that can be supported in a network.

3. The
              project will build a packet-level simulation environment, which will enable the
              development and testing of a wide variety of traffic control algorithms for
              aggregate QoS networks.  This research will 
help to identify metrics for
              comparing the effect of traffic control algorithms to support aggregate QoS. 
              An important part of our work is to determine the extent to which feedback-base
              traffic control can 
alleviate the provisioning problem.

By providing a
              theoretical reference frame for aggregate QoS, which provides tools and
              techniques for capacity provisioning and admission control, the proposed
              research will complement the currently ongoing 
standardization efforts for
              differentiated services on the Internet.

