Title       : Ultrasonic Phased Arrays for Nondestructive Evaluation of Cementitious Materials
               and Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9903535

Award Number: 9903535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shi-Chang Wooh scwooh@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS9903535
PI:  Shi-Chang Wooh
MIT
Ultrasonic Phased Arrays for
              Nondestructive Evaluation of Cementitious
Materials and Structures


This
              is a threeyear research proposal challenging the problems associated with
the
              nation's aging infrastructure. It is aimed to study and develop
              ultrasonic
phased array transducers most effective for assessing concrete
              structures and
cementitious materials.

Deterioration of civil
              infrastructure systems (CIS) has become a central issue
in reference to both
              safety and socioeconomic concerns. Deterioration itself is
inevitable, but
              nondestructive evaluation (NDE) may offer a solution for
preventing more
              serious consequences by detecting damage in its earlier stage.
Development of
              reliable, expeditious and effective NDE methods facilitates
early warnings of
              deterioration and structural integrity. Consequently, it
helps making decision
              of priorities on repair, retrofitting and replacement,
thus making
              contribution to assurance of public safety. Concrete structures are
major
              building blocks of CIS. As the impact of their degradation is
              widely
recognized, there are growing demands for efficient condition
              assessment
technology. NDE of structural concrete is a relatively undeveloped
              discipline
as compared with that of steel and other metals. The main mode of
              difficulty is
the heterogeneous and attenuating nature of
              concrete.

Ultrasonic phased array systems, widely employed in the area of
              medical
diagnostics, provide both quantitative measurement and imaging by
              means of
electronic scanning of a target object with an acoustic beam. This
              feature
eliminates the need of mechanical scanning and enhances
              nondestructive
inspection capabilities, which cannot be realized by static
              methods using
single element transducers. The potential advantages of the
              arrays include (1)
increased maneuverability of the ultrasonic beam, (2)
              greater area of
insonification from a fixed position, (3) high
              signal-to-noise-ratio, (4)
reduced inspection time and automated testing
              procedure, and (5) expeditious
imaging capability.

Phased arrays are
              recently extending their applications to metals and composite
materials as
              well. However, these arrays cannot be utilized for concrete since
they are
              designed without considering relevant aspects of importance. This
research
              program intends to deal with innovative low frequency phased array
ultrasonic
              sensors and their applications to cementitious materials.

It was observed
              from our previous study that acoustic focusing is more
effective in dealing
              with inhomogeneous materials, and the feasibility tests
demonstrated promising
              results that phased arrays can be utilized for concrete
if properly designed.
              Nevertheless, the analysis raised a potential problem of
enlarged "dead" zone
              that subsequently reduces effective inspectable area. This
is a serious
              deficiency from a practical standpoint, while our previous study
suggests an
              approach to resolve this challenging problem as presented in this
proposal. We
              would like to explore the possibilities of extending the study in
the proposed
              program.

The main objective of the proposed research is to examine the
              benefits and
limitations of using ultrasonic arrays for detecting cracks and
              other defects
within concrete structures. For this, a threephase research plan
              is proposed:
(1) modeling and optimization, (2) system development, and (3)
              implementation
and performance evaluation. It is anticipated that phased
              arrays will offer
extreme flexibility in transforming the data into useful
              information
presentable in either quantitative forms or imaging of defects in
              concrete.

