Title       : IXth International Conference on the Physics of Non-Crystalline Solids; Tucson,
               AZ; October 17-21, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9903468

Award Number: 9903468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Weinberg MCW@U.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Uhlmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9903468
Weinburg

The objective of the IXth International Conference on the
              Physics of Non-Crystalline Solids is to bring together a number of individuals
              from quite diverse scientific and engineering disciplines to share recent
              results and general information regarding the physics of amorphous materials.
              Some the outstanding scientists in the U.S. and abroad will gather to discuss
              problems of the amorphous state. The meeting will be highly interdisciplinary
              and both theoretical and practical aspects of materials behavior and properties
              will be presented.  The conference will be quite unique in terms of its breadth
              of scope and assemblage of such a diverse group of investigators. As a result,
              new insights to arise from the melding of ideas from the leaders of several
              diverse scientific disciplines is anticipated.  The primary topics to be
              covered include the glass transition, relaxation behavior, nucleation and
              crystallization, computer simulations, metallic glasses, amorphous polymers,
              transport phenomena, glass structure, optical processes and optical glasses, 
              immiscibility and spinodal decomposition, and fracture.  To guide the
              organization of this conference, and international advisory committee has been
              assembled. The meeting will consist of invited and contributed talks and poster
              presentations. It is anticipated that 125 people will attend the meeting. 
              Publication of most of the presentations in an issue of the Journal of
              Non-Crystalline Solids is planned.  In addition, the conference proceedings
              will be published by Elsevier. A special effort has been made to attract
              students and young researchers to the meeting.  
%%%
The International
              Conference on the Physics of Non-Crystalline Solids is held every four years. 
              The results of this meeting provide a catalyst for continued vigor in this area
              of increasing technological importance.
***

