Title       : Analyses and Measurements of Gas Turbine Blade Heat Transfer Under Unsteady High
               Free-Stream Turbulence Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9903972

Award Number: 9903972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204204             (Estimated)
Investigator: Foluso Ladeinde foluso.ladeinde@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Proposal Number: CTS  9903972

Principal Investigator:  F.
              Ladeinde and J-C Han



Obtaining first-rate performance and desirable
              thermodynamic and propulsive duty from gas turbine engines has invariably led
              to the use of higher inlet temperatures. Unfortunately, however, a severe
              problem is created by this industry trend, which are the increased heat load to
              the turbine components and the consequent thermal damage to the blades. The
              proposed work has the objective of addressing this issue using an integrated
              effort that combines high performance direct numerical simulation (DNS) of the
              relevant equations at SUNY Stony Brook, and experimental studies to validate
              the numerical models at the Turbine Heat Transfer Laboratory of Texas A & M.
              The proposed DNS study will be carried out on the IBM SP/2 supercomputer at the
              NSF-supported NPACI program at the San Diego Supercomputing Center, to take
              advantage of its massive parallelization. The ranges of the various parameters
              to be investigated are within those which are relevant to realistic engines.
              Both two-dimensional and three-dimensional simulations are planned to answer
              fundamental heat transfer-related questions concerning the measure of
              transition, the reliability of existing transition models, the crucial effects
              of free-stream turbulence intensity, length scale, heat transfer, Reynolds
              number, and Mach number. The precise mechanisms responsible for heat transfer
              will be identified and current turbine blade turbulence heat flux and Reynolds
              stress models will be evaluated and improved or discarded. The gas turbine
              industry is at the core of aerospace technology, power generation, and
              transportation and successful research is expected to lead to improvements in
              efficiency and reduction in emissions. Both the DOE advanced turbine system
              program (ATS) and the DOD integrated high performance turbine engine technology
              program (IHPTET), will benefit from this proposed work.

 
 

