Title       : Dissertation Research: Inka Strategies of Provincial Integration: Excavations in
               the Jequetepeque Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9903588

Award Number: 9903588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Donnan cdonnan@arts.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Christopher Donnan, Mr. William Sapp will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation
              at two Inca period sites in the Jequetepeque Valley in Northern Peru to
              determine the relationship between the Inca conquerors of this region and the
              prior "Chimu" inhabitants. Over the span of its ca. 10,000 year prehistory Peru
              saw the rise and fall of several empires. Coastal valleys went through cycles
              in which empires arose which forcibly incorporated local regions and ethnic
              groups into a centralized political structure. Such periods were followed by
              dissolution in which local areas once recovered a significant degree of
              autonomy. Northern coastal Peru is particularly interesting from this
              perspective because it was the seat of one empire, the "Chimu" which was then
              conquered and directly succeeded by the Inca. While a good deal is known about
              the Chimu period, much less is understood about their Incan successors and Mr.
              Sapp wants to learn how the Inca established control and governed this
              region.

Empires hold great interest for archaeologists because they provide
              an opportunity to understand how political control was exercised in
              technologically simple societies. The Inca case is particularly worthy of study
              because the Inca controlled a vast and geographically diverse region which
              extended from Equador to Argentina and incorporated inhabitants of Andean
              mountains as well as coastal desert plains. It appears that the Inca employed a
              number of strategies to govern and these ranged from direct military occupation
              and conquest to indirect rule where local elites were allowed to retain power.
              In northern Peru it is not clear whether the basic Chimu administrative
              structure was maintained or whether this was dismantled and day to day power
              devolved to the local level. It is also unclear the extent of Inca physical
              presence.

The Inca and Chimu are characterized by distinct architectural and
              ceramic styles and through excavation it is possible to determine at a
              particular site the extent to which each is present. One can also incorporate
              local regional styles into such an analysis and examine, for example whether
              blending and interweaving of elements take place. Because both ceramics and
              architecture fall within the visible realm, they make in effect, public
              statements and can considered reflections of underlying social and political
              patterns. Mr. Sapp with excavate two sites which he believes served
              administrative functions. The materials recovered will provide insight into
              Chimu - Inca interaction.

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide insight into how complex social and political entities develop and
              are maintained. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists and
              assist in training a promising young scientist.

