Title       : Dynamics of Phase Separation and Mesophase Phase Transition in Liquid Crystal
               and Rigid-Rod Polymer Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9903519

Award Number: 9903519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thein Kyu TKYU@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9903519
Kyu

The present proposal deals with polymer composites and
              electro-optical materials consisting of liquid crystals (LC) and liquid
              crystalline polymers (LCP).  It is a well-known fact that the electro-optical
              performance of polymer dispersed liquid crystals (PDLC) critically depends on
              the morphology and dispersion of liquid crystal domains.  The present proposal
              seeks basic understanding of the electro-optical performance of polymer
              dispersed liquid crystals via controlling the morphology of dispersed LX
              domains.  Emphasis has been placed on determination of the role of
              thermodynamic phase diagrams of LC/polymer mixtures on the final morphology
              including the LC dispersion and the emerging domain size.  Competition between
              the dynamics of phase separation and nematic ordering will be investigated as
              most polymer systems hardly attain an equilibrium state, particularly in the
              polymerization induced phase separation (PIPS).  This proposal covers the
              experimental and theoretical elucidation of (i) dynamics of phase transitions
              and critical phenomena in liquid crystals and side-chain liquid crystalline (or
              rigid-rod) polymers, (ii) effects of chain rigidity on dynamics of phase
              separation in binary nematics containing side-chain and main-chain liquid
              crystalline polymers, (iii) competition between the kinetics of mesophase
              ordering and dynamics of phase separation in smectic LC/polymer blends driven
              by either thermal quenching or chemical reactions and (iv) phase diagrams and
              phase separation dynamics of nanocomposites containing rigid rod polymers.  To
              demonstrate how the thermodynamic phase diagrams can guide the kinetic pathway
              for the emergence of LC domains, a kinetic model for mesophase ordering and
              phase separation in liquid crystal/polymer mixtures has been developed based on
              the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation (TGDL - Model C) involving coupling
              between the concentration and orientational order (liquid crystal ordering)
              parameters.  It is proposed to incorporate the Flory-Huggins (FH) theory for
              isotropic mixing and Maier-Saupe (MS) free energy functional for nematic
              ordering (or Maier-Saupe-McMillan (MSM) theory for smectic ordering) into the
              TDGL equation. The physical significance of all parameters pertaining  to the
              coupled TDGL - Model C equations will be clarified and their predictive
              capabilities will be demonstrated.  The dynamics of pattern formation will be
              analyzed in comparison with recent experimental observations.  Recognizing the
              possible control of domain morphology and improved understanding of mesogenic
              interactions, the proposed study will be extended to nano-composites.  If
              successful, the proposed theory would alleviate some of the problems such as
              the trial and error approach that leads to irreproducibility of the desired
              domain morphology and low yields in fabrication of PDLC films.

During this
              decade we have witnessed an immense growth in liquid crystal based optical
              devices such as flat panel displays.  The demand for advanced organic and
              polymeric electro-optical materials is expected to increase in the new
              millenium.  This area of flat panel displays has been dominated by Far East
              countries, primarily Japan.  It is important that the United States maintains
              its competitive edge through the pioneering basic research in this ever-growing
              and promising technology.  The proposed experimental and theoretical works on
              liquid crystal/polymeric composites will contribute to the development of new
              optical devices crucial for US industries through basic scientific
              understanding.  Another important point is that all simulation programs have
              been written in Visual C++ to display the emergence of LC domain morphology in
              live-mode with the aid of an LCD projector.  Such interactive programs are
              useful for classroom teaching and thus should be highly beneficial in the
              training of future scientists and engineers in the US.  This new methodology of
              teaching is in line with the goal of the University of Akron in attaining
              Carnegie Teaching Academy status.

