Title       : Adaptive Schemes for Multi-Carrier Based Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9903381

Award Number: 9903381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yeheskel Bar-Ness barness@yegal.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Multi-carrier based communication systems have the advantage of better
              exploitation of the channel bandwidth, and hence simple receivers design.  As a
              result they find broad applications in wireline as well as wireless
              environments.  Examples are the high-rate digital subscriber line (HDSL),
              digital audio broadcasting (DAD) and digital terrestrial television
              broadcasting (DTTB).  Additionally, the use of multi-carrier techniques in
              wireless PCS has been considered in the IMT-2000 (third generation mobile
              communication systems) standardization process.  For multi-user application,
              these systems are referred to as Multi-Carrier Code Division Multiple Access
              (MC-CDMA).

The performance of MC-CDMA is limited by multiusers interference
              (MUI).  Optimal multi-user detection accomplishes MUI cancellation by
              exploiting the knowledge of all users' signatures.  Due to complexity of the
              optimum multi-user detector, various sub-optimum detectors structures have been
              considered.  In a multicarrier modulated system it is advantageous to use
              closely spaced subcarriers, but not without high sensitivity of performance to
              frequency offset.  The latter might be caused by Doppler shift as result of
              mobile movement, as well as from a mismatch between the carrier frequencies at
              the transmitter and receiver.  In addition, the constellation of the desired
              signal at each subcarrier is rotated.  This in turn results in inter-rail
              interference between the I- and Q-rails, which further reduces the carrier to
              interference ration (CIR).  It was found that, in contrast to DS-CDMA, for
              MC-CDMA the conventional full dimensional decorrelator is dependent on the
              channel, prompting the use of an adaptive detector, which will be examined in
              this research.  Additionally, where MC-CDMA is considered for downlink, the
              investigators will use, a novel reduced complexity detector which does not
              require the knowledge of the other users' codes, but instead, uses a so-called
              compound code to represent all the interferers.  This effectively reduces the
              complexity to a 2 x 2 detector, which is equivalent to the complexity of a
              full-dimensional detector in the case of only two active users.  The
              investigators will also develop an adaptive detector that has he capability to
              correct the effects of a frequency offset utilizing a bootstrap based adaptive
              signal separator. 

