Title       : Reliable multicast for Core-Based Multicast Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  2001    
File        : a9903160

Award Number: 9903160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan F. Zheng   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chao-Ju Hou  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Reliable multicast is an important and challenging problem which is yet to be
              solved in order to deploy multicast services on the Internet.  In this
              proposal, the researchers propose to design, implement, and evaluate a reliable
              multicast scheme for core-based multicast routing, with the objectives of
              avoiding NAK implosion and duplicate replies, reducing recovery latency,
              achieving recovery isolation, and providing adaptivity to dynamic
              topology/membership changes.

Most exsiting reliable multicast schemes focus
              on source-based multicast trees.  They either cannot be directly deployed in
              core-based multicast trees or may render sub-optimal performance when directly
              deployed.  The major difficulty lies in that an on-tree router on a core-based
              tree does not know, due to lack of the per-source information, how to direct a
              retransmission request toward the source or some designated replier router. The
              researchers propose to design a simple, yet effective scheme that facilitates
              routers on a core-based tree to properly direct retransmission requests so as
              to closely emulate the optimal recovery scenario achieved in the turning point
              approach.  Specifically, the researchers consider the following
research
              issues:

(1) To solve the problem of identifying upstream/downstream
              interfaces (with respect to a source), The researchers  will (i) define a new
              path_info IP Option that carries the path information and have some of the data
              packets in a connection carry this IP Option. Each receiver that receives a
              data packet with this IP Option stores the path information for future use; and
              (ii) define a new TP_info IP Option to be carried in the retransmission
              requests so that a router knows how to direct retransmission requests.

(2)
              To conduct local recovery in the case of membership and topology changes,the
              researchers will carefully devise a mechanism, with the use of on-line error
              statistics collection, soft state caching, and Bayesian analysis, for selecting
              designated hosts (called repliers) to which direct retransmission requests will
              be forwarded.  A router now keeps track of error statistics over each of its
              interfaces and selects, with the use of
Bayesian analysis, the most reliable
              links as replier links.

(3) As indicated in [levine:98], a pure NAK-based
              scheme requires an infinite buffer at the source for correct operation.  The
              researchers  will devise a delayed ACK approach so that both sources and
              repliers can purge data packets that have been received by all the group
              members.

(4) For the proposed scheme to work in the existence of routers
              that do not have the reliable multicast capability, the researchers  will
              devise a mechanism to detect clouds and to properly direct retransmission
              routers and reply messages through them, without loss of recovery
              isolation.

The proposed research is a combination of two synergistic
              components:  development of all the component mechanisms in an analytic
              framework and their validation with software system building and experiments.
              We will pursue this research by taking advantage of the GateD Multicast source
              code (developed by the GateD Consortium, Merit Network, Inc.) as a software
              platform, and prototyping the proposed reliable multicast scheme (partially in
              the core-based multicast routing daemon and partially as the routing functions
              provided in the kernel).  With the help of the Ohio Supercomputing Center (OSC)
              and OSU Medical Center, the researchers will use asdatabase/server centered on
              large amounts of patient images acquired from MR and CT as a representative
              multicast application to illustrate the key functional, reliable, scalable, and
              adaptive characteristics of the prototype software.
