Title       : SGER: Impact of Hurricane Georges and Recovery Along NE Gulf Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9903984

Award Number: 9903984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49808              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Stone gagreg@unix1.sncc.1su.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ping Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry H. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9903984
Stone


The recent landfall of Hurricane Georges along the
              Mississippi coast has afforded us a unique opportunity to address an as yet
              unanswered question: "How does the post-storm response of a typically sediment
              rich, regressive/progradational system compare with that of a sediment starved,
              typically transgressive barrier system?"  The post-storm adjustment of sediment
              rich, retrogressive systems has not been investigated in any detail.  However,
              our preliminary investigations indicate that the longer term evolution of
              fluvially dominated systems in a coastal environment, such as the modern
              Mississippi River delta plain, are likely significantly influenced by
              catastrophic events such as Hurricane Georges---particularly on their seaward
              margins where subdelta growth is occurring and distributaries are prograding.
              While the response to the storm is evident and will be documented in more
              detail in this study, the post-storm adjustment phase is not at all understood.
               In addition, our understanding of the initial phases of barrier island
              recovery after severe storms is based primarily on supposition, largely
              governed by our interpretation of the day-to-day dynamics of coastal systems
              and associated processes during fairweather and storms of lesser magnitude. 
              Our primary objective is to quantify and better comprehend the post-storm
              adjustment of two geomorphologically distinct environments:  an actively
              building, fluvially dominated, sediment rich environment located in the 
              Birdsfoot delta, Louisiana and a sediment starved, transgressive system
              comprised of  Chandeleur Island (Louisiana), West Ship Island (Mississippi) and
              Santa Rosa Island (Florida) by establishing key monitoring sites that can be
              reoccupied over time.






