Title       : Low-Dimensional Models for Turbulent Heat Transfer in Flexible Cylinder Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9903346

Award Number: 9903346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morteza Gharib mory@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    

Proposal Number: CTS 9903346  

Principal Investigator:   M.
              Gharib  

This award, in conjunction with award 9901732, is to support an
              investigation into the flow around and the heat transfer from tube banks.
              Turbulent heat transfer from tube banks depends strongly on the specific
              geometric configuration employed, and is influenced substantially by the
              flow-induced vibrations that the tubes may be subject to. In particular, the
              recent use of high strength materials has produced more slender structures,
              which are more susceptible to vibration.  Existing models for predicting heat
              transfer and flow-induced vibrations are semi-empirical and even the most
              sophisticated ones depend critically on time-dependent coefficients, which are
              difficult to measure.  In this work a model is proposed that exhibit some of
              the complexity of turbulent heat transfer in flexible cylinder arrays but in a
              simplified setting.  Evidence from experimental and direct numerical simulation
              studies has shown that despite their complexity this type of coupled systems
              exhibit low-dimensionality and can be modeled effectively using dynamical
              systems techniques motivated by the theory of approximate inertial manifolds
              using nonlinear Galerkin models based on hierarchical modes extracted from
              numerical and experimental data bases using the ``method of snapshots". These
              models, in addition to the overall force coefficients and Nusselt number,
              provide detailed spatio-temporal description of the velocity and temperature
              fields. The experimental and numerical data bases will be obtained at one
              representative value of Peclet number using DPIV/T measurements and dynamic
              spectral simulations developed in a previous NSF grant. More specifically, the
              objective of this renewal grant is two-fold: First, to develop new experimental
              and simulation tools that will enable high temporal and spatial resolution of
              general flow/heat-structure interaction problems. Second, to construct reduced
              dynamical models that retain the spatio-temporal complexity of the full systems
              and predict accurately the mean and fluctuating quantities of interest. 


