Title       : GOALI: Preparation, Characterization and Kinetic Behavior of Unique Carbon
               Supported Bimetallic Cu Catalysts for the Selective Dehydrogenation of Alcohols
               and Diols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a9903760

Award Number: 9903760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Terry K. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry R. Ebner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor R. Terry K. Baker at Northeastern University, in collaboration with
              Prof. Vannice at Penn State University, and Drs. Friedman and Ebner at Monsanto
              Corporation, will study the preparation and characterization of bimetallic
              Cu-(Pt, Pd, Rh) particles supported on carbon (in the activated, graphic fiber,
              and diamond forms).  They will determine the kinetics and catalytic mechanisms
              of vapor-phase and liquid-phase dehydrogenation of alcohols to alkenes,
              reactions that are relevant to industrial processes utilized by Monsanto.  A
              broad motivation for the research is the potential replacement of
              environmentally hazardous copper chromite catalysts used in those processes. 
              Also environmentally important is the development of highly selective,
              wasteless processes.  At the fundamental level there is outstanding need for
              better understanding of bimetallic nanoparticle properties.  In particular for
              alcohol dehydrogenation the catalytic property dependence on composition,
              structure, solid phases, morphology, electric state, and dispersion of
              bimetallic nanoparticles supported on various types carbon substrates is poorly
              known or little understood.  Differences of behavior for vapor and liquid phase
              catalysis have not been investigated.  Drs. Baker and Vannice will prepare the
              novel catalysts.  Dr. Vannice will characterize particle size and
              surface-functional composition by XRD, IR, TEM and chemisorptoin while Dr.
              Baker will provide morphology and chemical state of the bimetallic particles by
              Controlled Atmosphere Electron Microscopy and TEM.  Drs. Friedman and Ebner
              will provide additoinal chemical composition and structural information by XPS
              and EXAFS.  Dr. Vannice will provide catalytic kinetics measurements for the
              vapor-phase dehydrogenation of n-butanol, 3-methylbutanol, crotyl alcohol and
              isopropanol, while Monsanto will do similar determinations for the liquid-phase
              reactions.
