Title       : Ceramic Production and Social Interaction: Expanding a Regional Provenance Data
               Base and Exploring a Key Production Area for Salado Polychrome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9903332

Award Number: 9903332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Miksa emiksa@desert.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Doelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Center for Desert Archaeol
	      3975 N. Tucson Blvd.
	      Tucson, AZ  857161037    520/881-2244

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Elizabeth Miksa will develop a
              method for determining manufacturing location of prehistoric pottery produced
              in the San Pedro River Valley of Arizona and Sonora. This area falls within the
              boundaries of the Hohokam regional system which extended over an area of more
              than 100,000 square km. Hohokam peoples achieved a high level of social
              integration in an arid part of the US Southwest in an environment which was not
              only dry but also experienced large and unpredictable shifts in rainfall from
              year to year and season to season. Through the maintenance of canals and
              irrigation agriculture it was possible to integrate large numbers of people
              into a single social system and sustain a settled village way of life. Although
              it is clear, through the analysis of several distinctive pottery types, that
              individual villages shared a common ideology and engaged in trade and other
              interactions, the details of these networks and how they changed over time are
              poorly understood. The picture is complicated by the fact that complex pottery
              styles were imitated and the existence of a shared motif, for example, does not
              mean that all vessels exhibiting it were produced at single site. Through
              petrographic and chemical analysis of ceramics, Dr. Miksa will gain new insight
              into trade and interaction networks. She will develop a sand petrofacies method
              for sourcing ceramics. Based on bedrock geology, it is highly likely that sand
              varies in composition across the San Pedro River drainage. Because aboriginal
              potters in the Southwest added sand to pot making clay for temper and because
              sand was usually collected from local sources, by analyzing the sand inclusions
              in prehistoric pottery it should be possible to determine their point of
              origin. Dr. Miksa will characterize sand from a number of locales within the
              river valley and then apply the results to a prehistoric sample. She will use
              trace element analysis (obtained through INAA) to provide supplementary
              information in situations where pastes are different but tempers the
              same.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide a
              model for sand temper analysis which, hopefully, can be applied in many regions
              of the world. The work will also shed light on the social and political
              organization within the prehistoric US Southwest.

