Title       : Documenting Southeastern US Prehistoric Cave Art
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a9903076

Award Number: 9903076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan F. Simek SIMEK@UTKVX  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jan Simek and his colleagues will
              record and date Southeastern USA rock art sites. Although such occurrences were
              first discovered in the 1950s recent research has demonstrated that prehistoric
              Native Americans across much of this region entered the "dark zone" of caves
              where no light penetrated and engraved, painted and sculpted cave walls. In
              some instances layers of mud which naturally covered the walls were formed into
              bas reliefs and these fragile forms are highly susceptible to destruction.
              Through analysis of a series of sites, many discovered by Dr. Simek and his
              team, it has been demonstrated that the earliest examples date to ca. 2,500 and
              that the tradition continued into historic times. In some cases the art is
              associated with human burial or other activity such as flint mining. In others
              the occurrences are isolated. Because artificial light sources were required to
              produce the art, burned torch fragments, amenable to radiocarbon dating, have
              been found. Dr. Simek and his colleagues will collect a large series of
              radiocarbon samples and submit these for laboratory analysis. Photographs and
              related data will be archived in an electronic database at the University of
              Tennessee and will be made available to resource managers and scholars
              interested in Southeastern prehistoric art and religion; electronic storage of
              the data will greatly enhance access for the archaeological community. In
              conjunction with basic documentation, detailed contextual studies will be
              performed in several art caves. Analysis of iconographic content, spatial
              variation of individual images, and aspects of composition will be undertaken.
              This will shed new light on the variation and spatial distribution of
              prehistoric Southeastern behavior. 

     This research is important because
              it will increase understanding of the cave art phenomenon itself, its evolution
              and cultural context, and will aid in developing plans for conserving and
              protecting these rare and precious archaeological resources. Many of the cave
              art sites are on private land and menaced by looters and vandals.

