Title       : Physically-Based Computational Modeling of Saturated Soil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9523959

Award Number: 9523959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sia Nemat-Nasser sia@halebopp.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9523959  Nemat-Nasser  Major earthquakes can cause lateral and vertical motion
              of the  surface soil layers, which may result in large permanent dis 
              placements. A consequence is damaged underground pipelines and  surface
              facilities such as roads, bridges, and buildings. In  coastal regions,
              saturated soils may liquefy during an  earthquake, resulting in damage to
              man-made facilities.    The necessary scientific tools for assisting soil
              engineers and  geophysicists concerned with liquefaction and the resulting soil
               failure are physically-based computational models with predictive  capability.
              The aim of this research program is to develop such  tools. The goal is to
              create science-based computational tools  with predictive capability in order
              to address the liquefaction  and soil failure phenomena.    The following tasks
              are addressed:    1. Examine by direct observation the history of the
              deformation  of  lines and layers of lead-doped granules embedded in a soil 
              sample, and relate this to the overall response. A special cell  with X-ray
              attachment provides a tool to study the kinematics of  deformation inside the
              sample. It provides the capability to  obtain insight into the deformation of a
              saturated particulate  medium during its liquefaction. It also permits the
              study of the  inception and growth of shearbands. Preliminary observations 
              suggest that even in a liquefied sample, shearbands can be  induced, as the
              deformation becomes large, during each cycle. The  development of such
              shearbands is examined as they develop, and  how they change as the deformation
              cycle is reversed.  Both  drained and undrained samples are investigated.    2.
              Directly observe and quantify the microstructure in shearband  zones. The
              special cell is used to create controlled shearbanding  in both drained and
              undrained saturated samples. The sample is  then impregnated with polyester
              resin, and solidified. In this  manner, the microstructure of the shearbands
              within the sample  can be captured. The sand mass is so lidified in situ, once
              a  desired state is reached. Thin sections are cut from this  solidified sample
              for microscopic analysis. During shear  localization, the particles in the
              region which eventually forms  the localized band may undergo large rotations,
              whereas particles  adjacent to the eventual shearing zone may still retain
              their  orientation and relative position that existed prior to the 
              localization. By studying the microstructure of a zone adjacent  to the
              localized region and comparing the deformation with that  within the zone, a
              complete picture of the transition from a  homogeneous to a highly localized
              heterogeneous deformation state  can be documented, Pictures are taken of the
              shear zones and  their neighborhoods for complete statistical and deterministic
               analysis. These results are used to guide the theoretical  modeling of the
              deformation prior to shearband inception, during  shearband formation, and
              within the shearband, once it has fully  developed.  ***
