Title       : The Behavior and Design of Reactors with Complex Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9523511

Award Number: 9523511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70116              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin R. Feinberg feinberg@che.rocester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Feinberg - 9523511      This work is a continuation of the
              development of chemical reaction network theory, which aims to provide
              engineers and chemists with easily applied tools for the analysis of complex
              reactors.  Unlike the previous work which emphasized reactor stability, the new
              work's main thrust is design of reactor systems.      The PI's past work
              emphasized the drawing of precise connections between reaction network
              structure and reactor stability.  When the underlying chemistry is known, the
              theory helps indicate a reactor's capacity for unstable behavior of various
              kinds.  When the chemistry is poorly understood, the theory helps distinguish
              between those candidate mechanisms that could account for observed reactor
              behavior and those that could not.  This work will address questions of optimal
              reactor design in the presence of complex chemistry.  Of Particular interest is
              the development of theory that would network, the feed and the design
              objectives are specified.  That is, one would like to know which qualitative
              configuration, taken from virtually limitless palette of reactor configurations
              available to the designer, is best suited to the designer's objectives.    The
              Chemical Reaction Network Toolbox, a program for IBM-compatible computers, was
              written by the PI so that early results of reaction network theory might be
              disseminated to a wide audience.  It is anticipated that work completed under
              this new grant will be incorporated into a more comprehensive version of the
              program.
