Title       : Improving Skills and Capabilities in the Conduct of Institutional Research in
               Postsecondary Educational Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9523700

Award Number: 9523700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary J. Golladay                        
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1472835            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence R. Russell trussell@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc for Inst Res
	      114 Stone Building
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064462    850/644-4470

NSF Program : 8801      SCIENCE & ENG ED & HUMAN RESRS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523700  Russell  This five-year project will support a variety of activities 
              designed to promote the use of national databases maintained  by the National
              Science Foundation (NSF) and the U. S.  Department of Education, National
              Center for Education  Statistics (NCES).  The grantee, the Association for 
              Institutional Research (AIR, will organize and administer a  program to support
              several types of awards to investigators  using these data bases.  The project
              will consist of three  components.  The first component would support
              fellowships  to individuals, to support on-site work in Washington, DC  Project
              would be expected to utilize national databases and  also provide a significant
              professional development  experience to the fellow.  The second would support
              research  work at the awardees home institution, either on national  databases
              or work of such a nature that it will contribute  to an overall understanding
              of postsecondary education or to  the professional development of personnel
              working in  postsecondary education.  The third component would provide  small
              grants for communicating and disseminating information  about the content of
              the NSF and NCES databases and  techniques for utilization of these databases
              for analysis.  Activities under this component could include small meetings  or
              seminars, support for special sessions at larger  meetings, special
              publications, or other dissemination  activities.  Results from all projects
              will be disseminated  through a variety of means to the user community.    This
              project will be administered by the Executive Officer  of the AIR, which will
              publicize the availability of project  funds, organize and conduct review
              panels for evaluating  individual proposals.  A Grant and Fellowship Advisory 
              Committee will provide guidance on program direction and  priorities; NSF and
              NCES will be represented on the  committee.  Other members will be broadly
              representative of  the higher education research community.    The project
              offers benefits including  greater visibility of  issues in postsecondary
              education and science and  engineering education, and improved data quality
              fostered by  greater use and scrutiny of existing data sources.
