Title       : Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9523974

Award Number: 9523974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4448525            (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel L. Tabor tabor@nucott.physics.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirby W. Kemper  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paul D. Cottle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil R. Fletcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              D         @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9523974
              Kemper This research in experimental nuclear physics will be carried out with
              the FSU tandem/linac accelerators and at other laboratories in the U.S. 
              Studies of  new  octupole behavior in 0(6) nuclei, rotational structure in s-d
              shell nuclei, identical band structures near Z = 64, and single-particle and
              collective properties of nuclei in the mass 80 region will be undertaken.  The
              excellent charged-particle detector resolution recently attained in resonant
              particle decay spectroscopy will allow levels in lieht nuclei to be studied
              within a few hundred keV of their a emission threshold.  The largely unexplored
              rank 3 analyzing powers can now be studied using the 7Li beam from the
              laser-pumped polarized ion source.  In addition, the high beam currents and
              polarizations from this source will permit detailed investigation of the origin
              of the tensor force in 6Li scattering.  Present and future laser capabilities
              along with beams from the tandem/LINAC will allow precise tests of quantum
              electrodynamics calculations of energy levels of low to intermediate Z
              helium-like ions.  The Hall B experime ntal physics program at CEBAF is set to
              commence and the capabilities of the CLAS will be aimed at examination of
              nucleon resonances and strangeness production.  Construction of the
              Ring-Imaging Cherenkov system for PHENIX is well under way.  Programs of
              radioactive beam scattering at MSU and conversion electron and ray studies at
              GAMMASPHERE are proposed. ***                                         ;        
                                                      Oh     +'  0                           
                                 (       L       p                     S u m m a r y I n f o
              r m a t i o n                           (                                      
                          &                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          $       H       l                                  
                      R:\WWUSER\ABSTRACT.DOT              9523974                            
              Gwendolyn C. Owens                  Gwendolyn C. Owens          @              
                                  @                                   @                      
                              (                                                              
                  @                                           Microsoft Word 6.0             
                                                      2                                      
                                                              ;                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         e = 
                   e                                                                         
                   "       "   "       "       "       "       "       L       L       L     
               L       L       L       V       L       l   j   `       d       d       d     
               d       d       d       d                                                     
               N           T   *   U   l                       "       d                 d   
                 d                       d       d       l       d       "       "       d   
                                 `       d       d       d       d       "       d       "   
                 d                               6       >       "       "       "       "   
                 d               d   k   d                                                   
                                                       9523974 Kemper This research in
              experimental nuclear physics will be carried out with the FSU tandem/linac
              accelerators and at other laboratories in the U.S.  Studies of  new  octupole
              behavior in 0(6) nuclei, rotational structure in s-d shell nuclei, identical
              band structures near Z = 64, and single-particle and collective properties of
              nuclei in the mass 80 region will be undertaken.  The excellent
              charged-particle detector resolution recently attained in resonant particle
              decay spectroscopy will allow levels in light nuclei to be studied within a few
              hundred keV of their a emission threshold.  The largely unexplored rank 3
              analyzing powers can now be studied using the 7Li beam from the laser-pumped
              polarized ion source.  In addition, the high beam currents and polarizations
              from this source will permit detailed investigation of the origin of the tensor
              force in 6Li scattering.  Present and future laser capabilities along with
              beams from the tandem/LINAC will allow precise tests of quantum electrodynamics
              calculations of energy levels of low to intermediate Z helium-
