Title       : Reaction of Carbon with Nitric and Unified Mechanism for Oxidation Carbon
               Gasification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9523801

Award Number: 9523801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph T. Yang yang@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9523801    This is a study of the reaction between carbon and
              nitric oxide (forming nitrogen and carbon oxides), including an examination of
              a hypothetical surface oxygen complex which could be the basis for a unified
              mechanism for all oxidative gasification reactions of carbon.  In the first
              part of this study, rates are measured for the reaction between carbon and
              nitric oxide using electron microscopy and single-crystal graphite for both
              uncatalyzed and catalyzed reactions.  For the uncatalyzed system, measurements
              include the relative rates of reaction of oxygen and nitric oxide with carbon,
              the dependence of activation energy on temperature, the kinetics of abstraction
              of  basal-plane atoms, kinetic effects of water and carbon monoxide, and
              surface nitrogen species.  For catalyzed reactions, turnover frequency is
              determined from the monolayer channeling rate data on the basal plane of
              graphite; catalysts are selected from the transition metals, alkali metals, and
              alkaline earths.   The second part of this study seeks better understanding of
              the oxygen intermediate suggested by molecular orbital theory; this species is
              the key to a unified mechanism.  Four graphites with four gases (oxygen, nitric
              oxide, water, and carbon dioxide) are studied by temperature-programmed
              desorption (TPD).  Spectroscopic analyses (Fourier-transform infrared, X-ray
              photoelectron, and carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance) are performed on
              graphite samples after interrupting TPD experiments at various temperatures to
              determine, if it exists, a correlation between surface oxygen species and
              carbon - monoxide desorption energies.    The "gasification" of carbon is a key
              element in a large number of energy, chemical, and environmental processes. 
              This, project examines one reaction (the fourth to be studied in this series)
              in the family of carbol gasification reactions and attempts to reduce the
              collected knowledge to a  unified mechanism for the process.  ***
