Title       : Large-Scale Structural Optimization Using New Duality Based Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9523127

Award Number: 9523127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249880             (Estimated)
Investigator: J R Jagannatha Rao rao@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523127  Rao   The principal objective of this research is to develop a new
              class of modeling and computational methods to solve certain very large-scale
              structural optimization problems.  In particular, the focus is on the topology
              design of discrete structures, which are recognized as one of the most
              important and challenging problems in the field of applied optimization.  These
              new methods are based on the principles of mathematical duality and have so far
              been deployed with remarkable success in two application classes:  the maximum
              stiffness design of elastic structures and the minimum weight design of plastic
              structures.  This work will significantly broaden the class of problems where
              similar duality-based methods can be applied. The major components of this
              project are the new modeling capability due to primal-dual transformations in
              various applications and the efficient, problem specific nonsmooth algorithms
              that exploit the structure of the resulting min-max formulations.   In
              advancing the frontiers of modern design techniques, researchers are constantly
              seeking scientific and mathematical tools by which satisfactory (i.e.,
              feasible) or even optimal designs can be efficiently computed.  While this has
              lead to numerous very successful applications in a wide cross-section of
              engineering disciplines, the class of problems related to the topology or
              configuration design of discrete structures had remained distinctly unsolved
              until the recent emergence of these duality-based methods.  Further development
              of these methods will represent a significant advance in applied design
              optimization, and will show how new and provably optimum topologies can be
              generated for static and dynamic load-bearing structures in a variety of
              automotive, civil and aerospace applications.
