Title       : Hybrid Layout Configurations for Cellular Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9523809

Award Number: 9523809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahrukh A. Irani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523809   Irani    This research focuses on the development of hybrid shop floor
              layout based on  cellular manufacturing concept. Hybrid layout refers to a
              layout with both dedicated and shared machine cells. In cellular manufacturing,
              parts and machines are formed into  clusters. Parts in the same cluster
              constitute a family. The machines in a cluster are formed into a  machine cell.
              A machine cell is dedicated to the processing of  parts in the same
              part-machine  cluster. The aim is to form cells that are independent and having
              no intercell material flow. This approach differs from the traditional method,
              which emphasized independent cells for all part families, by developing a
              functional cell, for machines shared by multiple parts families, and placing
              machines, that are not shared by multiple parts families, into dedicated cells.
              Hybrid layouts will  be developed based on the use of an heuristic algorithm
              for machine-part matrix clustering. The algorithm will integrate a number of
              search strategies including string matching and tabu search. The subsequent
              layout will be tested using simulation. In addition, scheduling rules for
              machine and material handling will be developed to support the simulation
              analysis. The suitability of VLSI CAD  algorithms for generating these hybrid
              layouts also will be investigated, and industrial data will be used to validate
              these layout methodologies.   The project presents a different  perspective or
              look at the cellular machine layout problem. In the traditional cellular layout
               problem, creation of independent machine cells with shared machines duplicated
              over multiple cells is the norm. This research advocates the creation of a
              functional cell for shared machines instead of  machine duplication.  The
              results of the research may make it easier to create virtual  machining cells
              to support such modern production concept as agile or lean manufacturing. 
              Improved material handling systems planning and control are critical to the
              competitiveness of our nation's  economic system. The outcome of this research
              will increase use of  material handling and layout systems planning, design,
              and control algorithms. This will enhance material flow and will improve
              production time on the shop floor.
