Title       : Kinetic Effects on MHD Phenomena in the Magnetosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9523331

Award Number: 9523331
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chio Z. Cheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept of Energy Princeton P
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This investigation deals with theory and data analysis related to  kinetic
              effects on magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) phenomena in the  magnetosphere.  When MHD
              activity is strongly affected by particle  kinetic effects such as finite
              gyro-radius effects, trapped  particle effects and wave-particle resonance
              effects, traditional  MHD approaches break down.  The kinetic-MHD approach to
              be applied  in this study will provide a theoretical and observational basis 
              for understanding kinetic effects on MHD phenomena such as Pc 4-5  magneitic
              pulsations and magnetospheric substorms.  Formulae for  computing plasma
              instability parameters from the particle data will  be obtained from this
              investigation.  By comparing theoretical  calculations with the plasma
              stability paramters obtained from  space-based instruments, the investigators
              will be able to study  the relationship between observed plasma properties and
              MHD  activity in the space environment.  If the theoretical kinetic-MHD 
              stability analysis is verfied, one can perform a real-time  numerical stability
              analysis based on in situ satellite particle  and magnetic field data and
              realistic magnetospheric equilibria.   Such an excerise could lead to advanced
              warning f the onset of  violent MHD activity and the associated high energy
              particle flux  that creates adverse space weather conditions.
