Title       : Modeling of Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization of Proteins and Nucleic
               Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9523413

Award Number: 9523413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akos Vertes vertes@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent results in laser-solid interactions indicate that there is a   convenient
              way to propel large molecules into the gas phase with little   or no
              degradation.  This particularly exciting new method,   matrix-assisted laser
              desorption ionization (MALDI), has enormously   expanded the mass range for the
              spectroscopy of high molecular weight   biomolecules.   No adequate theory is
              yet available to explain the entire   method, or even parts of it like
              co-crystallization or ion formation.    The proposal plans to study the
              chemistry and physics of the mechanisms   that produce the sample crystals,
              energize, eject, and ionize the   molecules from condensed molecular samples
              with emphasis on the MALDI   experiments on proteins and nucleic acids.  Two
              limits of the ejection   process will be explored:  the hydrodynamic (HD) limit
              and the molecular   dynamic (MD) limit.  The two descriptions complement each
              other in terms   of time scales (<200 ps for MD vs. 1 ns to 100 ns for HD) and
              accessible   information (molecular vs. bulk properties).     Large
              biomolecules are hard or impossible to evaporate since they tend to   decompose
              before reaching high-enoughtemperature.  The most accurate   spectroscopic
              methods, however, rely on gas phase molecules. A recently   discovered
              phenomenon, called matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization   (MALDI), gets
              around this problem by embedding the large molecules into   an
              easy-to-evaporate matrix that can be excited by pulsed laser   radiation.  The
              MALDI method has provided unprecedented accuracy in the   molecular mass
              determination of large proteins and other biomolecules.    Despite the great
              benefits of this method, understanding of the   underlying processes is lagging
              behind. The proposal plans to explore the   chemistry and physics of the
              mechanisms that produce the sample crystals,   energize, eject, and ionize the
              molecules from condensed molecular   samples with emphasis on the MALDI
              experiments on proteins and nucleic   acids.  Improved understanding of the
              basic phenomena involved will help   to extend the capabilities of MALDI for a
              larger group of important   biomolecules.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
