Title       : Observations and Modeling of the High Latitude Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9523818

Award Number: 9523818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John W. Meriwether                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenton J. Watkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The first part of this project will be studying the physical and chemical
              processes associated with formation of thin metallic-ion structures in the
              very-high-latitude upper atmosphere.  Experiments will be conducted at the
              incoherent-scatter radar facility at Sondrestrom, Greenland.  The PI will use a
              routine measurement program (currently underway) to establish a database that
              characterizes different structures, such as single versus double layers,
              latitudinal and altitude distributions.  He will also use a new experimental
              mode that simultaneously determines latitudinal variation of electric fields
              and high resolution density structures.  In conjunction with a new numerical
              model, these data will investigate the relative roles of electric fields and
              neutral winds in layer formation, determine the effects of time-varying
              E-fields, and discover the effects of aeronomic parameters, such as the
              ion-neutral collision frequency.    Secondly, the PI will further develop a new
              Eulerian 3-D time-dependent model of the polar ionosphere.  This approach is
              advantageous to the traditional Lagrangian method in permitting efficient high
              spatial resolution, in turn allowing time-dependent studies of polar plasma
              structures and better comparisons with data.  Using a new electric field model,
              the PI will investigate time-dependent ionospheric effects, particularly for
              northward interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) conditions.  This model can
              determine the continuous ionospheric response to a time-varying IMF.  He can
              then predict "space weather" effects, if appropriate IMF and space-particle
              data inputs are available to the model.
