Title       : Effects of Stochastic Variability of Soil Properties on Liquefaction Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9523092

Award Number: 9523092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Herve Prevost prevost@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Deodatis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9523092  Prevost  Though extensively studied during the last 30 years, the 
              phenomenon of soil liquefaction is still one of the main causes  of
              catastrophic damage during major earthquakes.  The aim of this  project is to
              obtain a better understanding of soil liquefaction  mechanisms, aimed at more
              realistic liquefaction risk assessment  methods and appropriate seismic design
              countermeasures, and  emphasizing the importance of spatial variability
              exhibited by  soil properties.    Natural soils are variable in their
              properties.  The scarcity of  field test results, and the degree of disorder
              exhibited by soil  properties, leads to the use of statistical methods to
              describe  the distribution of those properties.  In this context, the  various
              geomechanical soil properties are modeled as the  components of a
              multi-variate, multidimensional (mV-nD)  stochastic field.  The characteristics
              of the stochastic field  are evaluated based on statistically significant sets
              of "in-  situ" measurement results.  Two- and three-dimensional finite  element
              simulations of the behavior of horizontally layered sandy  soil, as well as of
              structures founded on liquefiable soil and  subjected to seismic loads, are
              performed using the multi-yield  soil constitutive model implemented in the
              computer code  DYNAFLOW.    The numerical simulation results for predicting
              excess pore-  pressure buildup, liquefaction index, and liquefaction induced 
              deformations -- obtained using stochastic input constitutive  parameters -- are
              compared to deterministic input simulation  results; and the influences on
              these results of spatial  correlation distances, probability distributions  of
              soil  properties, cross-correlations between various soil properties,  finite
              element discretization mesh size, as well as the effects  of the 2-D
              simplification vs. true 3-D behavior are examined and  quantified. 
              Verification of the method for constitutive  parameter calibration and for the
              performance of the analysis  procedure is made by comparison  with "in-situ"
              behavior recorded  during past earthquakes.    Recommendations will be made for
              updating current analysis and  design procedures for structures founded on
              liquefiable soils, in  order to account for the degree of spatial variability
              of soil  properties.  This research will provide a sound basis for 
              liquefaction risk assessment and for characterization of spatial  variability
              of soil properties.  ***
