Title       : Modeling and Solving Large-Scale Production, Location and Distribution Problems
               for Time-Sensitive Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9523048

Award Number: 9523048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Collette R. Coullard coullard@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Daskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur P. Hurter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523048  Coullard   This research addresses several related problems in the
              areas of manufacturing and distribution. The research seeks to develop models
              and methodologies that can be used to simultaneously make decisions on the
              location of manufacturing and distribution facilities, production quantities,
              assignment of products to facilities, and quantities of each product type to
              assign to a given distribution center. In particular, using the models, the
              following decisions can be made: (1) determination of the types of production
              and distribution systems to be built or maintained and where they should be
              located, (2) the assignment of products to facilities and the timing of
              production,  (3) the allocation of shipment quantities of each product type
              from each facility to each distribution center, and (4) the shipping route to
              be used from each production facility to each distribution center. This is a
              research that integrates several subproblems in both production and
              distribution. Some of the items to be optimized are strategic in nature (e.g.,
              facility location) while others are tactical (production schedule and
              production quantities) Each of the subproblems in the integrated model is
              difficult to solve by its own right. Thus, the integrated problem would
              obviously be large and much more difficult to solve to simultaneously optimize
              on the various subproblems included in the model. However, to overcome the size
              problem, the following three major goals are established: (1) develop realistic
              and flexible optimization models that incorporate in a reasonable manner the
              tactical and strategic issues that are involved, (2) employ a solution approach
              that is based on the branch-and-price and row generation technique that takes
              advantage of special structures of the model, and (3) develop systematic
              techniques for evaluating the robustness of the strategic decisions made by the
              model.    Although, integrated models as addressed in this research pose major
              solution and computational challenges, they  do , however, provide some major
              benefits. Equipped with these models, a decision maker will have a direct
              knowledge of the impact of strategic choices on tactical issues, and can thus
              make intelligent strategic decisions. Furthermore, such models provide an
              integrated framework to analyze the sensitivity of a system on various decision
              elements. The models developed are integer programming models. This work
              involves identifying the right tree management scheme for solving  integer
              programs by branch and bound  and the right column management scheme for
              solving the linear programs within the branch and bound. In so doing, this
              research also advances the knowledge in solving integer programming models.
