Title       : Dielectrometry Sensors and Algorithms to Monitor Moisture Dynamics and Other
               Impurities in Transformers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9523128

Award Number: 9523128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard C. Lesieutre bcl@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Markus Zahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1208,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523128  Lesieutre         New captive sensors can measure distributions of 
              conductivity and permittivity in dielectrics.  Each sensor has a  set of
              interdigitated electrodes which impose a spatially  periodic source of voltage
              at temporal frequency f and spatial  wavelength.  With an excitation that is
              periodic in space, the  fields decay in the perpendicular direction with a
              penetration  depth equal to the spatial wavelength.  One set of electrodes are 
              driven with a variable frequency AC voltage, and a high impedance  measurement
              is made of the induced voltage on the alternate set  of floating electrodes. 
              The magnitude and phase of the floating  voltage depends on the dielectric
              permittivity and electrical  conductivity of the medium adjacent to the sensor.
               From such  gain/phase measurements as a function of frequency for different 
              wavelength sensors, computer algorithms can calculate spatial  profiles of the
              permittivity and conductivity.  With calibration  of permittivity and
              conductivity dependence on other physical  variables such as moisture,
              temperature, concentration of  combustible gas, concentration of trace
              impurities, etc., it is  impossible to measure spatial distributions of such
              physical  quantities as a function of time.       Recent EPRI funded research
              has performed the preliminary  calibration between moisture and temperature to
              conductivity and  permittivity so that the sensors can be used to monitor the
              time  and space dynamics of moisture in oil impregnated transformer 
              pressboard.  The proposed research is to develop efficient  computer algorithms
              that can extract the pressboard moisture as a  function of time and space in
              transformers so that this  monitoring system of trend analysis and advanced
              diagnostics  sponsored by EPRI and several electric utilities.  Other research 
              tasks propose to extend the capability of the dielectrometry  sensor to include
              the investigation of special encapsulating  coatings that are selectively
              absorbing or reactive to  combustible ga s and other trace impurities in
              transformers such  as anti-oxidants, proposed anti-static additives such as 
              benzontriazole (BZA), and other impurities resulting from aging  and corrosion.
               ***
