Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: El Ombligo Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1995   
File        : a9523744

Award Number: 9523744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5448               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Fish pfish@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Paul Fish, Mr. John Carpenter will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze mortuary remains which were
              excavated many years ago near Guasave, Sinalo in Northern Mexico. The mound,
              which was originally believed to be an habitation, proved in fact to be a
              burial mound which contained almost 200 human skeletons and associated grave
              goods. These materials, which are housed in the American Museum of Natural
              History, have never been fully analyzed. Mr. Carpenter will conduct a detailed
              examination and in particular will focus on the variation among individuals. On
              this basis it will be possible to determine the extent to which the society
              itself was socially stratified and the degree of social complexity it achieved.
              These materials are very poorly dated and radiocarbon determinations will be
              made to determine exact chronological placement.  Extensive archaeological
              research has provided detailed information on the rise of complex prehistoric
              cultural entities in the U.S. Southwest and massive ruins such a Chaco Canyon
              in New Mexico attest to the level of social organization attained. Likewise
              much is known about the civilizations of Central Mexico. However the area
              between these two centers are poorly known from an archaeological perspective
              and archaeologists wish to understand whether this region served as a bridge
              between the North and South, whether it was a hinterland or whether it followed
              an independent cultural trajectory. The research by Mr. Carpenter will provide
              insight into this question.  This work is important for several reasons. It
              will shed new light into the development of New World civilization. It will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in the training of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
