Title       : ROW: A Computational Model for Mixed Initiative InteractiveDiscourse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9523666

Award Number: 9523666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Haller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Bytes Tran The research issue is representing and reasoning about interactive
              discourse during a  human-computer natural language interaction.  During an
              interaction, a computational system must be  able to take conversational
              control and release control to another participant to simulate the turn- 
              taking that takes place in task-oriented interactions.  In addition to
              representing and reasoning  about when to take control, an artificial agent (a
              computational system) must know how to signal what  it is doing through its
              choice of content and linguistic cues.  The system must also be able to 
              recognize when the human participant is taking control and reason about whether
              or not to allow it.  Three problems will be addressed in this investigation:
              reasoning about control, representing  discourse to accommodate conversational
              role change, and producing/interpreting linguistic cues that  indicate who has
              control.  Methods that will be applied to development of a model are use of a
              uniform  representation for domain and discourse information, and reification
              of conversational roles as  collaborative modes.  As part of the p roposed
              planning period, a prototype model will be developed,  implemented, and
              evaluated using two different application domains: an interactive spreadsheet
              and a  medical tutoring system.  It is unquestioned that natural language is a
              useful tool for for human-  computer interaction.  The ability to interact in
              natural language provides a flexible and efficient  means of communication to
              systems that are becoming increasingly complex to use because of their 
              capabilities                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
