Title       : MMIA: Hierarchical Approach to Integrated Assessment of Climate and Land Use
               Changes with an Application to the Central United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9523612

Award Number: 9523612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585619             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Easterling   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis S. Ojima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Callaway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas B. Kirchner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523612  Easterling  The complex interplay of human activities and the global
              environment has been examined for over a decade with modeling schemes that
              focus on discrete problems that are decoupled from the complex whole (e.g.,
              single sector studies, lack of feedbacks between component parts, partial
              representation of key relationships, poorly specified linkages between human
              and biophysical systems) thus making such schemes weak policy tools. 
              Integrated assessments (IA) are needed to more completely model whole
              human-environment systems.  Several IA efforts are under way, most of a highly
              spatially and sectorally aggregated form.  Little attention has been given to
              the question of  how much spatial and sectoral detail is necessary in order to
              achieve reliable estimates of land use and ecological changes in regional,
              national, and global modeling assessments; such is the question to which this
              proposed research is  addressed.  It is hypothesized that a spatial hierarchy
              of modeling is needed to present complex human-environmental systems.   The
              research objectives here are: (1) to develop information linkage between the
              Century terrestrial ecosystem model and the FASOM economic model in order to
              assess changes in the human-environmental system of the U.S. Great Plains in
              response to climate changes; (2) to identify and quantify the critical human
              environmental factors controlling land use decisions at local and regional
              scales; and (3) to evaluate the sensitivity of the human-environmental system
              of the U. S. great Plains to local scale land use decisions relative the
              aggregated regional analysis.
