Title       : Dynamic Service Aggregation for Interactive Information Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9523958

Award Number: 9523958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Little tdcl@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 2891,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Digital audio and video are increasingly common as data that are  manipulated in
              computer and communication systems.  Current resource  allocation mechanisms
              for network-based multipoint information delivery are  static in nature and
              cannot support interactivity for each participant.  Point-to-point approaches
              can support interactivity but are inefficient for  scaling to a large number of
              participants.  Currently, no techniques have  demonstrated the ability to
              renegotiate and scale service parameters per  session in progress as required
              to adapt to differing terminal equipment  characteristics and network
              congestion.    The proposal addresses this problem through the definition of
              decomposable  service groups that permit aggregation of interactivity, terminal
               characteristics, and levels of service scaling.  Interactivity implies the 
              availability of a unique service group.  A mechanism is proposed to 
              dynamically reassign elements to service groups based on changing 
              interactivity and session requirements.  Such a mechanism will allow the 
              adjustment of service quality based on cost, available resources, or 
              user-equipment characteristics, and will adapt to changing network loading. 
              The proposed approach applies the characteristics of end applications and  data
              storage requirements to the design of a data scaling mechanism.    Specific
              tasks of this research are to (1) formalize a model for  characterizing and
              aggregating service groups, (2) develop a protocol for  dynamic service
              aggregation, (3) identify a mapping for application  requirements to service
              groups and network quality of service, (4) the  establishment of a network
              access mechanism to support service degradation  and scaling for multiple
              sessions, and (5) the simulation, implementation,  and evaluation using
              established multipoint applications and multicast  protocols.
