Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Cretaceous Vertebrates of Madagascar--Implications
               for the Plate Tectonic and Biogeographic History of Gondwana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9523567

Award Number: 9523567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph H. Hartman joseph_hartman@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hartman  9523567   The goal of the current proposal is to substantially increase
              knowledge of the Late Cretaceous vertebrate fauna of Madagascar, which is
              currently very poorly known.  With the discovery and analysis of additional and
              more complete vertebrate fossils from the Mahajanga Basin of northwestern
              Madagascar, it will be possible to address three critical (but not mutually
              exclusive) hypotheses relating to the physical and biotic connections of the
              component parts of eastern Gondwana during the Late Cretaceous and the
              biogeographic origins of the extant vertebrate fauna of Madagascar:    
              HYPOTHESIS I:  Madagascar, Africa, and the Indian subcontinent, owing to their
              physical proximity, shared vertebrate faunas in the Late Cretaceous that were
              very similar, in some cases at the species level.  Many of the vertebrates from
              the Late Cretaceous of Madagascar are thought to be closely related to or, in
              some cases, conspecific with those of Africa and India.  Correspondingly, there
              is general agreement among geophysicists that the Indian subcontinent was close
              or adjacent to the eastern margin of Madagascar at this time.  Despite apparent
              similarities in the Late Cretaceous vertebrate faunas of Madagascar, Africa,
              and India, detailed comparisons have been difficult due to inadequate material.
               More complete material of vertebrate fossils from Madagascar (as well as India
              and Africa) are needed for such comparisons to be made.     HYPOTHESIS II:  The
              Indian subcontinent was faunally isolated from Madagascar (and Africa) in the
              later stages of the Late Cretaceous and, in the latest Cretaceous, contained
              elements from Laurasis (as a result of collision with Eurasia) that were not
              shared with Madagascar (or Africa).   Some of the evidence used in support of
              the recent and controversial hypothesis that the Indian subcontinent had
              already collided with Eurasia by the latest Cretaceous is paleontological.  The
              presence of purportedly Laurasian groups in the Maastrichtian of India
              indicated that a te rrestrial route between the Indian subcontinent and Eurasia
              may have existed by this time.  However, the material used to support this
              conclusion consists of isolated, fragmentary, and rare specimens with
              questionable identifications.  Preliminary identifications of some specimens
              form the Mahajanga Basin indicate that at least some of the "Laurasian" taxa
              found in the Late Cretaceous of India also occurred in Madagascar.  If these
              identifications are confirmed, it is more likely that these "Laurasian"
              elements entered the Indian subcontinent by way of Africa and Madagascar,
              rather than from Eurasia.     HYPOTHESIS III:  Some vertebrate higher taxa that
              comprise the extant fauna of Madagascar (e.g., Lemuriformes, Tenrecidae,
              Cordylidae) colonized the island prior to the beginning of the Cenozoic.  The
              biogeographic origins of the extant, highly endemic and imbalanced vertebrate
              fauna of Madagascar are unknown and have been the subject of speculative debate
              for many decades.  This is largely the result of the virtual absence of
              nonmarine, pre-Holocene Cenozoic strata on the island.  As a result, the best
              opportunity to shed light on this major problem is to discover vertebrate
              fossils in the richly fossiliferous Upper Cretaceous nonmarine strata of the
              Mahajanga Basin.    Much of the significance of this project lies in
              discovering and understanding more about the vertebrates that lived in
              Madagascar during the Late Cretaceous.  Fossil collections obtained through the
              proposed two field seasons will far exceed all previous efforts (combined) and
              will provide a reasonable estimate of the diversity of vertebrates in the
              "Maevarano" and "Marovoay" formations.  In the process of accumulating and
              analyzing data to test the hypotheses above, we expect to:  1) contribute
              substantially to knowledge of the diversity, anatomy, and phylogenetic
              relationships of the Late Cretaceous vertebrates of Madagascar; and 2) better
              constrain the lithostratigraphy and biostratigraphy of the fossiliferous beds
              (and to d efine formally the "Maravoay", "Maaevarano", and "Berivotra"
              formations).
