Title       : Time Resolved Studies of Molecular Clusters Using Mass Analyzed Threshold
               Ionization Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9523575

Award Number: 9523575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Knee JKNEE@WESLEYAN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Joseph L. Knee is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry   Program to
              study the spectroscopy and dynamics of molecular clusters   using pump-probe
              threshold photoelectron spectroscopy.  Threshold   photoelectron spectroscopy
              is used as a state selective probe of excited   state dynamics by monitoring
              the time evolution of the photoelectron   spectrum as a function of pump-probe
              laser delay.  By implementing mass   analyzed threshold ionization spectroscopy
              (MATI), such studies can be   done with mass resolution; a reflectron mass
              spectrometer will be built   for this purpose.  Fluorene-Ar(subn) clusters will
              be used to study   intramolecular vibrational redistribution (IVR) and
              vibrational   predissociation (VP) in van der waals complexes.  The cluster
              size, n,   will be varied in order to investigate cluster size influence on IVR
              and   VP dynamics. MATI experiments will be carried out which will distinguish 
               between different cluster conformations, allowing dynamic measurements of  
              processes such as conformer interconversions.  Cation cluster   spectroscopy
              will be another important component to these studies.  Also,   proton transfer
              in Naphthol-(NHsub3)subn and other hydrogen-bonded   systems will be studied.  
               Many studies have been completed on binary and tertiary complexes, but   for
              clusters of four or more, the quantity and quality of information   available
              is much less.  Larger clusters are important to study if one is   interested in
              learning about solution phase behavior such as how solvents   can participate
              in and mediate chemical reactions, e.g., the excited   state proton transfer
              between 1-Naththol and ammonia requires at least   four ammonia molecules
              complexed to the naphthol to occur.  To learn   about cluster structure and
              dynamics in larger clusters, one has to   overcome problems of complexity and
              mass selectivity.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
