Title       : MMIA: Vegetation Response To Mesoscale Climate Variability in the Mountainous
               West
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9523611

Award Number: 9523611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue A. Ferguson ferguson@dorothy.cfr.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523611  Ferguson   An integrated modeling methodology will be developed to help
              assess vegetation response to climate variability and climate change in complex
              terrain.  the chosen modeling domain includes the state of Oregon that
              represents linked regions of complex terrain.  In addition, the maritime
              influence in this domain allows successful dynamic modeling of climate and
              reasonably consistent statistical regression between climate parameters.  The
              spatial resolution of many currently available climate scenarios is too coarse
              for accurate ecological modeling in complex terrain.  The few high resolution
              climate scenarios of not have long enough time series for modeling transient
              responses of ecological processes.  Also, the effect of changes in climate
              variability is an important uncertainty in integrated assessments.  Therefore,
              significant effort will be devoted to developing very high resolution baseline
              climate scenarios and climate change scenarios that include changes in daily
              and interannual variability.     Available weather observations will be used to
              generate a spatially distributed data base that describes a current scenario of
              climate.  Daily climate will be simulated using a stochastic weather generator
              that will be modified to include relative humidity, wind, and maintain physical
              consistency between climate variables.  Changes in variability will be applies
              to the baseline climate database to develop a high resolution time series of
              potential change.   Three different simulated ecological responses will be
              tested.  One of the current climate, one from the time series reflecting only
              mean changes, and one from the time series reflecting mean and variance
              changes.  The integration of these physical components (scenario
              formation-physical impacts) fills a critical void in the full framework of
              integrative assessments.
