Title       : Parallel Simulation of Manufacturing and Communication Systems through Time
               Segmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9523111

Award Number: 9523111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sigrun Andradottir sa@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523111  Andradottir   The research objective is to investigate how the
              efficiency of simulation can be improved by conducting the simulation
              experiment on parallel processors. The parallel simulation approach envisioned
              in the research involves segmenting the time horizon allocating processor to
              simulate the entire system over a fraction of the total time horizon. This is
              equivalent to allocating only a portion of the total time segments to a
              processor. A major difficulty in applying time segmentation to simulate
              stochastic systems on parallel a processor is finding efficient ways of
              generating a valid sample path of the underlying system.  This is complicated
              by the fact that the initial conditions for the simulation on all but the first
              processor or time segment are unknown when the simulation is started. The new
              approach in this research is concerned with determining both the scope of
              applicability and the efficiency of a parallel simulation approach. The
              investigation will determine when parallel simulation approachs can be used to
              efficiently analyze complex systems.    Simulation is a key tool for studying
              and analyzing complex and dynamic systems. Its application domain is large and
              includes engineering, economic, and social systems.  One common criticism in
              the use of simulation is the amount of computational effort required before
              meaningful data can be generated. The parallel simulation approach,
              investigated in this research, is a move towards speeding up the simulation
              process on computers. If successful, the technique will see immediate
              application and incorporation into commercial simulation software. Large scale
              application will produce significant savings in time and money and shorten the
              length of time required to perform a simulation study.
