Title       : Dissertation Research: Early Paleoindians and Rockshelters in the Eastern
               Woodlands: A Case Study at Wolfe Shelter, Kentucky
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9523482

Award Number: 9523482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10779              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Tom Dillehay, Mr. Leon Lane will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at Wolfe
              Shelter, a rock overhang located on a tributary of the Cumberland River in
              Cumberland County, Kentucky. Previous work at his site has indicated a long
              archaeological sequence with remains from a number of different cultures. On
              the basis of stone tools recovered, it appears that the shelter and the
              adjacent area was occupied by Paleoindian hunter-gatherers as much at 12,000
              years ago. Such sites are extremely rare in the Eastern United States. Mr. Lane
              will conduct careful stratigraphic excavations and expose an area of 56 square
              meters in, and in the immediate vicinity of the site. Lithic materials as well
              as associated faunal and floral remains will be collected and analyzed. The
              geological and environmental history of the site will be reconstructed and
              appropriate samples collected for radiocarbon dating. This information should
              provide insight into: the type and extent of Paleoindian occupation; the
              technology and economy of the early occupants; the relationship between
              materials recovered inside the shelter and those in surrounding depositional
              settings.  While abundant data attest to the presence of Paleoindian peoples
              across North America by 12,000 years ago, surprisingly little is known about
              how they adapted to this unexploited environment. Almost all well preserved
              sites from this period are located in the Western part of the U.S. and there a
              picture of highly mobile large game hunters has emerged. However the
              environment in the Eastern part of the continent is quite different and quite
              likely adaptations were different in this region. However very little
              information is available. Thus the Wolfe Shelter is quite important and the
              results of this proposed research will be of widespread archaeological
              interest. It will also provide new understanding of hunter gatherer behavior
              during the earliest period of New World prehistory. The award will assist in
              the training of a promising young scientist.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
