Title       : Collaborative Research: Broadband Seismic Measurement on the Deep Ocean Floor: A
               Pilot Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9523541

Award Number: 9523541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $788603             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Orcutt jorcutt@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred N. Spiess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Vernon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523541  Orcutt  This team of investigators from Woods Hole Oceanographic
              Institution (Massachusetts), Scripps Institution of Oceanography (University of
              California, San Diego, California) and Rosenstiel School of Marine and
              Atmospheric Sciences (University of Miami, Florida) will jointly develop and
              test three types of deep-ocean seismometers as a pilot experiment for a set of
              ocean sensors to expand the existing land-based "global" seismic network to one
              which has truly global coverage.  Global seismic coverage with broadband
              seismometers provides a capability to accurately define the interior structure
              of the earth with resolution presently not possible, and it provides a
              capability to significantly improve warnings for tsunamis.  The instruments to
              be used in the present project are all "broadband" sensors, and will be
              deployed respectively 1) lying on the seafloor, 2) buried slightly within
              marine sediments, and 3) within an existing seafloor drill hole.  All
              deployments will be carried out for the same 3-month period in early 1997. The
              borehole deployment will use a specially developed system (Scripps Institution)
              to place the instrument in the borehole; the buried sensors will be emplaced
              with a system developed at University of Miami.  Tests will take place near
              Hawaii, and results of all three systems will be compared with a permanent land
              seismometer on the island of Oahu as well as with each other.  This project is
              jointly supported by Ocean Sciences and Earth Sciences Divisions of the
              Geosciences Directorate at NSF, and follows earlier development and testing
              programs of component instruments.  It is expected that this test will allow
              decisions to be made about what types of deployments (surface, buried or in
              drillholes) will be optimum for future "ocean seismic network" deployments. 
              ***
