Title       : Modeling of the Metal Cutting Process Using Molecular Dynamics (MD) Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9523551

Award Number: 9523551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Komanduri ranga@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lionel M. Raff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523551  Komanduri   Molecular dynamics simulation is done on the temporal and
              spatial scale of atoms, and solves the equations of Molecular dynamics
              simulation is done on the temporal and spatial scale of atoms, and solves the
              equations of motion using the fundamental forces that hold atoms together. 
              This is a memory and  time intensive computation  that is feasible with today's
              computer technology.  In some fields of  science and engineering this
              simulation approach has been used for a number of years, but molecular 
              dynamics is still relatively new in understanding metal cutting processes. 
              This research focuses on nano machining of various materials with single
              crystal diamond cutting edges using both a simulation and experimental
              approach.  The molecular dynamics models will include the traditional machining
              parameters. The detailed scale allows the investigation of subsurface damage
              and the effects of crystallographic orientation and defect structure.  In
              addition, it is possible to take a new look at the wear of diamond tools when
              machining iron, and the exit failures that occur when a cutting edge leaves a
              workpiece.  Using a nanometer scale machining setup inside a scanning electron
              microscope, experiments will be conducted to complement and verify the
              molecular dynamics modeling predictions.      The major impact of this research
              will be in building the research infrastructure to gain a fundamental
              understanding of machining at the nano level.  This will give a technological
              edge in the design of processes for micro scale precision components and
              systems.  ***
