Title       : Bioavailability and Biodegradation of Organic Contaminants In Heterogenous
               Subsurface Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1995 
File        : a9523870

Award Number: 9523870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raina M. Maier rmaier@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Brusseau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1584,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523870  Miller  Bioavailability and Biodegradation of Organic Contaminants in
              Heterogeneous Subsurface Environments.  One of the most promising and
              cost-effective environmental cleanup technologies for contaminated soil and
              groundwater is in situ bioremediation.  In situ bioremediation is the use of
              microorganisms to restore a contaminated environment without having to excavate
              or otherwise disturb the contaminated site. Many natural environments contain
              microbial communities capable of degrading (destroying) pollutants. There are
              two serious problems facing successful implementation of in situ
              bioremediation.  These are the physical and chemical heterogeneities found in
              natural environments, and the reduced availability of contaminants that results
              from the sorption (sticking) of contaminants to solid surfaces (clay or sand
              particles).  The goal of this project is to use an integrated biological and
              physical/chemical approach to investigate the factors controlling
              bioremediation in natural (heterogeneous) subsurface environments.  This
              proposal outlines a unique approach to understanding the effect of
              heterogeneity on contaminant availability, and how availability constraints can
              be overcome to enhance the magnitude and rate of bioremediation.  This approach
              combines state-of-the-art intermediate-scale flow and transport experiments
              with an advanced technique for the determination of both the number and
              activity of contaminant-degrading microorganisms (fiber optic detection of
              luminescing microorganisms).  This approach will allow the simultaneous
              detection of contaminant transport and microbial activity, which will allow for
              the investigation of the relationship between spatial heterogeneity and
              availability of contaminants for microbially-mediated destruction.  In
              addition, the approach will be used to evaluate the physical and biological
              parameters that control the transport of microorganisms in a heterogeneous
              environment, and to relate microbial mechanisms for enhanced transport to their
               potential to enhance the degradation of inaccessible organic contaminants. The
              approach will also be used to evaluate strategies to enhance in situ
              bioremediation, for example, the application of surfactants (detergents) that
              may increase the availability of sorbed contaminants. The results of the
              research will improve our understanding of these issues and will provide
              significant advancement in prediction of contaminant transport and fate, for
              evaluating groundwater contamination potential, and for the manipulation of
              subsurface systems to enhance the effectiveness of bioremediation technologies.
