Title       : Workshop on Interdisciplinary Haromonization of Terminology Used in Describing
               Spore-Forming Organisms in Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy in October 1995.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1995 
File        : a9523637

Award Number: 9523637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Micah I. Krichevsky micahk@atcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bionomics International
	      12221 Parklawn Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/881-2804

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                ?Y                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       Q       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                       ?Y    
               ?Y        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                               )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9523637
              Krichevsky Spore forming microorganisms are consistently encountered in
              microbial biodiversity and bioconservation studies.  Spore formation is found
              in bacterial, fungi, protozoa, and algae.  The systematics of these organisms
              is complex.  Furthermore, the lack of a comprehensive authoritative treatment
              of the description of spores and spore types means that many biodiversity and
              systematics studies are either in error (by not working on a  true  spore), or
              are not understandable due to resulting misidentifications or confusing
              descriptions.  Consequently, to help remedy the situation, an international
              workshop was organized and held in Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy, consisting of
              experts on the systematic of spore formation in bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and
              algae.  The experts were chosen by consultation with appropriate international
              organizations involved with the systematic of these various microbes (such as
              the Bergey s Manual Trust and the International Committee on Systematic
              Bacteriology for the bacteria.)  The object of the workshop was to rationalize
              and codify the terminology of spor e descriptions for all spore-forming type
              microorganisms.  The result of this effort will be a report on the proceedings
              of the workshop and a manual of definitions and instructions on accurate and
              standardized descriptions of spores.  It is intended that this report will
              serve as a multidisciplinary standards manual for systematics of spore forming
              microbes, thus providing for more accurate and consistent terminology and cell
              identifications in studies on microbial biodiversity. ***                      
                ;                                    S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n     
                                   (                                                   (     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    Oh     +'  0                                       $     
               H       l                                               D       h             
                                                   R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT             
                                       Krichevsky, M. I.                   Robert Uffen      
                               Shelley A. Graves           @    Q\a J                        
               @    1H  Y                          @       ?Y                                
                                                                               @    L        
                                           Microsoft Word 6.0                                
                                   5                                                         
                                           ;                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      e =       e            
                E   Q                   E                                       j       j   j
                    j       j       j       j                                                
                                        1                                                    
                            '       )       )       )   #   L               l           T    
                B                           j                                                
                                                      j       j                              
                                                      j               j               '      
                              ~               j       j       j       j               '      
                                                                                             
                                    9523637 Krichevsky Spore forming microorganisms are
              consistently encountered in microbial biodiversity and bioconservation studies.
               Spore formation is found in bacterial, fungi, protozoa, and algae.  The
              systematics of these organisms is complex.  Furthermore, the lack of a
              comprehensive authoritative treatment of the description of spores and spore
              types means that many biodiversity and systematics studies are either in error
              (by not working on a  true  spore), or are not understandable due to resulting
              misidentifications or confusing descriptions.  Consequently, to help remedy the
              situation, an international workshop was organized and held in Santa Maria
              Imbaro, Italy, consisting of experts on the systematic of spore formation in
              bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and algae.  The experts were chosen by consultation
              with appropriate international organizations involved with the systematic of
              these various microbes (such as the Bergey s Manual Trust and the International
              Committee on Systematic Bacteriology for the bacteria.)  The object of the
              workshop was to rationalize and
