Title       : Electric Transmission Line Insulator Flashover Predictor System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1995 
File        : a9523267

Award Number: 9523267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100053             (Estimated)
Investigator: George G. Karady karady@asuvax.eas.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith E. Holbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1208,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523267  Karady  Insulator contamination cases frequent flashovers near coastal 
              and industrial areas.  This problem occurs in transmission lines  as well as in
              substations.  Currently, there are no reliable  methods available for
              monitoring pollution build-up and  predicting imminent flashover.  The aim of
              this project is to  develop a sensor system that monitors pollution build-up
              and that  would alert operators when there is danger of flashover.   
              Preliminary laboratory studies were performed at ASU and  discharge current
              signatures were analyzed using the Fast Fourier  Transform (FFT).  Visual
              manifestations were recorded  simultaneously with the current signature.  It
              was found that  surface discharges have distinct stages of development. 
              Although  the amplitude of current changes continuously, the harmonic  content
              (signature) consistently indicated the status of  discharge.  It was observed
              that approaching flashover modifies  the harmonic content.  These findings
              suggest that flashover can  be predicted by signature analysis of the leakage
              current.    The concept is to select an exposed insulator in each area and 
              monitor the leakage current through the insulator.  The leakage  current will
              be digitized and signature analysis will be  performed.  A change in signature
              indicates approaching  flashover.    First, different signature analysis
              methods will be tested in a  laboratory to determine which one produces
              reliable flashover  indication.  After the method is identified and tested, a
              sensor  system will be built to perform this signature analysis  continuously. 
              It is foreseen that the system will include a  broad-band (20Hz-100kHz)
              currently sensor, a microprocessor and a  transmitter.  Leakage current will be
              continuously digitized and  50-100 cycles will be put in temporary storage. 
              The stored data  will be analyzed and if no signature change occurs, the data
              will  be discarded.  A signature change will trigger a transmitter that  will
              alert an operator.  Different levels of ala rm will be used.  ***
