Title       : Tsunamis: Landslide Generated Waves and Run-up and Landward Inundation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9523414

Award Number: 9523414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredric Raichlen raichlen@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9523414  Raichlen  This project addresses two areas related to the damage
              resulting  from tsunamis, namely generation and coastal effects.  Tsunamis  are
              ocean waves which are generated by impulsive events such as  earthquakes,
              landslides, and volcanic eruptions occurring on the  ocean bottom.  The tsunami
              problem can be divided into three  general areas: generation, propagation and
              coastal effects.    This investigation is directed toward mitigation of the
              tsunami  hazard primarily due to nearshore underwater landslides.  In 
              California, numerous submarine canyons are oriented perpendicular  to the
              shore, with the canyon heads nearshore where the  underwater sliding of
              sediment layers stored in the nearshore  regions of these canyons could
              generate large waves.  An  important mechanism which could cause such
              landslides could be a  distant or an offshore earthquake, such as the
              Northridge  earthquake of January 1994 which caused considerable shaking  and 
              damage in the coastal community of Santa Monica, approximately 20  miles from
              the epicenter.  If such shaking had triggered the  failure of sediment layers
              in the nearshore canyons, it is  possible that a damaging tsunami could have
              been generated in the  nearshore waters.    The shape and the kinematic
              properties of waves generated by  underwater landslides and their modification
              as they propagate  shoreward and overland are important in defining the forces
              on  structures, such as seawalls and buildings which may be in the  path of
              such potentially-destructive waves.    The project involves experiments to
              understand the tsunami  generation mechanism through underwater sediment
              slides, in  conjunction with the development of an analytical model for the 
              generation mechanism.  It will provide data to assist in the  evaluation of
              inundation distances to predict coastal flooding,  and suggest reliable limits
              to evacuation  zones.  Such data are  important for the engineering design,
              urban planning, and for  improvement of the tsunami warning syste m.  The
              results will be  directly applicable also to engineering problems associated
              with  other wave-structure interactions, such as the shoreward  propagation of
              long-wavelength storm waves, and to waves  generated in inland reservoirs and
              coastal inlets by landslides.  ***
