Title       : Manufacturing of Thin Polymer Fibers by Electrospinning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9523022

Award Number: 9523022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuris A. Dzenis ydzenis@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9162,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523022  Dzenis   The objective of this project is a comprehensive experimental
              and theoretical study of the process of electrospinning polymer solutions and
              melts into fibers.  Electrospinning makes it possible to spin very thin polymer
              fibers, with diameters as small as 1/100 the diameter of ordinary textile
              fibers, that is about 50 nanometers.  Such fibers are not readily available
              now.  This research will provide a scientific background for the development of
              experimental methods and devices to control the geometrical parameters,
              microstructure, and properties of fibers that can be produced economically. 
              This project will be carrier out at two universities.  One will concentrate on
              electromechanical models of the process, on the evaluation of fiber mechanical
              properties, on the electromechanical control of the placement of the fibers
              into useful patterns, and in the mechanical analysis of structures created with
              these fine, nanoscale fibers.  The other university will design and build
              improved electrospinning apparatus, collect data to improve the modeling of the
              process, measure diameters, shapes and molecular orientation in individual
              fibers using scanning probe and electron microscopy, select polymers to be
              spun, demonstrate successful spinning in air, other gases and vacuum.  Process
              modifications needed for spinning in special environments, such as would be
              encountered in applying pesticides to plants, or creating structures in space
              will be explored.  A number of unique phenomena, such as fiber splaying,
              acceleration of the jet by an alternating field, multiple jet interaction, and
              electrical means of fiber placement will be analyzed for the first time. 
              Experimental and theoretical data generated will constitute a fundamental basis
              for the future integrated manufacturing technologies combining fiber spinning
              with an automated fabrication of three dimensional fiber assemblies.  Both
              universities will be involved in educating students and transferring
              information developed in this proj ect to industrial, agricultural, space
              communications, or other areas where it can be used.   The interest in thin
              polymer fibers is broad.  Potential applications include improved reinforced
              composites; a substrate for catalysts and enzymes; a new way to place pesticide
              to plants; improve textiles; and advanced filters.  More exotic applications
              include solar sails for propulsion in space, large space antennas, reflecting
              lenses and mirrors, and others.  This research is part of a broader effort to
              understand and exploit the uniqueness of nanoscale technologies.
