Title       : Development and Evaluation of Lead-Free Solders for Electronic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1997    
File        : a9523447

Award Number: 9523447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris E. Fine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Semyon Vaynman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1039,1771,9161,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              R              
                                                                                            F
                           E b                 C o m p O b j                                 
                                                                                     \      
              W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                        
                                                              O b j e c t P o o l            
                                                                                     yb     
              yb                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       '   (   )   *   +   ,   -                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     NB6W    Word.Document.6      ;               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9523447 Fine 
              Fundamental aspects of alloy design, microstructural evolution, and
              solderability are addressed in this lead-free solders research project. 
              Modeling and simulation of intermetallic growth at the solder/substrate
              interface is carried out by using DICTRA and newly-developed THERMO-CALC
              softwares.  The study is conducted to improve the mechanical,
              thermo-mechanical, and electrical properties of low and higher melting
              temperatupe lead-free solders and solder joints; hence, the focus is on three
              areas:  (1) design of hierarchical high temperature (260 to 310(C) lead free
              solders; (2) dynamical microstructural evolution and its effect on the
              properties of solders and solder joints; and 3) design of fluxes aimed at
              improving the solderability of the lead-free solders.  Powders of Cu-Ni-Al and
              Ni-Ti alloys that exhibit pseudoelastic behavior are dispersed into selected
              lead-free solders.  The investigation of properties are measured as a function
              of solid-state aging for bulk solders and solder joints and the microstructural
              parameters are quantitized.   %%% This project is important to gaini ng
              increased fundamental understanding of physical, electrical, and  chemical
              properties of lead-free solders and solder joints. The result of this
              investigation of  the alloy design and development at high temperature lead
              free solders is expected to contribute significantly to the environmental and
              health concerning new electronic package technology.   ***                     
                  ;                                                                 O  h   
              +'  0                                                               &       2  
                  >     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (      
                                                          &                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          F       N       Z       w          
                                                  @   Macintosh HD:Applications:Microsoft
              Word 6.0.1:Templates:Normal         9523447         jyu         Bruce MacDonald
                   '@    "" ^b  @     v     @     xgb                   @                  
              Microsoft Word 6.0.1                 6                                  ;      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              h O       e                                                                    
                        j       j   j       j       j       j       j                        
                                                                1                            
                                                                                             
                        &   *   X       -                           j                        
                                                                               j       j     
                                                                               j             
               j                                       ~               j       j       j     
               j                           )                                                 
                                                             9523447 Fine  Fundamental
              aspects of alloy design, microstructural evolution, and solderability are
              addressed in this lead-free solders research project.  Modeling and simulation
              of intermetallic growth at the solder/substrate interface is carried out by
              using DICTRA and newly-developed THERMO-CALC softwares.  The study is conducted
              to improve the mechanical, thermo-mechanical, and electrical properties of low
              and higher melting temperature lead-free solders and solder joints; hence, the
              focus is on three areas:  (1) design of hierarchical high temperature (260 to
              310(C) lead free solders; (2) dynamical microstructural evolution and its
              effect on the properties of solders and solder joints; and 3) design of fluxes
              aimed at improving the solderability of the lead-free solders.  Powders of
              Cu-Ni-Al and Ni-Ti alloys that exhibit pseudoelastic behavior are dispersed
              into selected lead-free solders.  The investigation of properties are measured
              as a function of solid-state aging for bulk solders and solder joints and the
              microstructural parameters are quantitized.   %%% This project is important to
              gaining increased fundamental understanding of physical, electrical, and 
              chemical properties of lead-free solders and solder joints. The result of this
              investigation of  the alloy design and development at high temperature lead
              free solders is expected to contribute significantly to the environmental and
              health concerning new electronic package technology.   ***
