Title       : SGER: Nanoelectronic Functional Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9523423

Award Number: 9523423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vwani P. Roychowdhury   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523423  Roychowdhury  Continuing advances in the miniaturization of electron
              devices have made possible the fabrication of nanoelectric devices with feature
              sizes in the 1-100nm range.  However, it is widely believed that conventional
              integrated circuit design techniques will become impractical, due to the small
              size and the low current carrying capacity of nanostructured devices. 
              Proposals which envision novel ways to circumvent this problem have begun to
              appear in earnest.  The majority of these proposals use globally coherent
              quantum systems to generate computational abilities.  We differ from these
              proposals in that we use semiclassical global models as the basis from which to
              conceive nanoelectronic functional devices.  An additional point of departure,
              is our assumption that currently perceived limitations to realizing
              interconnects amongst the nanostructured devices will in time be overcome. 
              Finally, we restrict attention to niche applications, in which the collective
              activity of a large number of nanostructured devices give rise to useful
              computational functions.  The special purpose functional device concept adopted
              here can be contrasted with other approaches which envision the design of
              general purpose computers on the basis of quantum mechanical logic gates.   
              This work has been unified under a particular technology based on the creation
              of arrays of nanometer-sized metallic islands.  We consider different types of
              network mechanisms for the transfer of electrons between islands.  Depending on
              the types of transport nonlinearities permitted by the network links, we show
              that it is possible to generated different kinds of global activity in these
              networks.  We show, in addition that it is possible to impart a computational
              interpretation to these global activities.  In particular, we show that within
              a classical circuit theoretic model, non-monotone nonlinearities in the local
              transport can yield global associative memory effects.  We then show that this
              interpretation will remain  valid even when single-electron effects come into
              play, provided that the effective capacitance of the nanometallic islands is
              not too small.  We then investigate networks of islands in which the sole
              nonlinearity arises from single-electronics.  These networks are shown to be
              capable of associative memory effects, as well as yield approximate solutions
              to certain NP-complete optimization problems, provided that there is sufficient
              flexibility in the choice of inter-island capacitances.  Proposed future work
              includes:  (a) Development of novel theoretical techniques for the analysis and
              design of nanoelectronic networks, (b) Development of  detailed simulators for
              nanoelectronic functional devices on parallel machines, and (c) Incorporation
              of novel nanoelectronic device and network mechanisms in functional devices. 
              ***
