Title       : Dissertation Research: The Phylogenetic Position of Otavipithecus Namibiensis
               Quantitative Character Coding in Hominoid Phylogeny Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1995   
File        : a9523229

Award Number: 9523229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Conroy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will analyze the evolutionary relationships of Otavipithecus
              namibiensis, the recently  discovered Miocene hominoid species from Namibia. 
              The Miocene hominoids, a diverse  assemblage of fossil apes which occupied the
              Old World from roughly 22 to 5 million years  before present, gave rise both to
              humans and our closest living relatives, the African apes.   Consequently,
              understanding the evolutionary relationships of these early apes is crucial to
              the  study of human origins.  This study also will address a specific
              methodological problem in  hominoid studies:  the role of quantitative
              morphological characters in the reconstruction of  hominoid evolutionary
              relationships.  Current methods of coding quantitative characters into discrete
              character states for cladistic  analysis and several statistically-based
              methods new to primate systematics will be applied to  morphometric data taken
              from hominoid mandibles.  The relative effectiveness of these methods  will be
              compared.  The study sample will comprise fossil and extant hominoid mandibles
              housed  in collections in the U.S., Europe, and Africa, with an emphasis on
              constructing valid biological  samples and maximizing sample sizes. 
              Evolutionary analysis will be performed using current  computer-assisted
              methods of phylogeny reconstruction, and previously stated hypotheses 
              concerning the evolutionary relationships of Otavipithecus namibiensis will be
              examined in the  light of these results.  In addition to being a detailed
              investigation of the evolutionary affinities of Otavipithecus, this  study will
              provide the first rigorous examination of the role of quantitative character
              coding in  primate phylogeny reconstruction, the results of which ultimately
              may be generalized to additional  anatomical regions in hominoids, as well as
              to studies of other primate groups.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
