Title       : Nuclear Permeability as a Function of Cellular Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9523410

Award Number: 9523410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Feldherr feldheer@anatomy.med.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             IDx        @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       +       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      u      
              u                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                   2   3   4   5   6   7   8 
               9   :   ;   <                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      \ \  4 
                    L  4                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                9523410
              Feldherr   Recently, we found that signal-mediated nuclear import varies as a
              function of cellular activity.  Thus, as proliferating fibroblasts become
              quiescent there is a significant decrease in both the rate of macromolecular
              uptake into the nucleus, and the functional size of the transport channels. 
              Conversely, nuclear import capacity increases above the proliferating level in
              rapidly dividing, SV40 transformed cells.  These transport changes could have a
              significant effect on the regulation of transcriptional and translational
              events.  Similarly, the modulation of nuclear efflux could play a fundamental
              role in controlling cell metabolism.  Since substances exit the nucleus through
              the same transport channels that are used for uptake, and are subject to the
              same size restrictions, it is reasonable to assume that the import results
              mentioned above reflect overall transport activity.  However, it is also
              possible that specific factor which enhance signal-mediated import have no
              effect on export.  Therefore, considering its regulatory potential, we will
              investigate macromolecular movement  out of the nucleus in transformed,
              quiescent, and dividing BALB/c cells.  Relative efflux rates, as well as the
              size of particles that are able to exit the nucleus will be determined.  This
              will be determined.  This will be accomplished by injecting RNA- or
              polynucleotide-coated gold into the nucleoplasm and following its intracellular
              distribution by electron microscopy.  To facilitate export, the gold
              preparations will be treated with oocyte nuclear extracts, or specific proteins
              that are known to be required for nuclear efflux. %%%  This proposal will
              investigate the mechanisms by which components within the cell are transported
              across barrier (that is, the nuclear envelope) which separates the genetic
              material of the cell from the remainder of the cell (that is, the cytoplasm). 
              The rate at which material is transported is a reflection of the level of
              metabolic activity of the cell, but the mechanism which controls this is not
              clear.  A better understanding of this mechanism may allow researchers to cause
              a slow and quiescent cell to become an active cell. ***                        
               ;                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9420795    
                                      toni douglas                        toni douglas       
                      @      ?                            @                                  
                S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (              
                                                  1                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               @      b                                      
                                                                           @    F #          
                                       Microsoft Word 6.0                                    
                               3                                                             
                                       ;                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                 e =       e 
                               +                                                           j 
                   j   j       j       j       j       j                                     
                                               s   1                                         
                                                                       5               U     
                   T       3   s                       j                                     
                                                 s               j       j                   
                                                                 j               j           
                                         ~               j       j       j       j           
                             m                                                               
                                               9523410 Feldherr   Recently, we found that
              signal-mediated nuclear import varies as a function of cellular activity. 
              Thus, as proliferating fibroblasts become quiescent there is a significant
              decrease in both the rate of macromolecular uptake into the nucleus, and the
              functional size of the transport channels.  Conversely, nuclear import capacity
              increases above the proliferating level in rapidly dividing, SV40 transformed
              cells.  These transport changes could have a significant effect on the
              regulation of transcriptional and translational events.  Similarly, the mo
