Title       : Internal and External Causes of Climatic Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9523787

Award Number: 9523787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anjuli S. Bamzai                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1016199            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Ghil ghil@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1324,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9523787  Ghil, Michael  University of California, Los Angeles 
              Title: Internal and External Causes of Climatic Changes    The PI will study
              three general areas of climate:    1. He will continue research on the physical
              mechanisms of  Quaternary glaciations.  Simple and intermediate models of these
               mechanisms will be developed further, including zero-, one-, two-  and three
              dimensional models of the paleoceanic thermohaline  circulation (THC), in
              addition to the previously-modeled radiation  balance, ice-sheet mass balance,
              and hydrologic cycle.  Model  results will be compared in the spectral and
              temporal domain with  marine, ice-core and continental records, emphasizing
              rapid  variations associated with marine Heinrich and ice-core Dansgaard- 
              Oeschger events, and their spatial patterns.    2. Research on the
              low-frequency variability of the atmosphere,  emphasizing intraseasonal
              oscillations in the midlatitude  atmosphere, has proceeded through theoretical
              studies with a  hierarchy of simple and intermediate models, observational
              studies  of the longest upper-air datasets, and studies using the UCLA  general
              circulation model.  The PI shall complete this research  with a direct
              comparison of intermediate-model, GCM, and  observational-analysis results.  A
              laboratory study of barotropic  flow over topography should also shed further
              light on the  oscillations' physical mechanisms.    3. Natural climate
              variability on the interdecadal time scale is  the third, and new area of
              research.  Preliminary, univariate  studies of instrumental records will be
              extended to explore this  variability's spatial patterns.  Two- and
              three-dimensional THC  models will be coupled with active and passive
              atmospheric and sea-  ice models.  These models will be studied first for
              constant  radiative forcing and then for different scenarios of changes in 
              this forcing, due to solar variability, volcanic eruptions and  greenhouse-gas
              increases.  The interaction of these long-periodic,  intermittent or g radual
              changes with those caused by the short-  periodic annual cycle will be examined
              carefully.    All three thrusts of the investigation are aimed at clarifying
              the  interaction between the climatic system's natural variability - 
              intraseasonal, interdecadal or millennial - and the variable  forcing: external
              to the atmosphere, in the intraseasonal case, and  to the climate system as a
              whole, in the other two.  The tools to  be used are those of dynamical systems
              theory, for the model  studies, and of nonparametric statistics, for the model
              diagnostics  and data analysis.  Ultimately, the proposed research should 
              improve our understanding of the factors that contribute to or  limit the
              system's predictability on each one of the three time  scales under
              consideration.
