Title       : New Oxygen Ion Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1995   
File        : a9523157

Award Number: 9523157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49131              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Conrad zur Loye   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9523157  Zur Loye    In the previous funding period, it was shown
              that new oxide ion  conductors containing intrinsic oxygen vacancies can be
              readily  synthesized by creating intergrowth structures and, furthermore,  that
              such intergrowths can exhibit very high oxide ion  conductivities above an
              order-disorder transition. Although the  exact mechanism for this
              order-disorder transition is not yet fully  understood, it appears that by
              appropriate choices of structure  type and elemental compositions such
              transitions can be induced in  many types of intergrowth structures containing
              intrinsic oxygen  vacancies. This approach of creating intergrowth structures
              for the  synthesis of new oxide ion conductors is a general one, and can be 
              extended to other systems. During the proposed funding period,  major emphasis
              will be placed on investigating the precise  structural changes that occur
              during the order-disorder transitions  and on extending this work to include
              brownmillerite/rock salt  intergrowths and on modifying a class of materials
              which is  structurally related to the Aurivillius phase. It is expected that 
              new oxygen ion conductors will be synthesized and that their oxygen  ion
              conductivity and their stability in both reducing and oxidizing  conditions
              will be determined. The new materials will be  synthesized by high temperature
              solid state methods and  structurally characterized by Rietveld refinement of
              powder X-ray  or neutron diffraction data. Their chemical and physical
              properties  will be determined by standard electrical and analytical 
              techniques.   %%%  The objective of the proposed research is to synthesize new
              oxide  ion conductors and to characterize their structures, conductivities  and
              chemical stabilities. Oxide ion conductors have many important  applications in
              the areas of solid oxide fuel cells, oxygen  sensors, oxygen pumps and partial
              oxidation catalysts. Although  this class of materials has been known for a
              long time, there still  exists the general need  to develop new oxide ion
              conductors that  exhibit high conductivities and that are chemically stable
              under  both oxidizing and reducing conditions.
