Title       : Integration of Assessment of Global Climate Change with Local Air Pollution
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9523616

Award Number: 9523616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Prinn rprinn@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry D. Jacoby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523616  Prinn     Most policy analyses of the greenhouse gas issue do not
              consider the likely influence of local air pollution controls on global
              emissions, or on the evaluation of the cost of alternative greenhouse-gas
              control measures.  This lack occurs in part because the coupled climate science
              and policy issue is a great analytical challenge by itself; it also occurs in
              part because many of the analytical models used for assessment of the
              greenhouse issue take account of CO2 only, or they use CO2 as a surrogate for
              the more complex system involving several greenhouse-relevant gases and aerosol
              precursors.  Failure to consider the interaction between global and local
              aspects of anthropogenic emissions may prove to be a serious shortcoming in
              analyses of global climate change because these two aspects of environmental
              policy are linked in three important ways:  through the chemistry of the
              atmosphere, through the technology of emissions control, and through the
              interaction of local pollution policies with greenhouse gas control measures.  
                This research will explore methods and models for analyzing the interaction
              between policy choices regarding global climate change and likely developments
              in local air pollution control, and will include assessments of global climate
              change sources, policies, and impacts.  Preliminary versions of the needed
              models and data will be developed and tested using the MIT Integrated Framework
              and MIT models of urban air pollution.  This interdisciplinary task will deal
              with five main issues:  A. Characterization, for inclusion in models of future
              emissions, of the control policies that may be applied to emissions-producing
              activities (e.g., Nox and CO control in automobiles).  B. Modeling of air
              quality conditions in local urban metropoli in a way that is consistent with
              the prediction for larger regions in a global analysis framework.  C.
              Calculation of the emissions that are effective at national/regional scale
              considering the photochemical aging that occurs  to that portion of the
              emissions occurring in urban areas including the production of secondary
              pollutants like ozone and acid aerosols as the air is dispersed to
              national/regional scales.  D.  Valuation of the contributions of greenhouse gas
              control policies to local air quality and vice versa, in a way that can be
              integrated into assessments of net policy cost.  E.  Prediction of how the
              severity of local emissions control is likely to respond to increases over time
              in economic growth (and likely worsening of local conditions), so that this
              reaction can be included in long-term predictions of emissions of
              greenhouse-relevant gases.        This proposal focuses on the first three
              steps in this methodological development.  Research Task 1 is concerned with
              Point A; Task 2 involves research needed to develop methods for dealing with
              Point B; and Task 3 is concerned with the mapping in Point C.  In research Task
              4 these relationships will be tested using the MIT Integrated Framework and a
              plan will be prepared for subsequent stages of development of methods for
              integrating these components of emissions control policy.    Task 1.  Emissions
              Estimates and Control Functions.  Task 2.  Representation of Local Air Quality
              Conditions  Task 3.  Mapping Between Local Concentrations and Effective
              Regional Emissions.  Task 4.  Testing of Relations in the MIT Integrated
              Framework.    The work will be carried out within the MIT Joint Program on the
              Science and Policy of Global Change.  The Co-Principal Investigators are
              Professors Henry D. Jacoby and Ronald G. Prinn, who are Co-Directors of the
              Program.  Also serving as Co-Investigators are Professors Gregory McRae and
              Richard Eckaus.  Each of the four are expert in one or another aspect of the
              interdisciplinapy work:  Eckaus on the emissions forecasting, Jacoby on the
              emissions forecasts and integration of the MIT Framework, Prinn on the
              atmospheric chemistry, and McRae on the local air pollution modeling.
