Title       : Process Control in Batch Manufacturing: Dynamics and Coordination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1995 
File        : a9523029

Award Number: 9523029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Yao yao@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on the problem of quality control in a batch
              manufacturing system. Its aim is to develop techniques for identifying policies
              and control measures to apply to quality control problems. The techniques are
              described as dynamic in the sense that they are not limited to parametric
              designs but also consider the finding of policies and controls. The focus is on
              sequential techniques. Sequential techniques  make use of the dynamic
              information that result from testing and process monitoring.  Process control 
              will be studied with other related logistics issues in batch manufacturing. In
              particular, the  research will proceed along the following directions: (1)
              inter-stage coordination under capacity  constraint, (2) coordination among
              production, inspection, and process revision, (3) coordination  among
              subassembly operations and substitutable components, and (4) computation,
              approximation, and  aggregation techniques. The research also aims at
              identifying certain optimal sequential procedures  and revealing their
              structural properties, particularly, optimal sequential policie s with
              threshold  structures. The basic methodology underlying the research emphasis
              is Markovian decision programming  incorporated with the use of stochastic
              comparison techniques, including those based on the notion of  stochastic
              convexity and stochastic submodularity.   This research will yield several
              benefits if  successful. It will advance the state of knowledge in quality
              control in batch manufacturing. In  particular, the effectiveness of the
              sequential contrml policies, the importance of quality dynamics,  and the
              coordination of process control with other production logistics represent key
              contributions.  In addition, there will be new industrial technology findings
              based on the research. Finally, there  are some educational gains as well. The
              research will present new teaching materials for an  engineering course in
              dynamic process control. This way, next generation engineers will benefit from 
              the research by taking the knowledge gained from the course to their various
              employing organizations.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
