Title       : Information Theory of Timing Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9523805

Award Number: 9523805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio Verdu verdu@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A comprehensive information-theoretic study of the capacity of  communication
              channels where information is transmitted via timing  is undertaken.
              Communication channels that lend themselves to this  study include: queueing
              systems, random transit channels, protocol  information, covert channels,
              time-jitter storage channels,  intracomputer communications subject to timing
              uncertainties. The  study of the capacity of the above models may be relevant
              in  stochastic discrete-event systems outside the realm of  communications.
              Among the random phenomena that blur timing  information, queueing is one of
              the most important practically and  theoretically. Queues are the basic
              modeling blocks of data  communication networks, so finding their Shannon
              capacity is a  problem for which there is ample motivation. Very recent results
              by  Anantharam and Verdu for the single-server queue have shown  considerable
              promise, and the Shannon theoretic study of queueing  systems plays a central
              role in this project. In these problems,  information is encoded in the times
              of arrival of packets to the  queueing system (in addition to the contents of
              those packets), and  the receiver observes the times of departure of the
              packets from  the queueing system. The common theme of the foregoing channel 
              models is communication via discrete-events in continuous time. In  most of
              these cases, finding the capacity of those channels is far  from elementary
              because information theoretic challenges such as  infinite memory, non-additive
              noise, feedback, non-standard input  constraints, nonlinear input-output
              dependencies are often present.  Source coding problems such as the rate
              distortion function of the  Poisson process and communication via observed
              Markov processes are  also under the purview of this project. In those
              problems,  exponentially distributed times play a central role, for which the 
              rich information theoretic structure of Gaussian problems finds a  novel
              counterpart. The tools required in this study are drawn fr om  probability,
              random processes and optimization; specifically from  information theory,
              queueing theory, Markov processes, and data  communication networks.
