Title       : MRA: High Performance Computing, Information Serving, and Data Visualization on
               Clusters of Shared Memory Multiprocessors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1999   
File        : a9523480

Award Number: 9523480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1885000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Woodward paul@lcse.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9523480  Woodward  A collaboration with the NSF Metacenter to develop effective
              uses of the emerging supercomputer architecture consisting of a cluster of
              shared memory multiprocessors (SMP's) is proposed.  Uses which will be
              addressed include not only high performance computing, but also providing high
              performance data and multimedia services over the National Information
              Infrastructure and scientific visualization of very large data sets.  A strong
              team of researchers with considerable experience with the clustered SMP and
              closely related computer architectures has been assembled under the auspices of
              a new Laboratory for Computational Science and Engineering (LCS&E) at the
              University of Minnesota.  Exploiting generous long-term loans of equipment as
              well as existing infrastructure, this team will work closely with the computer
              industry on system integration and software development and with the Metacenter
              on application development.  Because of a shared interest in this new Silicon
              Graphics architecture; this MRA will collaborate especially closely with NCSA. 
              However, the work of this Metacenter Regional Alliance is ultimately intended
              to be portable to other vendors' implementations of the clustered SMP
              architecture, and therefore should be applicable to the IBM SP-3 (Cornell), the
              Cray J90 (Pittsburgh), as well as the Convex Exemplar (NCSA).  This MRA team
              developed the Wgl resolution Power Wall display system and demonstrated it at
              Supercomputing '94.  The LCS&E team will work with NCSA and the Electronic
              Visualization Laboratory through its recently funded MRA, to help bring this
              technology into use at those sites and, particularly, at the I-WAY (Information
              Wide Area Year) demonstration at Supercomputing '95.  Because of the Minnesota
              team's extensive work in building very high performance disk I/O subsystems for
              workstations, a useful relationship with the Parallel I/O Initiative at
              Caltech, another recent MRA, is also anticipated.  Finally, the LCS&E team will
              work together with local  inner city high schools and with the TIES
              organization representing a consortium of 45 Minnestoa school districts to
              provide K-12 outreach throughout the state of Minnesota.
