Title       : Collaborative Project: Perception, Function and Development of Complex Vocal
               Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9523635

Award Number: 9523635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38961              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Searcy wsearcy@umiami.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY    Nowicki & Searcy, IBN 9408360,  Perception, Function and
               Development of Complex Vocal Signals            Animal communication plays an
              important role in many  biologically critical arenas, particularly social
              behavior,  including territorial defense and the attraction and choice  of a
              mate.  Bird song is one of the most spectacular cases  on this type of
              behavior, and much of what has been learned  about the development and
              evolution of animal communication  has been the result of studies of bird song.
               In this  research project, Dr. Searcy will investigate several  aspects of a
              common characteristic of bird song, different  song types.       In many
              songbirds, the males sing variable songs which  can be classified into a small
              number of song types.  For  example, male song sparrows sing five to thirteen
              different  song types each.  This pattern is found in many species but  little
              is known about either how such variability in song  develops in the individual
              or about how it functions in an  evolutionary sense.  A series of experiments
              conducted in  both the laboratory and the field will investigate:  (1) the 
              abilities of song sparrows to discriminate variation both  within and between
              song types;  (2) the ways in which such  variation contributes toward either
              attracting a mate or  discouraging other territorial males:  (3) the extent to 
              which song sparrows differ in the amount of variability in  their songs in
              different regions of the country; and (4) the  role of learning and cultural
              transmission in the  development of song type variability.  Taken together, the
               results of these studies will advance the understanding of  the evolution and
              development of animal communication.
