Title       : O2 Herzberg State Reaction with N2 - A Possible Source of Stratospheric N2O
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9523356

Award Number: 9523356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Copeland rich@mplvax.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom G. Slanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523356  Copeland     In this project, the production of nitrous oxide from the
              reaction of individual excited states (specifically, Herzberg states) of
              molecular oxygen with molecular nitrogen will be investigated. This reaction
              could potentially provide an atmospheric source of nitrous oxide. The general
              understanding of the sink and source terms that determine the atmospheric
              altitude profile of nitrous oxide is still evolving. Although the major
              fraction of atmospheric nitrous oxide comes from the soil and from
              anthropogenic activity, there may also be a stratospheric source. Recent
              isotopic measurements of stratospheric nitrous oxide suggest that all of it may
              not be formed on the earth's surface. Laboratory experiments performed by this
              SRI research group have demonstrated that the removal of the oxygen Herzberg
              states in collisions with nitrogen is quite rapid, and that at least for the
              higher vibrational levels of these states, nitrogen is the dominant quencher in
              the terrestrial atmosphere. The Herzberg states are generated in the upper
              stratosphere and lower mesosphere by absorption of solar radiation, and in the
              upper mesosphere and lower thermosphere by oxygen atom recombination. To have a
              significant impact on the stratospheric nitrous oxide budget, only a very small
              reaction yield would be required.   Laboratory experiments will be performed
              where oxygen molecules will be excited to a specific vibrational level of one
              of the three Herzberg states with a UV laser in a closed system containing
              oxygen and nitrogen. After the mixture is exposed to the resonant light for
              minutes to hours, the resulting gases will be analyzed for nitrous oxide using
              the extremely sensitive technique of frequency-modulated diode laser
              spectroscopy. If no nitrous oxide is detected, an upper limit for its
              production will be established, eliminating this reaction system from further
              speculation.
