Title       : Polymerized Bicontinous Cubic Lipid Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9523297

Award Number: 9523297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523297  O'Brien    The formation of nonlamellar lipid structures in biological
              and model lipid membranes has been extensively investigated in recent years,
              because of the interest in the possible biological function of nonlamellar
              structures.  At certain conditions of temperature and concentration polar
              lipids form geometrically complex liquid crystalline structures.  These
              nonlamellar phases include bicontinuous cubic phases (QII) and the inverted
              hexagonal phase (HII).  Whatever may be the biological significance of
              nonlamellar phases, it is clear that stabilized nonlamellar structures offer
              novel technological materials,  In the first two years of our research into the
              polymerization of nonlamellar phases we have successfully demonstrated a
              strategy for their stabilization.  The objective then of the continuing
              research is to utilize this proven strategy to prepare a family of stabilized
              QII as well as HII phases in a manner that preserves both the lipid and aqueous
              phase networks and retains the biocompatibility of their interface.  In order
              to accomplish these goals the research will involve the design and synthesis of
              new polymerizable lipids, the characterization of the phase behavior of the
              hydrated unpolymerized lipid assemblies, and the controlled polymerization of
              the lipids in nonlamellar phases with careful attention to the nature of the
              polymer, i.e. the location and size of the polymer chains, and the extent of
              polymer crosslinking.  The phase behavior and stability of the polymerized
              nonlamellar assemblies will then be determined.  The nonlamellar phases will be
              stabilized in a manner that extends the range of temperatures and
              concentrations that favor the existence of the desired nonlamellar structure,
              as well as increases the resistance of the assembly to dissolution by
              surfactants or organic solvents.  This research will provide researchers with
              novel biomaterials to probe the physics and chemistry of lipid-water
              assemblies.  Since several QII phases are known that vary in sy mmetry and the
              size of the aqueous channels, therefore polymerizable lipids will be designed
              to form QII phases of each of the commonly found  groups in order to generate a
              family of stabilized organic zeolites.  The interpenetrating networks of the
              QII phase suggests potential applications of these organic zeolites, which take
              full advantage of the lipid membrane surface for the localization of reagents,
              the immobilization of antibody fragments or abenzymes, or the incorporation of
              proteins for chemical or biological conversions, diagnostics, and/or separation
              applications.  Polymerized HII phases are expected to provide regular hexagonal
              arrays with uniform pore sizes in the highly desirable ca. 3 to 8 nm diameter
              range, i.e. large enough to permit the flow of globular proteins or water
              soluble random coil polymers.  The proposed research will provide a scientific
              basis for the technological utilization of nonlamellar assemblies.  The
              research will seek to provide a coherent understanding of the effect of the
              formation, location, and nature of polymer chains on the characteristics of
              nonlamellar phases.  ***
