Title       : Gate Control of Light Emitting and Lasing Thyristors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9523729

Award Number: 9523729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir V. Mitin mitin@ece6.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523729   Mitin  The development of new principles of optoelectronic device
              operation is a  problem of great importance for modern optoelectronic
              integrated circuits,  optical computing and optical communication systems.
              III-V direct band gap  PnpN thyristor-like structures are currently used as
              efficient  light-triggerable power devices, optical amplifiers, dynamic
              optoelectronic  memories, and two- and three-terminal optoelectronic switches.
              Progress in  fabrication technology has led to a significant improvement of the
               parameters of thyristor-like devices, which in turn has led to new 
              optoelectronic applications. Our proposed use of the intermediate  incomplete
              turn-off regime constitutes a new principle, which can  essentially extend
              functional capabilities of these potentially key  components of optoelectronic
              computing and optical-fiber communication  systems.  The proposed research is
              aimed at utilizing the incomplete  turn-off regime of gate controlled
              light-emitting and lasing thyristors for  modulation of light intensity and
              switching purposes. In this regime a part  of the middle p-n junction is
              reverse biased and blocks the current, while  the remaining part of the
              structure is highly conducting and  light-emitting. The size of the
              light-emitting area and the light intensity  in this region can be controlled
              using small gate signals. Moreover, gates  make it possible to control the
              position of the light emitting region.  These features allow decreased
              switching times of optoelectronic switches  and the creation of new types of
              optical devices for the high-frequency  modulation of emission intensity and
              logic circuits. In the proposed regime  of operation the mechanism of carrier
              removal is based solely on the  effects of the electric field, and is
              completely free of recombination  lifetime limitations, which define the speed
              of conventional operation  regimes.  The goal of this project is to develop a
              new type of  multifunctional optoelectronic device. The research will be based
              on  a  computer simulation of gate-controlled light-emitting devices and
              lasers.  Simulation of stationary and nonstationary squeezing of electron-hole 
              plasma in partially turned-off optothyristors will be carried out, to 
              investigate squeezing effects on the parameters of light radiation. Optimum 
              conditions for effective control of light power and decreasing of switching 
              times will be determined.  ***
