Title       : Sapphire Fiber Optic Sensors and Instrumentation Capable of Operation Above 1500
               Degrees Celcius
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9523311

Award Number: 9523311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anbo Wang awang@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent A. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell G. May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Claus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1208,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523311  Wang  Cylindrical sapphire optical waveguides have been shown to be 
              especially attractive for the fabrication of high temperature  sensor
              instrumentation capable of operation at temperatures  potentially up to 2000C. 
              The Fiber & Electro-Optics Research  Center (FEORC) at Virginia Tech proposes
              to develop low-cost  reliable sapphire fiber temperature, pressure, and strain
              sensors  which are desirable for the monitoring and control of many high 
              temperature industrial processes, including the combustion  process-vital for
              the power generation industry.  Seven different  sensing configurations will be
              systematically investigated,  designed and fabricated to determine the optimal
              scheme for each  parameter measurement.  These sapphire waveguide-based schemes
               include the balanced polarimetric sensor, the lead-insensitive  polarimetric
              sensor, the critical angle reflection intensity-  based sensor, the frustrated
              optical coupling intensity-based  sensor, and the grating-based
              wavelength-coded sensor.  The  selected optimal sensing schemes will then be
              further developed  into prototype sensor instrumentation units for system
              testing to  determine the system technical performance as well as the 
              feasibility of these sensors for the monitoring of the identified  high
              temperature industrial processes involved in the power  industry.  In addition
              to the sensor study, system development  and testing, the proposed research
              will also largely involve  research in waveguide evaluations and modifications,
              high  performance sapphire-to-silica fiber splicing, and high  temperature
              component fabrication which will directly support the  proposed sensor work.   
                The successful completion of the proposed program will result in  sapphire
              fiber sensor instrumentation to meet the needs of  monitoring and/or control of
              high temperature industrial  processes involved in the power generation
              industry, including  the combustion, boiling process, high temperature piping
              and  vessel systems.  ***
