Title       : Probabilistic Planning in Partially Observable Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9523649

Award Number: 9523649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265291             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Hanks hanks@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              AI planning algorithms have typically ignored issues involving what to do if the
              agent has incomplete or incorrect information about the world. Probabilistic
              extensions to classical planners can quantify the agent's state of information,
              but have not addressed the question of when the agent should act to improve its
              state of information, how it should do so, and what it should do upon receiving
              new information.  This project further extends planning algorithms to allow the
              building of plans with information-gathering actions, contingent execution, and
              iteration.  The approach is a synthesis of traditional symbolic-planning
              representations and algorithms with a Bayesian- decision-theoretic model of
              uncertainty and information gathering.  The project also explores the
              connection between the model and related work in the decision sciences and
              stochastic optimization (particularly existing work on partially observable
              Markov decision processes).  The project's empirical component undertakes to
              develop control strategies that allow probabilistic plans with feedback to be
              constructed efficiently.  The model is applied to problems in automated
              manufacturing and medical decision making.  This research project will develop
              effective algorithms for planning under uncertainty while accommodating the
              ability to sense and act on new information about the world, thus addressing a
              fundamental limitation in classical planning algorithms and allowing existing
              planning technology to be applied to a significantly wider range of application
              domains.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
