Title       : New Techniques for Audio, Image, and Video Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9523767

Award Number: 9523767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369092             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Pearlman pearlman@ecse.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                NCR-9523767  Pearlman, William A.  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute  New
              Techniques for Audio, Image, and Video Compression    The goal of this research
              is to investigate more effective  techniques for digital audio, image, and
              video data compression.   For audio, the intention is to employ more efficient 
              entropy-constrained, conditional and unconditional, quantization in  the coding
              of the critical subbands of the MPEG audio standard.   The dependence of the
              subbands is next exploited using set  partitioning in hierarchical trees
              (SPIHT) as done originally in   embedded, wavelet, zerotree coding of images. 
              The resulting  embedded coding allows delivery of different qualities of
              service  with a single compressed bit stream.  A newly developed SPIHT 
              procedure, which obtained probably the best-to-date monochrome,   still image
              results (lossy or lossless) and with extremely fast  encoding and decoding, is
              utilized for audio and also for color  image and video coding.  The extremely
              fast execution of the SPIHT  coding procedure makes it especially suitable for
              video, where a  requirement of real-time coding becomes an insurmountable
              obstacle  for other procedures. Both lossy and lossless coding are 
              investigated, as they fit naturally into the SPIHT framework.  It is expected
              that the results will surpass those of existing  standard systems, which do not
              produce naturally embedded code, and  are far more complex operationally and
              hence slower in execution.   Other investigations involve the use of
              information theoretic  criteria to create optimal adaptive subband compositions
              and the  use of trellis coded quantization (TCQ) in block discrete cosine 
              transform (DCT) and lapped orthogonal transform (LOT) coding.  The  adaptive
              subband decompositions pay off in better compression for  a given subband
              coding technique.  TCQ coding brings an efficient,  but complex technique
              operating on transform blocks, which preserve  regional characteristics of the
              image.  Finally, the SPIHT coding  algorithm pr ovokes several theoretical
              questions which are  addressed. Among them are the minimal information rates to
               determine octave ranges of random variables and convey subset  partition
              numbers and element numbers, and the mutual information  between significant
              bits of dependent random variables and between  their respective residual bits.
               Satisfactory answers to these  questions will lead to more efficient coding
              techniques with  decreased complexity.
