Title       : Dynamics of Spatio-Temporal Complexity: Baroclinic Flows at Moderate to Large
               Supercriticality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9523479

Award Number: 9523479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99269              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Mundt mundt@cascade.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey K. Vallis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9523479  Mundt and Vallis     Numerical and laboratory simulations of baroclinic
              flows have revealed that moderately supercritical baroclinic systems can
              exhibit a wide range of behavior (e.g., steady, periodic, chaotic).  Moreover,
              aperiodic, temporally-irregular solutions can exist even when the flow is only
              marginally unstable, that is, at small values of supercriticality.  Most
              previous dynamics studies have been directed to studying this parameter range
              which corresponds to lower driving than is geophysically realistic.  Studies in
              more realistic parameter ranges are usually conducted with more complex models
              and have provided more empirical results, often relying on statistical
              descriptions, rather than a more thorough understanding of the dynamics.  Thus,
              little is known about the transition from chaos to turbulence in the
              supercriticality range characteristic of atmospheric flows.     The principal
              investigators will carry out a study focused on the complexity (disorder) of
              flows with increasing supercriticality, guided by their hypothesis that the
              level of mean flow supercriticality is directly related to the disorder of the
              eddy flow.  They will explore the extent to which behavior observed at low
              supercriticality is also observed at more geophysically realistic ranges of
              supercriticality.  Models of varying complexity will be employed, although the
              initial effort will focus on a two layer, quasi-geostrophic model.  A variety
              of analysis tools, from empirical orthogonal function analysis to wavelet
              analysis, will be employed.     The importance of this study lies in the
              potential for better understanding of the variability of the atmosphere, and
              has important implications a wide range of weather and climate issues,
              including weather regime transitions and parameterization of meridional heat
              flux in climate models.  ***
