Title       : Effects of Species Traits and Biodiversity on Ecosystem Processes in Arctic
               Tundra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9523247

Award Number: 9523247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Duguay                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185487             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The objective of the proposed research is to explore the effects of
              biodiversity in plant species and of plant growth forms on ecosystem cycling of
              C and N in arctic tundra.  In addition, it will test whether functional groups
              of plants are an adequate approximation for detailed physiological information
              on all species in understanding vegetation controls over ecosystem processes
              and the response of ecosystems to perturbations.  Effort will be focused on
              arctic tundra, a high priority ecosystem.   An integrated program of modeling
              and experimentation is proposed.  Experimentally, diversity in the tundra will
              be manipulated by removing different growth forms of tundra plants (which
              represent functional groups in the tundra), and all possible combinations of
              the species from two growth forms, and effects on ecosystem C and N cycling
              will be measured.  Simulation models will be developed to compare the effects
              of growth of individual plant species on ecosystem-level resource supply and
              cycling with those of functional groups constructed by averaging the
              characteristics of the different species in the growth form.    Plant growth
              for each of the major species and competitive interactions during growth will
              be modeled.  Model predictions of the distribution and net productivity of
              species or functional groups, ecosystem net primary productivity, and nutrient
              cycling under current climatic conditions will be compared.  Effects of 
              removing or introducing species or functional groups from the models, and of
              perturbations caused by herbivory or variable climate will also be examined,
              and will be compared with experimental results of removing species and growth
              forms.  This research is novel because it is the first experimental test of the
              effects of species and growth form diversity on ecosystem processes in the
              tundra, and it is the first attempt to model the impact of plant species and
              their competitive interactions on ecosystem processes in arctic tundra.  This
              is critical to understanding the  role of species and functional group
              diversity in ecosystem processes.
