Title       : Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical and Hydrologic Controls on Solutes and
               Flowpaths in Alpine Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1995 
File        : a9523886

Award Number: 9523886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Williams markw@snobear.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald H. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1167,1584,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will elucidate geochemical and biogeochemical processes that are 
              important at the watershed scale in alpine basins.  It will examine these
              processes using a  multidisciplinary approach that combines stable and
              radiogenic isotopic tracers, plot level  experiments, process-level modeling,
              and field research to constrain the modeling results.  New  isotopic tools will
              be used in combination with field measurements of water quality and quantity to
               separate the relative contributions of atmospheric and soil-derived sources of
              nitrate in  streamwaters, increase our understanding of the biogeochemical
              reactions controlling alkalinity, and  provide insights into the dynamics of
              sulfur deposition.  A key objective is the development of a  robust model for
              solute transport built on fundamental principles to predict the fate of a
              variety of  chemical constituents at many sites and under a variety of
              conditions.  The relevant geochemical,  biogeochemical and hydrologic processes
              are interconnected at the watershed scale and therefore must  be studied
              together.  The algorithms used for this  physically-based mathematical model
              provide an  integrated approach to modeling the hydrology and biogeochemistry
              of seasonally snow-covered alpine  basins with model development and field work
              inextricably linked.  This research will contribute to a  better fundamental
              understanding of the biogeochemical and geochemical processes, which can be
              used in  responding to anthropogenic perturbations. The multidisciplinary
              research team has cooperative support  from the National Biological Service,
              U.S. Geological Survey, the National Park Service, and the  Long-Term
              Ecological Research Program.  The two study areas are Niwot Ridge/Green Lakes
              Valley and  Lock Vale Watershed, which lie on the east slope of the Colorado
              Front Range.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
