Title       : Hydrological, Geochemical and Microbiological Controls On Anaerobic Aromatic
               Hydrocarbon Degradation In a Petroleum-Contaminated Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9523932

Award Number: 9523932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349535             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek R. Lovley dlovley@microbio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1584,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523932  Lovely  Hydrological, Geochemical and Microbiological Controls on
              Anaerobic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation in a Petroleum-Contaminated Aquifer
              Contamination of ground water with petroleum products as the result of
              terrestrial oil spills and leaking underground storage tanks is a serious
              environmental problem.  Toxic aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene and toluene
              which are important components of many fuels are water soluble and thus migrate
              with the ground water.  Although aerobic microorganisms can readily degrade
              aromatic hydrocarbons when oxygen is present, most heavily contaminated ground
              waters lack oxygen.  Recent studies have demonstrated that there are
              microorganisms which can degrade aromatic hydrocarbon contaminants in ground
              water in the absence of oxygen.  These anaerobic microorganisms use ferric iron
              or sulfate as an electron acceptor for the degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons
              rather than oxygen.  In some instances this anaerobic microbial metabolism can
              remove significant quantities of aromatic hydrocarbons from contaminated ground
              waters and may alleviate the need for expensive remediation procedures.  The
              purpose of this research is to determine what microorganisms are responsible
              for the degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in petroleum-contaminated aquifers
              and to elucidate the environmental conditions which might stimulate or inhibit
              this microbial activity.  Microbial populations in the aquifer will be studied
              with several novel techniques including a newly developed molecular method
              which permits rapid screening of the microbial populations in the sediments
              without the need to culture the microorganisms.  The effect of changes in
              hydrological and geochemical conditions on the size and activity of the
              anaerobic microbial populations responsible for aromatic hydrocarbon
              degradation will be evaluated with field observations and in aquifer material
              that is experimentally manipulated in laboratory incubations. It is expected
              that these studies will identify key p arameters which can be used to simply
              and reliably predict the rate and extent of anaerobic romatic hydrocarbon
              degradation in petroleum-contaminated environments.  ??
