Title       : Aggregation Dynamics of Antarctic Krill, Euphausia Superba Dana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9523748

Award Number: 9523748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Huntley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Meng Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523748  Huntley  Patchiness of zooplankton and micronekton is a feature of
              central  importance in marine ecosystems.  In the Southern Ocean,  aggregations
              of krill (Euphausia superba) are of particular  interest.  The distribution and
              dynamics of such aggregations are  critical to determining the transformation
              of organic matter  (e.g. carbon flux) and the fate of populations in the sea. 
              These  phenomena are especially important in the mesoscale and sub-  mesoscale
              domains, where patchiness is most strongly expressed.   If the means to predict
              patch dynamics is lacking, then so is the  means to adequately predict carbon
              flux and population dynamics  at these scales.    Traditional models of
              zooplankton patch dynamics generally treat  animals as Lagrangian particles
              whose aggregations are determined  solely by processes of advection and
              diffusion.  This approach  ignores behavior induced by biotic and abiotic
              forces and  manifested as purposeful motion - motion that clearly is not 
              governed by advection and diffusion.  Attempts to acknowledge  behavior in
              models of plankton motility have been successful at  the level of the
              individual animal, but even the most powerful  computers cannot run
              individual-based models to predict  aggregation dynamics of n individuals.   
              This proposal takes a new approach to modeling aggregation  dynamics, based on
              "bio-continuum" theory, and provides for model  verification against benchmark
              field data.  Rather than relying  on traditional advection-diffusion equations,
              which ignore  behavior, the bio-continuum theory recognizes behavioral forces
              in  the context of statistical mechanics.  Model output provides  information
              on animal behaviors, manifest as swimming velocities,  that are absent from
              other models of patch dynamics.  All key  model variables are measurable using
              common sampling techniques,  such as acoustic Doppler and multiple net systems.
                 The proposed research consists of studying both the internal and  external
              forces that act on aggregations of  Euphausia superba.  First, the internal
              forces of autocoherence (that act between  animals to maintain patch integrity)
              will be measured in krill  aggregations observed in the Gerlache Strait region
              in 1992.  Our  database consists of more than 20 such aggregations observed by 
              ADCP and MOCNESS.  Second, the effect of external physical  forcing on krill
              aggregations will be studied by embedding krill  swarms of typical scales in
              numerically modeled flow regimes that  are typical of the Gerlache Strait
              region (Zhou and Niiler 1995),  by combining the Princeton circulation model
              (e.g. Blumberg and  Mellor 1987) with our aggregation model.    This research
              provides a novel, dynamic theory of animal  aggregations in the sea.  A study
              of the fundamental theory,  coupled with model realizations that can be
              compared to observed  aggregations of Euphausia superba, may lead to more
              realistic  predictions of krill patch dynamics in the Southern Ocean.  Such 
              predictions are critical to more accurate measurements of carbon  flux and the
              population dynamics of krill.
