Title       : MRA: Network-Based Training and Access to HPC using NERO-- the Network for
               Engineering and Research in Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1997  
File        : a9523629

Award Number: 9523629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1446801            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cherri M. Pancake pancake@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve W. Otto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice E. Cuny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen D. Malony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rubin H. Landau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Tad Reynales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret M. Burnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Driscoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Robert Daasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9523629  Pancake    This  NSF Metacenter Regional Alliance(MRA) will Link the
              Oregon Joint Graduate School of Engineering to the San Diego Supercomputer
              Center.  The objective is to improve access to high performance computing (HPC)
              for engineers and scientists in the Pacific Northwest.  Facilitating this
              collaborative work will be a high speed fiber optic network, the Network for
              Engineering and Research in Oregon (NERO), which was first deployed in 1994. 
              The proposed MRA will exploit that infrastructure to expand the HPC user
              community through distributed access to HPC platforms, to tools and 
              environments supporting parallel programming, to online training materials and
              example applications, and to key human resources via several types of remote
              collaborative sessions. The MRA will exploit the NERO infrastructure to
              provide:    a distributed, network-based repository of information on HPC tools
              and environments    network-based, interactive training  materials and example
              applications developed specifically for non-computer scientists    network-wide
              interactive broadcasts of seminars, remote user group meetings, and interactive
              consulting sessions, both real-time and as after-the-fact replay    desktop
              videoconferencing, shared white boards and shared file system for MRA
              collaboration over the NERO wide area network    highspeed network access to
              parallel computing platforms within Oregon    dedicated network access to the
              San Diego Supercomputer Center    a framework for collaboration with other
              national and regional metacenters
