Title       : An Integrated Machine Vision Based System for Solving the Cutting Stock Problem
               in the Leather Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9523123

Award Number: 9523123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sundararaman Anand sam.Anand@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. McCord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523123  Anand   This research addresses the problem of using an integrated
              machine vision system in the optimization of the cut and minimization of the
              scrap losses in the leather industry. This is a cutting stock problem in which
              machine vision technology is applied to optimize the cuts and minimize scrap.
              The operation involves cutting smaller irregular leather pieces from a larger
              piece in the shoe industry. Based on input from shop schedule and the prices of
              leather parts, a systems approach is applied for planning the cutting
              operations. The machine vision is used in acquiring the image of the leather
              pieces and the shoe parts for which the leather pieces are to be attached,
              polygonizing them, and storing the polygonized images in separate image
              databases. Using the polygonal images of the leather pieces, the shoe parts,
              and the manufacturing priorities as input, algorithms are developed for solving
              the irregular shape cutting stock problem from irregular sheets. The layout
              information for each leather piece is stored in a layout database and
              communicated to the cutting operator as a graphic display on a terminal.
              Alternatively, the layout information is converted to a numerical control (NC)
              code and fed to a computer numerical control (CNC) controller for automated
              cutting (laser or waterjet cutting of leather).    The general cutting stock
              problem has applications in a number of industries, including construction,
              sheet metal, apparel, textile, and glass. Most of the parts in these industries
              are irregular in shape. Therefore, any methodology or algorithm that improves
              the utilization of raw materials in these industries can substantially reduce
              scrap losses and make them more competitive. This project is focused at
              developing such a tool. The outcome of this research will also help automate
              some of the critical operations in these industries and thus, reduce
              overdependency on human labor and experience.
