Title       : Relative Roles of Stream-Subsurface Hydrologic Exchange and Microbial and
               Chemical Transformations in Controlling Heavy Metal Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9523881

Award Number: 9523881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Conklin martha@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9523881  Conklin    The specific aims of this project are to determine the
              constraints on heavy-metal transport in a shallow groundwater aquifer with low
              dissolved oxygen that intercepts oxic surface water in a perennial stream. 
              Heterogeneous chemical and biological reactions are enhanced in shallow
              groundwater flow paths that are recharged from the stream (hyporheic zone), due
              to mixing with oxic streamwater and increased contact with geochemically and
              biologically active sediment coatings.  Our central hypothesis is that the
              secondary hydrologic residence time in the hyporheic zone and the increased
              contact of the streamwater with the sediment are adequate to permit
              microbial/chemical transformations of heavy metals to be the dominant removal
              mechanism for a coupled stream-aquifer system.    We plan to identify the most
              important hydrologic, biological and chemical factors that enhance oxidation of
              dissolved metals in the hyporheic zone.  The proposed work spans point
              measurements (batch experiments) to field measurement at the kilometer-scale. 
              The field  situation that we will study in a contaminated alluvial basin in
              Arizona (Pinal Creek) is typical of heavy-metal contaminated stream-shallow
              groundwater systems.  Previous mass balance work at the field site indicated
              that interplay between hydrologic and microbial/chemical processes in the
              hyporheic zone at Pinal Creek significantly reduced basin-wide exports of
              dissolved manganese (the principal metal contaminant at this study site) to
              downstream areas.  In this study we will use a combination of measurements in
              the laboratory (batch, column, and sandbox), along with field experimental data
              and modeling analysis to determine the relative importance of physical and
              chemical processes.  Specifically, we will identify the dominant mechanism of
              Mn(II) oxidation in the hyporheic zone and determine the relative roles of
              biological and chemical factors, and hydrologic mass transfer limitations.  We
              will adapt and extend the Transient Storage Mod el for application as a
              reactive transport model for stream-shallow groundwater systems.  Our
              multi-scale study will allow us to determine the role the hyporheic-zone
              processes have on the mass balance of manganese in the entire contaminated
              alluvial drainage basin.  This system provides a unique opportunity to separate
              hyporheic zone processes from basin-wide processes; the parameters determined
              from this study will be used to constrain a coupled stream-shallow groundwater
              transport model with applications in other drainage basins.
