Title       : Computational and Applied Aspects of Multiperiod Stochastic Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9523275

Award Number: 9523275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185120             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Birge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9523275  Birge   This research is a continuation of a previous NSF funded
              project on stochastic programming. Specifically, this project will continue the
              development of solution methods, approximation procedures, models , and
              structural results for multiperiod stochastic programs. These objectives will
              be accomplished through the development of new decomposition methods for
              distributed processors, including integer variables and nonlinear functions,
              new methods with interior point techniques that focus on distributed solutions,
              new bounds on the value of the stochastic solution and approximation solutions,
              new techniques for bounding stochastic integer programming problems, and new
              approximations and methods using specific model characteristics to enable
              accurate results. Cmmparisons will consider alternative approaches with
              computational effort, error analysis, and the value of information and model
              complexity. The models will be applied to a variety of problems drawn from
              manufacturing, finance, vehicle routing, power systems planning, and energy
              policy. The goals are to obtain efficient practical solutions with known error
              characteristics.    Many optimization problems are characterized by parameter
              values that are not known with certainty. Stochastic programming recognizes the
              uncertain nature of parameters to model and solve problems. The algorithms
              developed in this research will provide additional capabilities for solving
              complex decision problems which generally possess greater number of parameters
              with uncertain values. The explicit recognition of uncertainty in model
              building combined with more efficient algorithms for solving the models will
              lead to higher  decision quality. The impact of improved decision quality from
              an economic point of view can be very significant. Further, the models
              investigated and the solution techniques produced will help to advance the
              knowledge in the area.
