Title       : Dissertation Research: Production and Distribution of Chalcolithic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1995      
File        : a9523625

Award Number: 9523625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Mr. Staso Forenbaher will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in the
              Estremadura region of Portugal, the westernmost land of continental Europe.
              During the Chalcolithic (Copper Age), the Tejo estuary penetrated deep inland,
              effectively turning it into a peninsula over 100 km long and 50 km wide. The
              area thus forms a discrete archaeological region. Mr. Forenbaher will conduct
              two types of work. First he will excavate at the site of Casas de Baixo to
              collect a large systematic sample of lithic materials as well as contextual
              information and organic for radiocarbon dating. Excavation will be carried out
              in 1 m. sq. units and continue until an adequate lithic sample has been
              obtained. Secondly, Mr. Forenbaher will analyze lithic collections from a large
              number of Chalcolithic sites. These include quarries where raw materials were
              obtained and stone tools produced, small settlements, larger fortified
              settlements and human burials. Specimens will be measured and described both to
              establish artifact classes and to determine the degree of standardization
              within each. Raw materials will also be sourced to tie them to point of origin.
               Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies emerged and it is
              clear that the Portuguese Chalcolithic sites represent an early stage in this
              process. Based on very carefully worked artifacts which appear in some graves,
              it is evident that social hierarchies had begun to appear during this time but
              the extent to which society generally was organized along such principles is
              uncertain. Through his research, Mr. Forenbaher will be able to determine how
              lithics functioned within the social system. He will examine the degree to
              which standardized products were manufactured and this will provide information
              on the extent of economic centralization. By tracing finished products to the
              raw material source he can reconstruct the extent and direction of trade
              networks and the degree of centralized control involved.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will shed new light on the origins of social complexity and
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
