Title       : Analysis of the Initial Reactions of Plant Fatty Acid Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9105830

Award Number: 9105830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan G. Jaworski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fatty acid biosynthesis in plants is a primary metabolic pathway               
              that is necessary to provide the fatty acyl components found in the            
              lipids of membranes and vegetable oils.  The initial sequence of               
              reaction for this pathway are under reevaluation since a new                   
              condensing enzyme, 3-ketoacyl-ACP synthase II (KAS III), was                   
              discovered in spinach.  KAS III has properties in vitro that are               
              consistent with it being the enzyme that catalyzes the initial                 
              priming reaction of fatty acid synthesis.  The objective of this               
              proposal is to obtain in vivo evidence that it is an essential                 
              component of fatty acid synthesis and normally acts to catalyze the            
              initial condensation.  In addition, the metabolic role of acetyl-              
              CoA-ACP transacylase and KAS I will be reevaluated.  Previously,               
              these two enzymes were thought to initiate fatty acid synthesis.               
                                                                                             
              The biochemical characterization of KAS III to be completed                    
              includes substrate specificity and level of acetyl-CoA-ACP                     
              transacylase activity copurifying with KAS III.  The effects on                
              rates of, and regulation of fatty acid synthesis will be evaluated.            
              IN addition, the in vivo role of KAS III and acetyl-CoA-ACP                    
              transacylase will be evaluated using isolated chloroplasts.  The               
              results of this proposal should help to determine the initial steps            
              of fatty acid biosynthesis in plants.//
