Title       : Receptor-Like Protein Kinases in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9105388

Award Number: 9105388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Walker WalkerJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas D. Randall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This laboratory has identified a gene that appears to encode a                 
              novel class of receptors in plants.  The molecular architecture of             
              this putative plant cell receptor is reminiscent of the receptor               
              tyrosine kinases (e.g. epidermal growth factor receptor, insulin               
              and insulin-like receptors, and platelet-derived growth factor                 
              receptor) known in animals.  It consists of a cytoplasmic domain               
              that is homologous to the serine/threonine-specific protein                    
              kinases.  This kinase domain is linked, via a membrane-spanning                
              stretch of amino acids, to an extracellular domain.  This                      
              extracellular domain is related to S-locus (self-incompatibility)              
              glycoproteins of Brassica, which are involved in pollen                        
              recognition.  The newly isolated gene may represent a prototype of             
              an entire class of plant cell receptors with protein kinase                    
              activity.  The proposed research will establish the biochemical                
              properties of the maize putative protein kinase and obtain a clear             
              understanding of its tissue, cellular, and subcellular                         
              distribution.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              All cells bear on their surfaces molecular receptors that sense                
              external information and relay this information into the cell.  The            
              subject of the proposed research is a newly identified receptor-               
              like molecule in plants.  The structure of this molecule resembles             
              that of some important growth factor receptors of animal cells.                
              The goal of this project is to study the biochemistry and                      
              distribution of this molecule in plants.  Molecules of this type               
              could be of profound importance in developmental and environmental             
              responses and cell to cell signaling in higher plants.
