Title       : Studies on the Cytopathogenic Protein from Naegleria Ambebaeand its Activities
               in Cultured Vertebrate Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1994      
File        : a9105554

Award Number: 9105554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thelma H. Dunnebacke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pub Hlth Fdtn Enterprises
	      13200 Crossroads Parkway N
	      City of Industry, CA  917463420    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Free living amoebae of the genus Naegleria were found to contain            
              a filterable agent (NACM, Naegleria amoeba cytopathogenic material)            
              that could destroy a variety of vertebrate cells in culture in a               
              highly distinctive manner.  After a delay of 4-6 days, a new                   
              product, detected by monoclonal antibodies made to NACM, developed             
              in the cytoplasm of the treated cells at a time shortly preceding              
              the rapid and complete disintegration of the entire culture. Active            
              products from such cells could be passaged on new cultures. The                
              objective of this investigation is to identify by amino acid                   
              sequence the biologically active NACM and to use this identity to              
              determine the causal relationship between it and the new cell                  
              products.  The isolation methods include hydrophobic interaction,              
              gel permeation, and affinity chromatography, followed by                       
              preparative and analytical electrophoresis.  The identification                
              methods include bioassay, determination of amino acid sequence,                
              peptide synthesis and antibody production and use in immunoassays,             
              immunochemical identification, quantitation, and analysis.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Essentially, NACM is a protein which, in some as yet unknown                   
              fashion, triggers in cultured vertebrate cells both the production             
              of more of itself (or a close homolog) and the specific death of               
              the cell.  Elucidation of the mechanism underlying the NACM                    
              phenomenon could have broad implications for biology.
