Title       : Biochemical Basis of Phytoalexin Synthesis in Sorghum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9105943

Award Number: 9105943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Nicholson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry G. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Goldsbrough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal deals with the synthesis of 3-deoxyanthocyanidin                 
              phytoalexins in sorghum.  It involves characterization of an enzyme            
              suspected to be involved in deoxyanthocyanidin synthesis,                      
              determination of the timing of initiation of the synthetic pathway             
              by analysis of pathway intermediates by 14C labeling, the appearance           
              of mRNA specific to genes regulating phenylpropanoid and flavonoid             
              synthesis, and comparison of juvenile and mature stages of plants              
              to determine differences in their ability to express resistance.               
              The phytoalexins are synthesized in a site specific manner within              
              vesicle-like inclusions in cells that are under fungal attack.  The            
              deoxyanthocyanidins are both fungitoxic and phytotoxic and they                
              accumulate specifically within the immediate area of the infection             
              site at an exceptionally early time in the disease interaction.                
              Three hours prior to the onset of accumulation there is a marked               
              increase in the level of extractable chalcone synthase enzyme                  
              activity in the host tissue.  As these compounds are phytotoxic                
              they are themselves toxic to the cells that produce them.  It is               
              hypothesized that the synthesis of the phytoalexins occurs in a                
              compartmentalized fashion that protects the host tissue from their             
              toxic effects and in a manner that allows for their directed                   
              synthesis and release at the site of fungal perturbation.  These               
              studies will help to elucidate natural mechanisms of plant                     
              resistance to pests with important implications for agricultural               
              applications.//
