Title       : Production and Regulation of Organelle Transport in Melanophores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9105553

Award Number: 9105553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leah T. Haimo leah.haimo@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                As a model system to study organelle transport, pigment granule              
              aggregation and dispersion will be analyzed in lysed melanophores              
              from the teleost fish, Tilapia mossambica and Fundulus                         
              heteroclitus, and the movements of isolated granules along                     
              microtubules will be assessed in vitro.  The aim of the project is             
              to determine whether or not dynein and kinesin have opposing roles             
              in the generation of bidirectional pigment granule transport in                
              melanophores and to understand the mechanism by which the two                  
              directions of transport are regulated.  This laboratory has                    
              previously determined that dispersion requires protein                         
              phosphorylation via cAMP dependent protein kinase while aggregation            
              requires protein dephosphorylation via calcineurin.  Experiments               
              will be carried out to determine if dynein, kinesin, or other                  
              components of the pigment granule transport system in the                      
              melanophores are substrates for the kinase and phosphatase.  If                
              these substrates as well as the motors generating opposing                     
              movements are identified, then it may be possible to elucidate the             
              mechanism by which the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation signal            
              is translated into transport in a given direction.                             
                                                                                             
              The orderly transport of membrane-enclosed subcellular compartments            
              from one region of the cytoplasm to another is a very important                
              problem in cell biology.  Such transport phenomena are responsible             
              for a wide variety of cellular functions, including endocytosis and            
              secretion.  In the case of melanophores of fish, the transport of              
              the pigment granules radially from an "aggregated" central location            
              to a "dispersed" situation results in a change in the coloration               
              of the skin of the fish, and is an important adaptive response to              
              predation.  This project will result in information that will be               
              of use in not only understanding fish coloration, but also all                 
              other microtubule-mediated translocations of subcellular                       
              compartments.
