Title       : Molecular Analysis of the Aphid Transmission of Pea Enation Mosaic Virus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1994       
File        : a9105334

Award Number: 9105334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. A. de Zoeten bppchair@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Demler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent analyses of the luteovirus and related PEMV group have                  
              identified a capsid subunit implicated as the determinant of                   
              circulative aphid transmission.  It is hypothesized that the                   
              recognition between virus and vector is mediated by specific                   
              receptors occurring in the aphids' salivary system.  THe objectives            
              of this study are twofold.  First, it is proposed to apply sequence            
              analysis of transmissible and nontransmissible strains of PEMV to              
              examine the mechanism of expression and suppression of this                    
              phenotype.  Second, the specificity of the virus-vector interaction            
              will be exploited to produce specific probes for application in EM             
              in situ localization studies to identify the site(S) within the                
              vector leading to this recognition.                                            
                                                                                             
              This research concerns the molecular basis of aphid transmission               
              of a group of economically important plant viruses known as the pea            
              enation mosaic viruses.  This study will provide information on the            
              viral protein domains involved in aphid transmission of the virus,             
              and the genetic mechanisms that lead to the expression of specific             
              viral phenotypes.  In addition, it will provide information on the             
              pathway of virion transport, as well as on the presence and                    
              location of viral receptors in the aphid vector.  Since there is               
              currently no known plant resistance mechanisms for these viral                 
              groups, understanding this transmission process may suggest methods            
              for both vector and virus control.
