Title       : Prehistoric Human Ecology on the Golfo Dulce, Southern CostaRica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1992     
File        : a9105666

Award Number: 9105666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47356              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hoopes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              During preliminary field reconnaissance in 1990, Dr. John Hoopes               
              located 22 prehistoric sites on and around Golfito bay, Costa                  
              Rica.  Ceramic and lithic artifacts indicate that these cover a                
              time range from 500 B.C. to 600 A.D.  Among the most important                 
              discoveries were two large shell midden sites with excellent                   
              preservation of organic materials.  This is rare in wet tropical               
              regions. Each of these sites contained high concentrations of                  
              well-preserved mammal, bird, fish and human bone in addition to                
              shell. Large quantities of charcoal and pottery were also                      
              present.  With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Hoopes                 
              will conduct excavation at both shell middens. He will collect                 
              samples of a wide variety of organic as well as inorganic                      
              remains.  A team of specialists has been assembled to analyze                  
              these and it will place specific emphasis on those aspects which               
              will permit reconstruction of prehistoric environmental and                    
              subsistence patterns.  Lake core sediments will also be collected              
              to allow placement of these sites into a broader                               
              paleoenvironmental context.  Finally, a preliminary survey of                  
              local caves and rockshelters will be conducted to search for                   
              sites dating to the earliest periods of occupation of the region.              
                                                                                             
               While considerable archaeological attention has been focussed on              
              the development of agriculture in temperate regions, relatively                
              little is known about how human populations adapted in tropical                
              areas.  Yet it is clear that chiefdoms and complex societies                   
              developed in such regions in Middle America and the goal of this               
              research is to learn about the subsistence base which allowed                  
              this to happen.  It is also known that prehistoric groups in the               
              American tropics utilized both root crops as well as maize, but                
              it is not clear when the latter was adopted and the role it may                
              have played in the development of social complexity.  It is not                
              lack of archaeological interest but rather poor preservation                   
              which has hampered research and what makes Dr. Hoopes sites so                 
              important is the excellent preservation of both faunal and floral              
              remains.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              In addition to the regional knowledge which will emerge, this                  
              research is important because it will increase our understanding               
              of long-term human adaptations to the humid tropics.  It will                  
              also provide insight into how tropical forests may be used on a                
              sustained basis.  Given the involvement of graduate students, the              
              research will contribute to the training of young scientists.
