Title       : Metabolism of Circulating Hormones by the Fish Gill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9105247

Award Number: 9105247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In addition to its well-known respiratory function the mammalian               
              lung plays an important role in regulating a variety of plasma                 
              hormones and also serves as a highly efficient biological filter               
              of other blood-born molecules.  The anatomy of the lung is ideally             
              suited to perform these activities, 1) the entire blood volume                 
              first passes through the lung before it is divided between the                 
              other organs, and 2)  the extensive capillary network of the lungs             
              provide a very large surface for interactions between plasma                   
              molecules and metabolically active cells.  Previous work in this               
              laboratory has shown that the fish gill has anatomical features                
              identical to the lung and subsequent studies have confirmed that               
              the gill, like the mammalian lung is able to metabolize circulating            
              hormones such as angiotensin and the catecholamines, epinephrine               
              and norepinephrine.  Thus hormone regulation by respiratory organs             
              developed very early in vertebrate evolution and is not a feature              
              unique to the lung.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will further delineate the metabolic                     
              capabilities of the gill with respect to a variety of important                
              cardiovascular hormones including angiotensin, atrial natriuretic              
              peptides, catecholamines, serotonin and a novel vasoactive peptide             
              hormone T60K that was recently found in this laboratory.  An                   
              isolated perfused gill technique has been developed to quantify                
              metabolism and identify the important enzymatic steps.  Findings               
              form these studies will be compared to hormone metabolism in intact            
              fish to further identify the over-all importance of the gill in                
              hormone regulation.  In addition, preliminary screening will be                
              done on the ability of the gill to metabolize foreign compounds                
              such as those found in polluted environments.  Isolation and                   
              culture of pillar cells, endothelial cells unique to the gill, will            
              also be done to permit cell-specific metabolic activity.                       
                                                                                             
              Results form this research will be important to endocrinologists               
              and physiologists interested in endocrine control mechanisms and               
              the phylogenetic development of the vascular endothelium as a                  
              metabolic organ.  These results are also important because they                
              provide the initial direction for further work on the ability of               
              the gill to metabolize toxic substances, the latter delivered to               
              the gill via the blood or the environment.//
