Title       : Comparative and Developmental Analysis of Surface Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9105226

Award Number: 9105226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Benjamin Bouck U25209@uicvm.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 This study will address the regulation of cell form and the                 
              segregation of surface domains in a model unicellular system,                  
              Euglena.  In Euglena, cell form is maintained by a peripheral                  
              membrane skeleton that is bound to the plasma membrane by an                   
              integral membrane protein, IP39.  The interactions between IP39                
              and the two major membrane skeletal proteins (articulins) will be              
              dissected by isolating the binding region, evaluating the                      
              significance of phosphorylation of that site, and determining its              
              amino acid sequence with a combination of partial peptide                      
              sequencing and deduction of amino acid sequences from cDNA clones.             
              The 80 and 86 kD membrane skeletal proteins (articulins) will be               
              radiolabeled and fragmented to identify their binding domains to               
              each other and to IP39.  Partial peptide sequencing will be                    
              correlated with the deduced amino acid sequences now available from            
              the cDNA clones of both proteins.  A genomic library will be                   
              constructed and the cDNAs will be used to identify clones with 80              
              and 86 kD encoding regions.  Regions 5' (upstream) to the cDNAs                
              will be of particular interest as they may contain sequences                   
              specific for regulating the synthesis of proteins of the cell                  
              surface.  A 205 kD protein associated with the membrane skeleton               
              will be further assessed, as it has immunoidentity and a size                  
              similar to the vertebrate membrane skeletal proteins.  C-DNA clones            
              for the 205 kD proteins will be selected and sequenced for                     
              comparative studies.  Targeting signals for flagellar specific                 
              components (mastigonemes and the paraxial rod) will be sought from             
              analysis of amino termini obtained from sequence analysis of cDNA              
              clones for paraxial rods and mastigoneme proteins.  Regions upsteam            
              to the cDNAs will be sequenced using clones from the proposed                  
              genomic library in order to identify regulatory signals specific               
              to flagella-localized proteins as distinguished from the cell                  
              surface restricted articulins and IP39.                                        
                                                                                             
              The long-term goal of this research is to understand the molecular             
              and biochemical bases for generating and maintaining cell form and             
              for targeting proteins to areas critical to generating cell form.
