Title       : Mechanism of Action of Interferon-gamma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1991   
File        : a9105645

Award Number: 9105645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124689             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brooklyn HSC
	      450 Clarkson Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112032012    212/270-1000

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The means by which interferons (IFNs) activate gene expression               
              through interaction with cellular receptors is being actively                  
              investigated.  It has been shown that intracellular human IFN-gamma            
              can activate characteristic responses in murine cells despite the              
              normal species-specificity barrier presumed to be due to the                   
              receptor.  This effect is not due to induced synthesis of murine               
              IFNs or TNF.  Experiments to be performed will determine whether               
              other secondary mediators could be responsible.  If they are not,              
              alternative mechanisms by which intracellular IFN-gamma may                    
              activate gene expression and the relationship between this response            
              and the normal physiological pathway for IFN-gamma action will be              
              investigated.  To examine the role of secondary mediators, the                 
              induction of MHC class II mRNA expression in cells will be assayed             
              in cells expressing intracellular IFN-gamma transiently or under               
              a regulatable promoter, or after delivery of IFN-gamma protein by              
              liposome fusion.  Neutralizing antibodies and inhibitors of protein            
              synthesis will be added to such cells to block the action or                   
              production of secondary mediators.  To examine mechanisms by which             
              intracellular IFN-gamma can activate responses, a search will be               
              made to identify cytoplasmic proteins which interact with free IFN-            
              gamma.  Mutations of the IFN-gamma molecule will be used to explore            
              the role of C-terminal domains in both normal extracellular and                
              intracellular activity.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The "comon wisdom" is that inteferons exert their effects, such as             
              induction of specific gene expression, on target cells via                     
              receptor-mediated signal transduction.  The proposed work embraces             
              an unconventional concept, i.e., that an extracellular ligand can              
              have an intracellular function.  The experiments proposed will                 
              explore the hypothesis that IFN acts directly, possibly within the             
              nucleus, to turn on specific genes.  The information obtained from             
              this study could turn out to be applicable to signaling mechanisms             
              used by other cytokines and growth factors.
