Title       : Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotopes in Soils as Indicators of Continental Paleoclimates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1993  
File        : a9105112

Award Number: 9105112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Savin sms7@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiahong Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   There is far less quantitative information about the evolution            
              and history of climate on the continents than in the deep sea.                 
              Among the reasons for this is a scarcity of quantitative proxy                 
              indicators of continental climate.  The work outlined is an effort             
              to develop and apply techniques for using oxygen and hydrogen                  
              isotope ratios of minerals in soil profiles as indicators of                   
              climatic conditions during the soil-forming process.  The initial              
              stage of the research will consist of detailed studies of a series             
              of active weathering profiles developed on a variety of parent                 
              materials in a variety of climatic regimes.  Weathering profiles               
              targeted for this study include lateritic soils in the Amazon Basin            
              of Brazil, saprolites on the Virginia Piedmont, and weathering                 
              profiles developed on Hawaiian basalts under varying rainfall                  
              regimes.  The approach combines careful field description,                     
              petrographic and mineralogical study, isotopic analysis of soil                
              water and isotopic analysis of separated soil minerals.  We expect             
              this proposed study of modern weathering profiles to lead to an                
              understanding of the climatic factors which control the isotopic               
              compositions of soil minerals.  In a later stage of the project we             
              will apply the results of the initial stage of the work to the                 
              study of paleosols.  The most important result expected from the               
              proposed work is the development of new tools for the study of                 
              continental paleoclimates.  When these tools are widely applied in             
              this and later studies, the information obtained will be useful for            
              global paleoclimatic reconstructions and the testing of climate                
              models.
