Title       : lecular Biology and Biochemistry of Heme and Copper- ntaining Dissimilatory
               Denitrifying Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9105711

Award Number: 9105711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean LeGall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              That type of anaerobic (or alternative) bacterial respiration                  
              called denitrification entails utilization of branched                         
              electron transport chains.  Nitrate is reduced to nitrite by                   
              electrons donated by reduced quinones to a b-type cytochrome                   
              subunit and thence to the molybdo-iron-sulfur subunit of                       
              nitrate reductase, a complex, membrane-bound enzyme conserved                  
              in all known denitrifiers.  Nitrite is reduced to nitric                       
              oxide by electrons passing from the cytochrome bc1 complex to                  
              cytochrome c551 and then to cytochrome cd1, the nitrite                        
              reductase conserved in 90% of denitrifying isolates.  The                      
              other apparent denitrifiers make use of a copper protein                       
              nitrite reductase that reduces nitrite to nitric oxide and                     
              appears in several cases tested not to link reduction to                       
              phosphorylation but to function as a nitrite detoxifier.                       
              Nitric oxide reductase, as integrally membrane-bound enzyme                    
              and reportedly very nearly purified in only two or there                       
              laboratories, appears to be a bc-type cytochrome.  Nitrous                     
              oxide reductase is an eight-copper protein conserved in                        
              several denitrifiers and reported in one case to have a c-                     
              type cytochrome subunit.  Ancillary enzymes (e.g., cytochrome                  
              c',superoxide dismutase, and cytochrome c peroxidase)                          
              apparently serve to protect this type of respiration from                      
              possibly damaging oxidants.                                                    
              To study the copper enzymes of Achromobacter cycloclastes,                     
              obtaining tertiary structures for cupredoxin and the N2O                       
              reductase, a Model of docking mechanisms for electron                          
              transfer among these copper enzymes will be developed.  Genes                  
              for the copper enzymes will be cloned in E. coli and site-                     
              directed mutagenesis will be used with the possibility of                      
              transfer of the genes into P. stutzeri mutants lacking                         
              nitrite and/or nitrous oxide reductase.  One goal will be                      
              reestablishment in vitro of the entire physiological electron                  
              transfer chain from pyridine nucleotide to terminal oxidant.                   
              Two unusual, perhaps unique, cytochromes that appear to bear                   
              ancillary roles in denitrification will be studied                             
              intensively.  These are, first, the high-spin-heme-bearing                     
              "b'-type" protein from B. halodenitrificans which reversibly                   
              binds nitric oxide; and, second, the cytochrome c-552 from                     
              anaerobically but not aerobically grown P. stutzeri Zobell                     
              strain, which undergoes alteration to become a cytochrome c                    
              peroxidase.  Investigation of the unusual properties of the                    
              B. haloldenitrificans nitrite reductase will be carried out                    
              to determine how the enzyme fits into the Gram + cell.  The                    
              mechanism for regulating the performance of D.  desulfuricans                  
              hexaheme as either nitrite or nitric oxide reductase will be                   
              investigated.
