Title       : Toward a Model for Mineral Dissolution Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1991  
File        : a9105318

Award Number: 9105318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118786             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Casey whcasey@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this study is to compare the acid-base                   
              surface chemistry and dissolution kinetics of a series of minerals             
              of similar composition and increasing structural complexity.  This             
              series includes bromellite (corundum, quartz), phenakite,                      
              chrysoberyl (and beryl).  This study is intended to establish a                
              link between models for dissolution of simple oxides, which are                
              easily studied, and rock-forming minerals containing several                   
              potential sites for dissolution.                                               
                   The research entails determining the dissolution rate laws for            
              phenakite, chrysoberyl and beryl as a function of pH and                       
              temperature in the range of 15-80 degrees C.  Data already exist               
              for the other minerals.  An essential part of the research is                  
              comparison of the dissolution activation energies with the                     
              enthalpies of hydrogen- and hydroxyl-ion adsorption.  This                     
              comparison will determine the extent that variations in equilibrium            
              adsorption enthalpies with pH account for the reported variation               
              in dissolution activation energies with solution pH.                           
                   The proposed minerals have properties which are uniquely                  
              suited to establish the aforementioned link.  All dissolve                     
              sufficiently slowly that solute diffusion does not affect the                  
              reaction rate.  Thus the acid-base surface chemistry, which                    
              controls the pH-dependence of the reaction rate, can be easily                 
              characterized.  Most importantly, the coordination chemistry of                
              cations to oxygens is consistent in the entire series of minerals.             
              This research involves fundamental understanding of the kinetics               
              of dissolution in common rock-forming minerals necessary to get at             
              the basics of rock weathering are metamorphism.
