Title       : Households, Popular Consciousness & Economic Crisis in Argentina and Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9105941

Award Number: 9105941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry A. Selby selbyhenry@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project studies changes in family and household ideology,                 
              organization and practices in the lower and middle classes of two              
              cities in Latin America, one in Argentina and one in Mexico.  At               
              the present time Mexico is apparently recovering from a                        
              depression of 8 years, while Argentina is entering a new, more                 
              drastic stage of economic problems.  The project will examine the              
              survival strategies of households in two cities, looking at the                
              internal organization of the households, how they manage their                 
              funds, investments, and time, and how they deal with changes in                
              the labor market.  The project will examine how people represent               
              their household responsibilities to themselves and to others, and              
              how they understand local, regional, national, and international               
              economic changes.  Methods include surveys, intensive interviews               
              and participant observation, in collaboration with Argentinean                 
              and Mexican social scientists.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important because Latin America has undergone                 
              severe economic stress, and will continue to do so for the near                
              future, at the same time that its population has become                        
              increasingly urban.  Anthropological research has established the              
              profound importance of the household in understanding how people               
              cope with difficulties.  This project will add to our knowledge                
              by comparing similar households in countries at different stages               
              of economic development.  The ultimate goal is to construct a                  
              folk theory of labor economics and the international system, in                
              order to understand how Latin Americans understand their economic              
              plight.  This sort of information will be important to policy                  
              makers in assessing the impact of different international                      
              policies on the urban population.
