Title       : Regulation of Expression of the Nitrogen Fixation (nif) genes of K. pneumoniae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9105280

Award Number: 9105280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney G. Kustu kustu@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              The nifA gene product (NIFA protein) is required to activate                   
              transcription of the nitrogen fixation (nif) operons in a wide                 
              variety of gram-negative bacteria belonging to the phylum "Purple              
              bacteria and their relatives".  To activate, NIFA binds to sites               
              100 bp upstream of nif promoters and allows RNA polymerase sigma               
              (54 holoenzyme form) to denature the DNA strands around the                    
              transcription startsite- that is, to isomerize from closed to open             
              complexes.  We succeeded in demonstrating activity of the NIFA                 
              protein from Klebsiella pneumonia in vitro by developing an assay              
              that allowed us to detect activity in crude preparations.  We found            
              that NIFA is assisted in activating transcription by the                       
              integration host factor (IHF), a small protein that bends the DNA              
              between upstream NIFA sites and nif promoters to increase contracts            
              between the activator and polymerase.  During the next grant                   
              period, we will attempt to purify active NIFA and study its                    
              properties-its DNA-binding and its presumed ATPase activity, which             
              is rare for transcriptional activators.  In addition, we will use              
              electron microscopy to characterize specialized nucleoprotein                  
              structures (SNUPS) that form at nif promoters in the presence of               
              activator, polymerase, and IHF.  In the presence of the NIFL                   
              protein, Klebsiella NIFA is inactivated by molecular oxygen or                 
              combined nitrogen.  We will attempt to demonstrate this                        
              inactivation convincingly in crude preparations and, using it as               
              an assay, to purify and characterize NIFL.
