Title       : Molecular Analysis of Dynein Isoforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9105835

Award Number: 9105835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Asai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Dynein is a protein which "powers" the translocation of                     
              molecules along microtubules.  Dynein is responsible for ciliary               
              and flagellar beating, organelle transport (including axonal                   
              transport), and aspects of mitotic anaphase motion.  Distinct                  
              isoforms of dynein are thought to perform each of these functions.             
              It is hypothesized that dynein is the composite of motor domains               
              that are common to all dyneins and tether domains that are unique              
              to each isoform and that define the location of the isoform and                
              link the dynein to the molecule that is translocated along the                 
              microtubule.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The long term objective of this project is to determine the                    
              structures of dynein isoforms that are expressed in the developing             
              sea urchin embryo, an excellent system for the study of dynein                 
              isoforms.  The complete sequence of sea urchin axonemal dynein beta            
              heavy chain has recently been determined.  The goals of the current            
              three year project are to produce a library of monoclonal                      
              antibodies to selected epitopes along the length of the beta chain,            
              to use the antibodies to determine what epitopes are exposed on the            
              surface of the native dynein molecule, and to begin the exploration            
              of isoform-specific epitopes.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This project will provide new information that is critical for the             
              elucidation of the molecular mechanism of dynein activity, and will            
              lead to an eventual understanding of the structural basis for                  
              dynein isoform functional diversity.
