Title       : Protein Import into Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1993  
File        : a9105609

Award Number: 9105609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Verner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this proposal is to investigate events that occur in             
              the cytosol of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae prior to or                  
              during the import of proteins into mitochondria.  Emphasis is                  
              placed on interactions between mitochondrial precursor proteins and            
              cytosolic components.  Such components will be identified and their            
              function in the import process assessed.  The influence of                     
              cytosolic factors on precursor conformation will be analyzed.                  
              Experiments will be performed to determine if precursor proteins               
              fold tightly in the cytosol subsequent to their synthesis in the               
              cell or are either prevented from folding or actively unfolded                 
              prior to the import reaction.  Experiments will also be conducted              
              to evaluate the overall importance of a cotranslational import                 
              mechanism and to determine if precursor synthesis and import are               
              coupled in vivo.  To achieve these goals, S. cerevisiae will be                
              used to perform both in vitro and in vivo experiments.  A                      
              completely homologous yeast in vitro import system that has been               
              recently developed will be a fundamental component of the approach.            
              Since both the cytosolic extract required for in vitro precursor               
              synthesis and mitochondria are isolated from the same type of cell,            
              interactions between these two cellular components can be studied              
              and the results more directly applied to the situation in vivo.                
                                                                                             
              The mitochondrion, a vital organellar component of the eukaryotic              
              cell, is made up of proteins from two genomic sources:  some of                
              mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the mitochondrion's own DNA              
              and synthesized by its own transcriptional and translational                   
              machinery, while others are encoded by the nuclear genome and                  
              synthesized by the cytoplasmic translational machinery.  The                   
              question of how these proteins get from their sites of synthesis               
              to their functional locations in the mitochondrion is an important             
              and widely-studied one.  The two aspects of the problem addressed              
              in this proposal, namely (1) whether or not cytosolic factors are              
              involved in the import of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins               
              into the mitochondria, and (2) whether or not some proteins are                
              translocated into the mitochondria co-translationally, that is,                
              while they are still being synthesized, as opposed to post-                    
              translationally, that is, after the synthesis of the protein is                
              completed, are important, somewhat controversial, and timely.  It              
              is anticipated that these studies will lead to fundamental new                 
              insights into the mechanism of mitochondrial biogenesis.
