Title       : G Proteins and Insulin Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9105802

Award Number: 9105802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo G. Romero ggr+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Insulin is one of the most important regulators of biological                  
              functions.  However, our present knowledge on the mechanisms of                
              action of insulin is very limited.  Insulin interacts with cells               
              by binding to a specific surface receptor and, upon binding,                   
              generates specific biochemical signals that control various                    
              metabolic processes that occur inside the cell. One of the various             
              signals used by insulin is the generation of small chemical                    
              mediators.  These mediators are complex sugars that act by                     
              regulating a number of biochemical functions that determine the                
              metabolism of glucose, fat and other cellular components.                      
                                                                                             
              However, the mechanisms by which insulin regulates the generation              
              of these mediators are not understood.  Members of a family of                 
              regulatory proteins (G proteins) are involved in the generation of             
              insulin mediators.  It is not clear, however, how the insulin                  
              receptor communicates with these proteins.  Several alternative                
              hypotheses exist.  For instance, upon binding of insulin, the                  
              receptor becomes activated and may change the structure of other               
              proteins by attaching phosphate groups in specific sites located               
              in the target protein.  Alternatively, the activated receptor may              
              interact directly with these regulatory proteins, modifying them               
              transitorily and inducing their activation without generating any              
              long term chemical changes in the protein.  These and other                    
              possibilities will be examined by taking advantage of several types            
              of modified insulin receptors generated by recombinant DNA                     
              technology in which specific functions have been impaired.                     
                                                                                             
              It is possible that the major defects associated with the                      
              resistance of Type 2 diabetics to insulin may be related to the                
              mechanisms by which insulin transmits signals to the interior of               
              the cell.  This proposal addresses directly some important                     
              questions on the biochemical events that lead to the generation of             
              insulin mediators and the work proposed here should increase our               
              understanding of the molecular defects that lead to the diabetic               
              state.//
