Title       : Silicate Dissolution in Organic-Rich Aqueous Systems: Reaction Mechanisms and
               Rate Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1993  
File        : a9105778

Award Number: 9105778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip C. Bennett pbennett@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The goal of the proposed research is to examine the role of               
              organic-silica and organic-aluminum complexes in feldspar                      
              dissolution.  Organic acids have been implicated as important                  
              reactants in a number of weathering environments, and are suggested            
              to accelerate feldspar dissolution, increase feldspar solubility,              
              mobilize aluminum and silica in solution, and alter the equilibrium            
              between the solution and the precipitated secondary phases.  The               
              precise mechanism by which organic acids influence feldspar                    
              dissolution, however, and their significance in varying surficial              
              weathering processes, is not well established.  In natural waters              
              at circum-neutral to acidic pH, there appears to be four primary               
              processes:  proton hydrolysis, solution complexation of aluminum,              
              solution complexation of silica, and surface coordination resulting            
              in accelerated dissolution.  Depending on the environmental                    
              conditions and the organic acid species present, the dominant                  
              mechanism may be one or a combination of any of the four                       
              possibilities.                                                                 
                   The approach for the proposed study is to combine three                   
              independent methodologies to investigate a simple feldspar-aqueous-            
              -electrolyte system.  Dissolution experiments will be done to                  
              quantify the effects of various organic-acid anions on dissolution             
              kinetics as a function of pH, temperature, and solution                        
              composition.  These experiments are designed to separate the                   
              parallel mechanisms of acidic hydrolysis, solution complexation,               
              and surface interactions.  Spectroscopic experiments will                      
              investigate the stability and formation kinetics of the solution               
              complexes of aluminum and silica.  Raman, FTIR, UV-VIS,   C and                
                Si methods will be used to gain information on bonding                       
              environment, stoichiometry, and stability as a function of pH and              
              temperature, using the same solution compositions as in the                    
              dissolution experiments.  These studies will be combined with                  
              molecular orbital modeling relationships of the organic-acid--metal            
              combinations as a function of organic-acid functional-group                    
              chemistry.  The results of the solution complexation studies and               
              modeling will be used to calibrate large-scale molecular-mechanics             
              models of silicate surfaces that will be used to test the                      
              hypothetical interactions derived from the dissolution experiments.            
                   This is a two-year study which will interface with ongoing                
              studies of field locations at which silica-organic complexation has            
              been identified as a significant weathering mechanism, and these               
              field sites will be used to test possible models of interaction.               
              In addition, the study will involve collaboration with Los Alamos              
              National Laboratory in developing methods of spectroscopic analysis            
              of organic-metal complexes in aqueous systems.
