Title       : Transcriptional Regulation by the P Gene, a Myb-Homolog in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1993   
File        : a9105631

Award Number: 9105631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313699             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Stillman stillman@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In previous work we have shown that the P gene regulates the                   
              accumulation of RNA from three genes of the flavonoid biosynthetic             
              pathway.  We have also shown that P encodes proteins with                      
              significant homology to the DNA binding domain of the c-myb family             
              of oncogene proteins.  Here, we propose a combined molecular,                  
              biochemical and genetic analysis of the regulatory function of the             
              P gene products.  We will generate antibodies against P proteins               
              and use these to identify the P-encoded proteins and determine                 
              post-translational modifications may be involved in the regulatory             
              function of P.  The role of the P-encoded expression of the P                  
              transcripts in different maize tissues.  The target sequences                  
              present in P regulated genes necessary for P regulation will be                
              determined by functional testing and in vitro DNA binding assays.              
              Finally, we will analyze mutations in the P-encoded proteins using             
              two complementary in vivo systems.  In the first, we will attempt              
              to reproduce P regulation of a target gene in the yeast S.                     
              cerevisiae; if successful, this approach will facilitate rapid                 
              analysis of P regulation and allow the identification of                       
              transcription factors which interact with P.  The second in vivo               
              system examines P function in the maize plant using the                        
              transposable element Ac to generate mutant alleles at the specific             
              sites in the P protein.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Together, these results should help to reveal fundamental                      
              mechanisms by which a plant regulatory gene activates                          
              transcription.***//
