Title       : Collaborative Research: Geochemistry and Paleontology of Precabrian Exposure
               Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1991      
File        : a9105534

Award Number: 9105534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90201              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Paul Knauth Knauth@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Horodyski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A combination of field, petrographic, and isotopic work has               
              identified 2 horizons in Precambrian carbonate strata (800 m.yr.               
              Beck Spring Dolomite, CA. and 1200 m.yr. Mescal Limestone, AZ)                 
              which were silicified during Precambrian erosion events.                       
              Microfossils have been discovered in chert samples from these                  
              horizons by R Horodyski and represent the first fossil record of               
              organisms that inhabited the Precambrian land surface.  Carbon                 
              isotope measurements in the associated carbonate reveal that the               
              land surface was extensively occupied by a terrestrial                         
              photosynthesizing community.  The microfossils in the chert are                
              therefore probably not isolated examples but are elements of this              
              extensive community.  An attempt will be made to establish the                 
              first paleontologic record for the Precambrian terrestrial                     
              environment.                                                                   
                   Field, isotopic, and petrographic work will establish the                 
              paleoenvironmental conditions of the paleokarst horizons and will              
              establish, in detail, which silica phases formed during Precambrian            
              weathering as opposed to those which formed during early diagenesis            
              of the original marine carbonates.  Cherts with strong textural and            
              geochemical characteristics indicative of subaerial formation will             
              be examined in thick petrographic sections for the presence of                 
              microfossils.  The biogenicity of microstructures will be                      
              evaluated, and an effort will be made to establish biologic                    
              affinities for any microfossils found.  Particular attention will              
              be given to comparing microfossils associated with the exposure                
              surfaces with those in the underlying marine cherts to establish               
              that the microfossils found associated with the exposure surfaces              
              truly represent microorganisms that were living in a terrestrial               
              setting.
