Title       : Affinity Labeling of Purine Nucleotide Sites in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9105116

Award Number: 9105116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta F. Colman rfcolman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Purine nucleotides have a multi-functional role in cellular                    
              metabolism.  For example, they are directly involved in                        
              kinase and ATPase reactions, they functin as regulators of                     
              many allosteric enzymes, they are involved (through the                        
              effects of cyclic AMP) in the action of several hormones,                      
              they contribute to the aggregation of platelets, and they                      
              participate in dehydrogenase reactions as part of the                          
              coenzyme molecule.  The immediate aim of this study is to                      
              develop the tools which will allow  systematic exploration of                  
              the amino acid residues in the purine nucleotide sites of                      
              proteins.  The general approach of affinity labeling will be                   
              used based on reagents previously synthesized in this                          
              laboratory as well as on new reagents which incorporate, at                    
              various positions of the purine or ribose ring, alkylating                     
              agents capable of reacting covalently with the protein; the                    
              purine nucleotide moiety will thus provide the specificity                     
              for chemical modification of the proteins within the binding                   
              sites.  The effects of these nucleotide alkylating agents on                   
              the rabbit muscle pyruvate kinase as well as on the rat liver                  
              ecto-ATPase will be examined.  The aggregation of blood                        
              platelets is induced by ADP, presumably by binding to                          
              receptor sites on the platelet surface membrane.  Affinity                     
              labeling with the purine nucleotide analogues will be used to                  
              identify and isolate the ADP receptor protein of platelet                      
              membranes.  Further, the effects of reactive cAMP derivatives                  
              on the platelet cAMP phosphodiesterase will be explored.  For                  
              each enzyme, the kinetics of the affinity labeling reaction                    
              will be examined, the extend of reagent incorporation will be                  
              determined and radioactive peptides will be isolated from                      
              proteolytic digests of labeled enzyme to identify the                          
              modified residue.  The first class of nucleotide analogues                     
              which we described, the fluorosulfonylbenzoyl nucleosides,                     
              has already been used to react at specific sites of more than                  
              50 proteins; it is likely that the newer compounds which we                    
              develop will similarly have broad applicability in the                         
              labeling of nucleotide sites in proteins and that these                        
              studies will serve as prototypes for the use of these                          
              compounds to probe other enzymes.
