Title       : Massive Burial Dolomitization: The Jurassic Vajont Oolite of Northeastern Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1991       
File        : a9105010

Award Number: 9105010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Hardie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The origin of massive replacement dolomite remains one of the             
              major unresolved problems of sedimentology.  Presently favored                 
              interpretations for the origin of massive dolomites have centered              
              on "early" low temperature processes involving surface or near-                
              surface waters, and alternative processes such as "late" burial                
              dolomitization have been overlooked by all but a few workers.  The             
              recent development of theoretical and computer models of                       
              groundwater flow systems in sedimentary basins makes the time ripe             
              for a new look at burial dolomitization.  Fluid flow is the one new            
              factor of major significance that needs to be added to our attempts            
              to resolve the dolomite problem.  This is a study of the dolomite              
              of the Jurassic Vajont Oolite of the Venetian Alps in northern                 
              Italy where preliminary field and geochemical work indicates that              
              dolomitization occurred at elevated temperatures under burial                  
              conditions.  The approach will be to integrate fieldwork,                      
              petrography, isotope and fluid inclusion data, and hydrologic                  
              modeling.  The Vajont Oolite offers several special features that              
              make such a study worthwhile:  (1) it is massively but not                     
              completely dolomitized so that dolomitization fronts that give                 
              direct clues to the subsurface pathways of the dolomitizing fluids             
              can be mapped (see Newton, Hardie and Phillips, 1990); (2) it                  
              consists of shallow water ooids that were resedimented in deep                 
              water by slope processes before alteration, thus shallow water                 
              dolomitization processes are ruled out; (3) the ooids and their                
              intergranular cements are well preserved in the undolomitized parts            
              of the Vajont sot hat it is possible to document in detail their               
              pre-dolomitization petrography and isotope geochemistry; thus, the             
              changes produced by dolomitization can be identified and measured;             
              (4) exposures of partly but massively dolomitized Vajont in                    
              roadcuts reveal that dolomitization fluid pathways were controlled             
              by fracture and fault planes of Late Tertiary age (Alpine orogeny),            
              indication unequivocally that the dolomitization was of "late"                 
              burial origin.                                                                 
                   The results of the study could shed new light on the role of              
              deeply circulated subsurface fluids in the origin of massive                   
              dolomites, particularly those that act as reservoirs to oil, gas,              
              and hydrothermal ores.
