Title       : Tunicate Lectins as Acute Phase Reactants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1993      
File        : a9105875

Award Number: 9105875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo R. Vasta vasta@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The overall goals of this research program are to characterize                 
              fully the molecular and gene structures and binding properties of              
              lectins from selected model invertebrates in order to understand               
              their evolution as recognition molecules and elucidate the                     
              molecular mechanisms of their biological functions.  During the                
              past three years, with NSF support, four distinct L-fucosyl-binding            
              lectins have been isolated from the plasma of the protochordate,               
              C.picta, and the biochemical properties and binding specificities,             
              in addition to L-fucose, have been characterized.   C. picta                   
              lectins bind phosphocholine, galactan, and sialic and muramic                  
              acids.  Furthermore, by the use of monoclonal antibodies and                   
              conventional antisera developed against the purified proteins and              
              synthetic peptides, it was shown that those lectins are cross-                 
              reactive with mammalian acute phase reactants, in particular with              
              c-reactive protein (CRP), serum amyloid P (SAP) and coagulation                
              factor VIII (F VIII).  Partial amino acid sequences have been                  
              determined for two of the lectins, and a peptide form one of the               
              lectins (CPL-I) has been characterized that exhibits high homology             
              to human F VIII.  A poly(A)+ containing RNA from hemocytes has been            
              isolated, double stranded cDNA synthesized, a library constructed              
              using the expression vector, lambda gt11, and twelve positive                  
              recombinant phage clones have been isolated.  Goals for the next               
              three years are:  1) to complete the amino acid and nucleotide                 
              sequences of both lectins to determine the extent of homology to               
              the acute phase proteins, CRP, SAP, and F VIII; 2) to develop                  
              probes required to identify and isolate genomic clones in order to             
              characterize the structure of their genes; and 3) to carry out                 
              studies to identify and characterize the interactions of C. picta              
              lectins with their putative natural ligands (exogenous or                      
              endogenous), in particular the bacterial community associated with             
              C. picta colonies and the tunic sulphated galactans.                           
                                                                                             
              Prior research from this laboratory has shown that the                         
              protochordates, tunicates, have carbohydrate-binding proteins                  
              (lectins) in their blood that resemble certain proteins found in               
              the blood of higher vertebrates, the so-called "acute phase                    
              proteins", that are thought to be components of a primitive defense            
              response.   The continuation of these molecular-level studies of               
              tunicate lectins will increase our knowledge of the physiology of              
              these interesting marine organisms and expand our understanding of             
              the origins of host defense mechanisms.
