Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of Steroid Gene Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9105007

Award Number: 9105007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Miesfeld RLM@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hormones are important physiological molecules which control a                 
              variety of cellular processes during both development and                      
              homeostasis of most all plants and animals.  Steroids represent one            
              class of hormones found in mammals, they are produced by several               
              small glands as by-products of cholesterol.  Steroid hormones                  
              circulate through the blood and enter cells by passive diffusion.              
              The most important mediators of steroid effects are steroid                    
              receptor proteins, which when bound with the steroid molecule, form            
              activated complexes that ultimately regulate the expression of                 
              specific target genes in the nucleus.  The integration of signals              
              coming from multiple steroid receptor interactions in a variety of             
              cell types, results in a coordinated response to changes in the                
              enviroment.  For example, most steroid molecules differ by only a              
              few atoms of carbon and oxygen, yet increased stress leads to                  
              secretion of glucocorticoids signalling the liver to release stored            
              glycogen while seasonal changes in the weather cause male birds to             
              alter the production of androgens thereby directly influencing                 
              certain brain cells that control mating songs.  Recent advances in             
              the molecular biology of steroid hormone action now make it                    
              possible to begin studies at the cellular level to investigate the             
              mechanisms that control these seemingly intricate  responses.                  
                                                                                             
              We propose to perform a series of molecular analyses using cloned              
              androgen and glucocorticoid receptor sequences to identify critical            
              residues important for binding of these receptors to the regulatory            
              regions of responsive target genes.  Using three basic approaches              
              these experiments should:  1) identify the nucleotide sequence of              
              optimal receptor binding sites on DNA, 2) delineate structure-                 
              function relationships of the androgen receptor which distinguish              
              it from the glucocorticoid receptor, this comparative analysis may             
              reveal important differences between the  receptors would explain              
              the observed cell-specific effects of these hormones, and 3)                   
              integrate androgen and glucocorticoid receptor sequences into the              
              chromosomes of cells that normally lack these receptors and                    
              determine how this alters their hormonal responsiveness.  We                   
              anticipate that as a result of these basic studies aimed at                    
              dissecting the molecular interactions of steroid receptors with                
              target gene DNA, we may gain a greater understanding of the                    
              circuitry which controls complex hormonal responses to                         
              developmental and environmental cues.
