Title       : Activation of Mast Cells and Eosinophils: Studies at the Single-Cell Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1995     
File        : a9105361

Award Number: 9105361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare M. Fewtrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Activation of non-excitable cells leads to an increase in                    
              intracellular calcium and the generation of other intracellular                
              signals which together initiate the physiological response.                    
              Single-cell studies of stimulus-response coupling in non-excitable             
              cells are proposed, using two immune effector cells, the mast cell             
              and the eosinophil, as model systems.  The mast cell has been a                
              valuable model for many years.  In contrast, remarkably little is              
              known about signal transduction in eosinophils, in spite of their              
              importance in a variety of immne responses.  Studies on mast cells             
              will continue to utilize the well-established rat basophilic                   
              leukemia cell line.  Guinea pig eosinophils will be used for more              
              preliminary studies of signal transduction in eosinophils.                     
              Quantitative image enhanced microscopy will be used to measure                 
              Ca2+, membrane potential, exocytosis and chemotaxis in single                  
              cells. In many cases more than one of these parameters can be                  
              monitored simultaneously in many individual cells.                             
              Electrophysiologcal measurements, utilizing the perforated patch               
              configuration of the whole cell recording technique, will be used              
              to identify calcium currents or any other conductances that are                
              activated in response to various stimuli.  Simultaneous                        
              measurements of intracellular Ca2+, ionic current, and exocytosis              
              are also planned.  The long term goal is to identify the mechanisms            
              by which intracellular Ca2+ is increased and to determine what                 
              aspects of the Ca2+ signal are important in the exocytotic and/or              
              chemotactic response of a cell.                                                
                                                                                             
              When mast cells or eosinophils interact with certain protein or                
              peptide effectors (such as immunoglobulins), the effectors bind to             
              receptors on the surfaces of these cells and result in a specific              
              physiological response (such as secretion of the contents of                   
              specific storage granules).  The question addressed in these                   
              studies is how the binding of a receptor at the outside of the cell            
              results in the physiological response, a phenomenon termed                     
              stimulus-response coupling.  It has already been established that              
              intracellular calcium is increased as a result of stimulation, and             
              that the increased calcium levels leads to the generation of other             
              intracellular signals culminating in the response.  This project               
              will probe the role of calcium in stimulus-response coupling, using            
              a combination of novel and established techniques (sometimes                   
              simultaneously) in order to extend our understanding of the                    
              mechanism of this form of transmembrane signal transduction.
