Title       : High Altitude Hunter-Gatherer Adaptation in the Middle RockyMountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1993  
File        : a9105914

Award Number: 9105914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134003             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Frison   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcel Kornfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Lou Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This action permits Dr. Frison and his colleagues to continue                  
              archaeological excavation at the Helen Lookingbill archaeological              
              site which is located at an altitude of 8600 feet in northwestern              
              Wyoming.  Previous work has demonstrated that the site contains                
              stratified deposits which date from ca. 10,000 to 5,000 years                  
              ago.  The rich and well-preserved faunal and lithic remains                    
              contain a record of human activity which spans the Paleoindian                 
              and Early Archaic periods.  The team will continue careful                     
              excavation with exact plotting of individual pieces.  Faunal and               
              lithic remains will be analyzed and supplemented with a number of              
              other studies. Additional work on site geology will provide clues              
              to site formation processes.  Such work on a broader regional                  
              level combined with pollen analysis should show how climate                    
              changed over time in this high altitude area and thus provide a                
              backdrop for the understanding of human response.  The region                  
              will also be surveyed for available stone sources which will be                
              chemically characterized.  Lithic materials from the site will be              
              matched to these to give a picture of broader environment use.                 
                                                                                             
              While many archaeological sites have been excavated in the                     
              adjacent Great Plains region, relatively little is known about                 
              how native American populations adapted to the harsher high                    
              altitude environments.  From information to date it appears that               
              a different cultural trajectory was followed in this latter                    
              region and that agriculture was not adopted.  To understand human              
              adaptation, it is necessary to excavate rich stratified sites                  
              with long cultural sequences and to date them accurately.  The                 
              Helen Lookingbill site provides an excellent opportunity for                   
              this.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our knowledge of a relatively unknown region of North America.                 
              It will shed light on how human societies at a simple level of                 
              technological organization adapt to a harsh and changing                       
              environment.  It will also further development of excavation and               
              recording techniques pioneered by Dr. Frison and his colleagues.               
              These will have widespread archaeological applicability.
