Title       : Classical and Quantum Gravitation and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1994     
File        : a9105935

Award Number: 9105935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $765010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Allen ballen@gravity.phys.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard E. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The effects of a network of cosmic strings in our                         
              universe will examined in light of recent progress in                          
              understanding the formation of structure on these networks.                    
              The principle concerns are gravitational radiation emission,                   
              the perturbations in the temperature of the cosmic background                  
              radiation, and the formation of large-scale structure in the                   
              universe.                                                                      
                   Aspects of quantum gravity associated with noneuclidean                   
              topology, and related problems involving closed timelike                       
              curves, will be examined.  The Casimir effect will be studied                  
              as a method for supporting the throat of a traversable                         
              wormhole against gravitational collapse.                                       
                   Research in general-relativistic astrophysics will                        
              include efforts to portray the spin-down of rapidly rotating                   
              neutron stars and to extend work on normal modes, stability                    
              and equilibrium configurations of relativistic stars and black                 
              holes.  Observations during the next decade may well fix the                   
              upper limit on neutron star rotation, and comparison with the                  
              theoretical limit would then sharply constrain the equation of                 
              state of neutron star matter.                                                  
                   The properties of matter compressed to very high                          
              densities by gravitational collapse will be studied as a                       
              possible mechanism for avoiding the formation of singularities                 
              in general relativity.  New methods will be developed for the                  
              numerical integration of the generalized Einstein equations                    
              containing higher derivative perturbative terms.
