Title       : Paleomagnetic Study of the Ordovician of Northern Arkansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1992     
File        : a9105146

Award Number: 9105146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95171              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Farr   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Sprowl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Ordovician Period in Earth history (505 to 438 million                
              years ago) appears to have been a time of rapid rotation of North              
              America.  The most important evidence for this rotation is                     
              paleomagnetic; the magnetic signal recorded in Ordovician rocks.               
              Unfortunately, the original magnetic record in many Ordovician                 
              rocks has been overwritten by a wide-spread hydrothermal alteration            
              during the late Paleozoic.  This late Paleozoic remagnetization                
              obscures our view of the Ordovician motions of North America and               
              has made it very difficult to develop a consistent record of                   
              reversals of the magnetic field (magnetostratigraphy) in the                   
              Ordovician.  Reversals are very useful as time markers in the rock             
              record because they occur simultaneously over the entire Earth.                
              The late Paleozoic overprinting is so widespread that it is of                 
              significant interest in itself:  What is the cause of the                      
              overprinting event?  Why are some rocks strongly affected and                  
              others hardly at all?                                                          
                   To detail the Ordovician motions of North America and develop             
              an Ordovician magnetostratigraphy, and at the same time examine the            
              nature of the late Paleozoic event, we need a set of Ordovician                
              rocks which are only partially affected by that event.  We can then            
              use the magnetic signal of the unaltered rocks to address the issue            
              of Ordovician polar wander and magnetostratigraphy, and use the                
              relationship between the unaltered and altered rocks to determine              
              the controls on the late Paleozoic alterations.  This study will               
              focus on such a set of rocks from northern Arkansas.  The results              
              of such a study will provide valuable insight into the dynamic                 
              history of the Earth and its magnetic field, as well as information            
              regarding the dynamics of the hydrothermal system responsible for              
              the remagnetization of Paleozoic rocks in North America.
