Title       : Dissertation Research: Two Modes of Speciation in Coreopsis (Asteraceae): A
               Chloroplast DNA Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9105167

Award Number: 9105167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent E. Holsinger kent@darwin.eeb.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta J. Mason-Gamer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Within Coreopsis section Coreopsis (Asteraceae) both gradual and               
              saltational modes of speciation are represented.  Chloroplast DNA              
              from both sets of diverging taxa will be digested with ten                     
              restriction enzymes, and the corresponding filters will be probed              
              with eight cloned chloroplast DNA fragments.  The diversity found              
              within the three gradually diverging diploid morphological                     
              varieties of C. grandiflora will be used to determine whether                  
              divergence is occurring between the taxonomic varieties or between             
              the two major, discontinuous geographical portions of its range.               
              The presumed saltational speciation event involving C. nuecensoides            
              and its derivative C. nuecensis will be examined to determine                  
              whether the relative amounts of chloroplast DNA diversity within               
              the species correspond with a saltational event, and if so, how                
              severe the accompanying population bottleneck may have been.  A                
              preliminary survey of cpDNA diversity has revealed considerable                
              interspecific, interpopulational, and intrapopulational variation.             
              The results of this study will give important insights into the                
              genetic processes involved in two modes of speciation, and will                
              demonstrate the usefulness of cpDNA for diversity analyses below               
              the species level.
