Title       : Sigma Pi Interactions in Hydrocarbon Cation Radicals and SS Bonds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9105485

Award Number: 9105485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. Nelsen nelsen@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Nelsen will                
              study the detailed mechanism of the reaction of alkene cation                  
              radicals with oxygen, and he will also investigate electronic                  
              interactions in compounds that contain sulfur-sulfur bonds. In                 
              the first part of this project, Dr. Nelsen will study carbon                   
              skeletal rearrangements that accompany the reaction of certain                 
              alkylated alkenes and dienes with ground state oxygen. These                   
              skeletal rearrangements cause some alkenes to produce                          
              five-membered ring peroxides in competition with four-membered                 
              rings. In the second part, experimental and theoretical studies                
              will be performed that are designed to probe the influence of                  
              electronic effects on rotational barriers in compounds that                    
              contain S-S bonds.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              A particularly fascinating group of peroxides, called                          
              "dioxetanes", have two carbons and two oxygens linked together                 
              in a four-membered ring. Dr. Nelsen has developed a new type of                
              reaction in which dioxetanes are produced directly from                        
              ground-state oxygen and alkenes via an intermediate cation                     
              radical. His approach permits the synthesis of new dioxetanes                  
              that cannot be made by other, more traditional methods for                     
              preparing dioxetanes. In the first part of this project, Dr.                   
              Nelsen will study the detailed mechanism of this process. In                   
              the second part, experiments will be performed that are                        
              designed to clarify the mechanism by which electronic                          
              interactions in compounds that contain sulfur-sulfur (S-S)                     
              bonds affect their chemistry. Since the strength of the S-S                    
              bond has important consequences in biological systems, the                     
              results of this aspect of Dr. Nelsen's overall study may have                  
              impact upon drug design (in addition to their fundamental                      
              importance to physical-organic and theoretical chemistry).
