Title       : Project SERAPHIM: Innovative Chemical Education with Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1990   
File        : a9096219

Award Number: 9096219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia A. Ferguson                    
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1990    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11700              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Moore jwmoore@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      Since its inception in 1982, Project SERAPHIM has achieved             
              great success in its three main functions: collector and                       
              disseminator of microcomputer-related instructional materials in               
              chemistry; the conduct of workshops to train teachers to use                   
              computers effectively in classrooms and laboratories; and the                  
              development of innovative chemistry software.  The project has                 
              developed collaborative efforts with other local and national                  
              projects and receives more than $150,000 annually from local                   
              school systems which use its materials or teacher development                  
              activities.  The project now plans to enhance its dissemination                
              efforts by preparing "Best of SERAPHIM" learning packets and by                
              developing an electronic journal that will allow phasing out of                
              its distribution function.  New research and development efforts               
              will include effective, instructive computerized experiments, a                
              simple and inexpensive voltage interface, instrument simulators,               
              and programmer's tools for new and existing microcomputers.                    
                      Although the existence of microcomputers in precollege                 
              classrooms has grown significantly during the past few years, the              
              creation of effective software has not kept pace.  SERAPHIM is                 
              filling a great need in chemistry education through the                        
              development and evaluation of chemistry software.  SERAPHIM's                  
              teacher development efforts have resulted in a network of                      
              chemistry faculty from both the precollege level and institutions              
              of higher education, a collaboration which is enhancing learning               
              in both areas.  The project's efforts have demonstrated that the               
              the microcomputer can be quite effectively used to aid students                
              in learning chemistry as well as being a motivating factor.  The               
              store of quality chemistry software has benefitted enormously                  
              because of the work of SERAPHIM.
