Title       : Photodissociation/Photoionization Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1992   
File        : a9096266

Award Number: 9096266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray V. Johnston mvj@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant is in the general field of analytical and surface                   
              chemistry, and in the subfield of mass spectrometry.  Professor                
              Murray Johnston will study the laser photodissociation and                     
              photoionization of hydrocarbon molecules containing four to ten                
              carbon atoms.  An important objective of the program is to                     
              identify mechanisms of fragmentations of molecules after they                  
              have been photoionized.  This will lead to more specific means                 
              of determining structure in large molecules from controlled                    
              fragmentations in mass spectrometry.  This will improve the                    
              determination of complex hydrocarbon mixtures, such as                         
              hydrocarbon fuels and oils, which is accomplished by mass                      
              spectrometry.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The research to be conducted will focus on ultraviolet and                     
              vacuum ultraviolet unimolecular photochemistry and                             
              photodissociation of alkanes and alkenes.  The main objective                  
              is to understand charge remote fragmentation and the                           
              localization of charge in "soft" photoionization processes.                    
              This novel approach will allow for more controlled                             
              photofragmentation, and will be compared with electron impact                  
              and chemical ionization techniques.  Gas phase alkanes and                     
              alkenes will be photodissociated by an excimer laser and the                   
              photoproducts photoionized by 118 nm photons.  Time of Flight                  
              mass spectrometric detection will be utilized.  Relative                       
              abundances of specific fragments will be used to understand                    
              branching.  The minimization of rearrangements upon                            
              fragmentation with this method should allow cleaner                            
              interpretation of structure in mass spectrometry.
