Title       : Studies in Organosulfur Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1990    
File        : a9096208

Award Number: 9096208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyriacos C. Nicolaou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research will lead to new methods of synthesizing complex                 
              molecules.  It is being funded by the Organic and                              
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program.  This work will permit the                   
              investigation of an unusual new class of molecules that contain                
              the cyclic sulfur analog of cyclic peroxides.  It has the                      
              potential to produce molecules with unusual chemical and                       
              biological properties.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Four-membered rings with two adjacent sulfur atoms, known as                   
              1,2-dithietanes, are of fundamental theoretical, chemical and                  
              biological interest.  Although postulated as transient                         
              intermediates, no representative of this class of compounds was                
              known as a stable compound until the recent disclosure of the                  
              first stable compound in this series, 1,2-dithiatopazine.  The                 
              chemistry and biology of this compound will be investigated.  A                
              series of other 1,2 dithietanes will also be targeted for                      
              synthesis and those compounds proven stable will also be                       
              studied.  The targeted systems were designed to probe the                      
              effect of molecular framework flanking the 1,2-dithietane                      
              moiety including the size of the adjacent rings and the                        
              presence of nitrogen and carbon in them. Molecular mechanics                   
              calculations will also be performed in attempts to predict the                 
              stability of designed systems.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Several alternative methods for the synthesis of thionolactones                
              will be explored.  The chemistry of these intermediates will be                
              studied with particular emphasis on new C-C bond forming                       
              reactions and cyclic ether formation.  Thus, the intermolecular                
              coupling of dithionolactones using electron transfer processes                 
              and subsequent chemistry will also be followed as a route to                   
              complex polycyclic systems.  Dithionoesters will also be                       
              synthesized and their intramolecular coupling will be                          
              investigated as a means to construct cyclic frameworks.                        
                                                                                             
              The reasons for the special stability of 1,2-dithiatopazine are                
              not quite clear at present.  Calculations on the stability of                  
              the systems are expected to lead to intesting predictions which                
              will be tested experimentally.  Also theoretical predictions                   
              regarding the physical, chemical and biological properties of                  
              these molecules are intriguing and will be put to the test.                    
              Furthermore, the power and scope to the projected methodology                  
              for the formation of the 1,2-dithietanes involving C-C bond                    
              formation could be important in ring construction.  These                      
              fundamental reactions and other extensions involving the                       
              thionocarbonyl functionality will be investigated and have the                 
              potential of becoming useful synthetic methods.
