Title       : RUI: Smoothing the Matter Distribution in the Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1990 
File        : a9096323

Award Number: 9096323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 30,  1990 
Expires     : December 31,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalia V. Zotov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The effect of the clumping of matter on the form that Einstein's               
              equations should take on various scales (e.g. those including                  
              stars, galaxies, and clusters of galaxies) will be explored.  It               
              is already clear from work done on the first two of these scales,              
              that such parameters as the rate of expansion of the universe, as              
              estimated from observations, will be affected.  Before                         
              quantitative estimates of such effects can be made, it will be                 
              necessary to refine the procedures used for averaging quantities               
              in the Einstein's equations over a discrete matter distribution.               
              A Swiss-cheese model will be used for the galaxies, rather than                
              the almost-point model used so far, and this can be extended to                
              clusters of galaxies.  Such clustering must obviously be taken                 
              into account.  Filament-void structure may also be investigated                
              eventually, using computer simulation to find an appropriate                   
              probability distribution.  The other refinement needed is finding              
              a more realistic stress-energy tensor for a galaxy, and                        
              afterwards for a cluster.  The zero-pressure dust model used so                
              far was sufficient to establish the general nature of the                      
              results, but not to allow evaluation of constants in the                       
              expression for the rate of expansion of the universe.
