Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Nonlinear Wave Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9096156

Award Number: 9096156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1989   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey Segur segur@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              8822444                                                                        
              Segur                                                                          
                   This project includes three separate lines of research in                 
              nonlinear wave motion in evolutionary systems.  The three ideas                
              are largely independent.  Part A concerns the development of an                
              effective method to determine whether or not a particular                      
              solution of an evolution equation is stable to small changes in                
              initial data.  Stability theory advanced significantly after                   
              the discovery by Arnol'd (1965) and others of a systematic                     
              method to construct Lyapunov functionals.  Even so, the methods                
              currently available are unable to determine whether a flow as                  
              simple as stably statified, paralled shear flow is a stable                    
              solution of Euler's equations in two dimensions.  One goal is                  
              to devise a generalization of current methods that might settle                
              the question.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                 The focus in part B is on the Kadomstev-Peviashvili (KP)                    
              equation with periodic boundary conditions.  The equation is                   
              known to be completely integrable, so there is reason to                       
              believe that the initial value problem for the KP equation with                
              periodic boundary conditions is solvable.  The KP equation also                
              provides accurate models of a class of water waves, and it is                  
              intimately connected with the theory of Riemann surfaces in                    
              algebraic geometry.  In fact, the problem is so rich that                      
              progress in almost any direction would valuable.                               
                  The objective in part C is to construct a new kinetic                      
              theory for a large collection of wavepackets that interact                     
              primarily through resonant triads.  If successful, the theory                  
              would result in a  Boltzmann-type equation, whose equilibrium                  
              solutions would provide an equilibrium spectrum of wave                        
              energies, analogous to the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution for                  
              molecules.  An earlier version of such a theory was given by                   
              Segur (1984); the work in this part of the project would                       
              correct a deficiency in that model.
