Title       : Peak Detection and Quantification in NMR Spectra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1990      
File        : a9096278

Award Number: 9096278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 30,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah J. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              NMR spectroscopy can provide unique information about the changes              
              in concentration of metabolites in vivo and the structure of                   
              proteins in solution.  Interpretation of the large, multi-                     
              dimensional datasets produced by such studies requires first the               
              detection and quantification of peaks in individual spectra.  As               
              new, sophisticated experimental techniques are developed, the                  
              difficulties of peak quantificaition are providing major                       
              obstacles to efficient data analysis.  Standard methods of                     
              quantifying NMR spectra rely heavily on manual input and do not                
              address the all important questions of operator bias or variable               
              accuracy of parameter estimates.  This project will develop                    
              practical and reliable algorithms which can perform a thorough                 
              statistical analysis within  a reasonable timescale.  The new                  
              algorithms will be based upon an approach which has proved                     
              extremely successful in treating 1-D data with low s:n                         
              peaks and variable baseline (PIQABLE).  Different types of 1-D                 
              spectra, chemical shift imaging (CSI) data, and both J-correlated              
              and distance correlated 2-D  H spectra will be considered.  By                 
              providing the right tools for quantitative analysis, this study                
              will make significant and unique contributions to interpreting                 
              multi-nuclear in vivo spectra from extracts, cells or intact                   
              tissues, and investigating the molecular structure of proteins                 
              in solution.
