Title       : Statistical Studies of DNA Sequence Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1990   
File        : a9096248

Award Number: 9096248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tarri M. Joyner                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masatoshi Nei nxm2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   With the aim of understanding the process and mechanism of                
              molecular evolution, three mutually related research projects are              
              proposed.  The first project is for identifying positive                       
              Darwinian selection at the DNA level by examining the relative                 
              rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous (amino acid altering)                    
              nucleotide substitution.  Both statistical analyses of DNA                     
              sequence data and mathematical modeling of nucleotide                          
              substitution will be conducted.  Special attention will be given               
              to the active and contact sites of proteins involved in the                    
              immune and nonimmune systems in vertebrates.  We are particularly              
              interested in examining whether overdominant selection is                      
              involved in the antigen-recognition sites of proteins concerned                
              with the immune system.  The second project is intended to                     
              clarify the effect of population bottlenecks on the divergence of              
              nucleotide sequences within and between populations.  Stochastic               
              theory of population genetics will be used to solve this problem,              
              and the mathematical theory developed will be applied to analyze               
              data on mitochondrial DNA phylogenies.  The third project is to                
              study the evolution of the major histocompatibility complex gene               
              family, which is one of the most complicated genetic systems in                
              vertebrates.  Analyzing DNA sequences available, we will examine               
              the evolutionary relationships of genes within and between loci                
              as well as within and between species.  The functional change of               
              different groups of genes in the evolutionary process will also                
              be investigated.
