Title       : Theoretical Studies of Heme Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9096181

Award Number: 9096181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilda H. Loew loew@montara.molres.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Research Inst
	      
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    /   -

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Loew is theoretically characterizing the relationship                 
              between structure, spectra, and function of heme proteins.  The                
              work is focused primarily on one class of metabolizing heme                    
              enzymes, the peroxidase, in comparison with other classes of heme              
              proteins to understand the origin of their functional                          
              differences. Four complementary sets of studies are envisioned                 
              which utilize increasingly complex models for the heme active                  
              site.                                                                          
              1.  Continued studies using the least complex, iron-porphine,                  
              heme model for the active site will focus on three types of                    
              calculations.  In one study, the electronic spectra of complexes               
              of Metmyglobin (MetMb) with small anionic ligands will be                      
              calculated.  In another, a comparative study will be made of the               
              resting state and putative transient peroxide complex of                       
              Cytochrome C Peroxidase (CCP) to help to further identify this                 
              species.  In the third study, the spectra of the biologically                  
              active Compound-I forms of peroxidases and catalase will be                    
              calculated in an attempt to further understand the origin of the               
              observed differences between them.                                             
              2.  At the next level of model heme active sites, studies will be              
              made of the effect of porphyrin ring substituents on the                       
              ground-state properties of CCP and related peroxidases.                        
              3.  Since the heme unit alone does not determine the function of               
              different heme proteins, an expanded active site including amino               
              acids near the proximal histidine ligand and the distal binding                
              site will be used to (a) compare of the ease of formation of the               
              biologically active Compound-I form of CCP to that in MetMb,                   
              which should help understand why two such similar proteins have                
              different biological functions and (b) further elucidate the                   
              electron transfer mechanism from nearby candidate amino acids to               
              the heme unit of CCP-I and identification of this still                        
              controversial radical center.                                                  
              4.  Full protein studies are also planned to address the effect                
              of conformational and dynamic behavior on the function of the                  
              peroxidases, focusing on the amino acids thought to be involved                
              in Compound-I formation and in the transfer of an electron to its              
              heme unit.  Dr. Loew will also try to understand why some site                 
              specific mutations destroy peroxidase activity, while others                   
              retain it, and the effect of mutation on the electron transfer                 
              process.  The refined crystal structure of CCP will also be used               
              to attempt to construct a primitive structure of horseradish                   
              peroxidase, with the goal of obtaining a three dimensional                     
              description of the key amino acids near the heme unit, where the               
              greatest homology with CCP exists.                                             
                   If successful, three specific questions of current interest               
              will be addressed.  (1) Is the mechanism of formation of                       
              Compound-I in HRP similar to that in CCP?  (2) Where is the                    
              substrate binding site in HRP?  (3) Why is there no electron                   
              transfer from the protein to the heme unit in HRP-I, as there                  
              appears to be in CCP-I?
