Title       : U.S.-Sierra Leone: Cooperative Research on Molecular Theories of Solubility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1989    
File        : a9096113

Award Number: 9096113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 30,  1989    
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Witold K. Brostow brostow@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Witold K. Brostow,                  
              Department of Materials Engineering, Drexel University, to pursue              
              with Dr. Daniel Ate're' Jonah, Professor, Department of Mathematics,           
              Fourah Bay College, University of Sierra Leone, for a period of 24             
              months, a program of research on molecular theories of solubility.             
              The research will deal with the  the statistical mechanics of                  
              solubility of gases in liquids and in amorphous solids, solubility of          
              solids and liquids in supercritical fluids, and vapor-liquid                   
              equilibria of dilute systems.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Professor Jonah has already developed the first version of the theory          
              of dilute solutions and solubility, while Dr. Brostow has made                 
              experimental observations on vapor-liquid equilibria of highly dilute          
              solutions and has developed equations for isobaric expansivity and             
              isothermal compressivity which are required to make the theory                 
              usable.  The research is expected to lead to a better understanding            
              of  solubility and would be useful in industry for improving                   
              efficiency of separation and purification of materials and also for            
              better protecting amorphous polymers from the effects of gas                   
              solubility on their properties.  This project is relevant to the               
              objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks          
              to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and               
              engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through the           
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and          
              through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  The U.S. and             
              Sierra Leonian collaborators are highly respected scientists with              
              extensive research experience and productive publication records in            
              the field of the proposal.
