Title       : Design Principles for Computer Assisted Multiattribute Preference Modelling and
               Assessment: A Behavioral Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1991   
File        : a9096303

Award Number: 9096303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Fischer fischer@mail.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research has two basic objectives:  (1) to learn more             
              about how people make complex decisions, and (2) to develop and test           
              computer-based decision support systems that are intended to improve           
              the quality of such decisions.  The research considers two factors             
              that make decisions difficult.  The first is uncertainty about what            
              the consequences of each decision alternative will be, especially in           
              cases where there is the risk of a substantial loss.  The second is the        
              presence of multiple objectives that conflict with one another, thus           
              forcing decision makers to make tradeoffs among objectives.                    
                                                                                             
              Two types of research activities are proposed. It involves laboratory          
              and field studies designed to learn more about intuitive decision              
              making strategies and the potential biases and other shortcomings of           
              these strategies.  Such research is important because it allows the            
              anticipation potential biases or errors that may result from intuitive         
              decision making processes.  Second, computer software will be designed         
              to improve the quality of decisions involving risk and conflicting             
              objectives.  Such computer-based decision support systems are                  
              important because they may significantly improve decision making               
              processes in business, government, medicine, and engineering.  They            
              may even be helpful to consumers making complex decisions involving            
              substantial financial or health outcomes.
