Title       : Determinants of Long-Run Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1990  
File        : a9096292

Award Number: 9096292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Stokey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The author will be working on several different projects                       
              involving determinants of long-run growth.                                     
                                                                                             
              The first part of the proposal looks at the role of the product                
              cycle as a link between trade and development. Growth in many                  
              countries has been driven by export industries. Particular                     
              industries keep moving around the globe, however, in search of                 
              cheap labor and the industries in a particular country keep                    
              changing, usually in the direction of higher-technology products.              
              The research focuses on examining the importance of                            
              international trade and of R&D in determining long run growth                  
              rates.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The second part of the proposal deals with models directed at                  
              understanding why some countries remain in an "underdevelopment                
              trap" with high rates of population growth and low rates of per                
              capita income growth. The motivation is to understand what sorts               
              of policies -- subsidies to education, social security programs,               
              etc. -- if any, might be useful in lowering birth rates and                    
              encouraging investment in marketable skills.
