Title       : CRB: Evolutionary and Conservation Genetics of Native Hawaiian Ferns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9096282

Award Number: 9096282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Ranker Thomas.Ranker@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   The Hawaiian Islands possess one of the most distinctive                  
              floras in the world.  Because of its rich biodiversity and                     
              extreme geographic isolation, the Hawaiian archipelago is often                
              praised as an ideal locality in which to study the patterns and                
              processes of organic evolution.  However, much of Hawaii's unique              
              flora is endangered because of habitat conversion by humans and                
              introduced animals and through the invasion of alien, weedy plant              
              competitors.  Fragmentation of forest habitat in particular may                
              reduce the effective number of mature plants able to reproduce in              
              the wild.  There is a critical need, therefore, for studies which              
              not only address evolutionary questions but also obtain data                   
              useful to the wise stewardship of Hawaii's plant resources.                    
                   In a project relevant to the conservation biology of native               
              Hawaiian ferns, Dr. Thomas Ranker of the University of Hawaii                  
              will employ enzyme electrophoresis to describe levels and                      
              patterns of genetic diversity within and among populations of 24               
              species of native Hawaiian ferns.  Levels of outcrossing and                   
              inbreeding among the tiny gametophytes of these species will be                
              analyzed by examining natural stands of fern sporophytes as well               
              as by sampling natural and laboratory populations of selected                  
              gametophytes.  For species of the endemic genera Adenophorus and               
              Sadleria, gametophytes will be grown in the laboratory and tested              
              for factors affecting reproductive capacity and outcrossing                    
              behavior.   Comparisons will be made between wide-ranging, common              
              species and narrowly distributed, rare ones, and correlations                  
              sought with amounts of genetic variation and apportionment of                  
              this variation within populations or among scattered populations.              
              These data are pertinent to management decisions regarding                     
              effective population sizes for maintaining genetic variation and               
              overall diversity in the Hawaiian fern flora.
