Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Analysis of the Photosystem I Reaction Center
               by Resolution-Reconstitution Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9096305

Award Number: 9096305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9110               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Golbeck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will facilitate continued cooperation between Professor             
              John H. Golbeck, Department of Chemistry, Portland State University;           
              Professor Isamu Ikegami, Teikyo University, Sagamiko, Japan; and               
              Professor Shigeru Itoh, National Institute of Basic Biology,                   
              Okazaki, Japan.  The scientists are collaborating in a study of some           
              of the basic processes occurring when photosynthesis takes place in            
              green plants and cyanobacteria.  They are focusing on the lower-               
              potential system (Photosystem I) of two photochemical systems                  
              involved sequentially in the overall photosynthetic process.  This             
              cooperative project is based on the combined individual abilities of           
              the U.S. and Japanese researchers to remove and then put back,                 
              selectively, the chlorophyll molecules, the phylloquinone molecules,           
              and the iron-sulfur clusters that make up the reaction center.  This           
              newly developed, selective resolution and reconstitution protocol,             
              combined with the scientists' ability to effect polypeptide -                  
              protein rebinding, offers new opportunities to address longstanding            
              questions regarding the pathways of electron flow in Photosystem I.            
              By leaving some of the components out when reconstructing the                  
              complex, the function of these subunits may become better understood.          
              Some of the components may also be chemically altered or exchanged             
              before the complex is reconstituted, in order to synthesize artificial         
              or modified centers, and the effect determined.  In addition, use              
              of certain iron and sulfur isotopes will permit various spectroscopic          
              studies to be carried out, yielding structural information regarding           
              the complex.
