Title       : Analysis of Observational Evidence in Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1990      
File        : a9096269

Award Number: 9096269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 30,  1990      
Expires     : May 30,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39531              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Kosso   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Kosso is concerned in this project with the structure of                   
              archaeological knowledge.  He is focusing specifically on the                  
              role of observation in archaeology and on the status of                        
              observation as objective evidence for claims made about the                    
              past.  The demonstration by philosophers of science that                       
              observations are theory-dependent is as relevant to                            
              archaeological observations as it is to the natural sciences,                  
              and understanding the empirical basis of any science requires                  
              addressing the problem of theory-influenced observation.  Dr.                  
              Kosso's most recent work has shown that we can concede to a                    
              certain amount of theory-dependence in observation without                     
              sacrificing the objectivity of the observational evidence if                   
              we insist that the theories which influence an observation are                 
              independent from the theory for which the observation is                       
              evidence.  This concept of independence as a standard of                       
              empirical evidence has been successfully applied to examples                   
              in the natural sciences.  Dr. Kosso is now applying the same                   
              methodological apparatus to analyze observational evidence in                  
              archaeology.  This analysis is potentially of significance to                  
              archaeologists with a concern for empirical foundations of                     
              their science as well as to philosophers interested in the                     
              structure of scientific knowledge.
