Title       : Field-Based Study of Some Magmatic-Tectonic Effects of RidgeCollision on the
               Continental Margin of S. Chile: The TaitaoOphiolite and Near-Trench Intrusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1989  
File        : a9096140

Award Number: 9096140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Forsythe rdforsyt@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The tectonic evolution of orogenic systems developing at                  
              convergent margins involves steady state and episodic processes.               
              Steady state processes, such as subduction or arc magmatism have               
              received considerable study, however, it is becoming apparent                  
              that many orogenic belts have a history involving relatively                   
              short, discrete periods of deformation superimposed on the steady              
              state processes.  This project examines the effect of a collision              
              of an active spreading center with a convergent margin.  The                   
              Chile margin triple junction in southern Chile is the best modern              
              example available for study because of its relatively well known,              
              simple kinematic evolution.  The work involves study of a 3-4 Ma               
              ophiolite exposed on land 15km from the trench, silicic plutons                
              near the ophiolite and associated hot springs, and faults and                  
              uplifted recent deposits.  Results are expected to document a                  
              variety of features related to the subduction of an active ridge               
              that may be used in the interpretation of ancient systems.
