Title       : Mechanisms of Human Color Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9096169

Award Number: 9096169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1989   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Cicerone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Color vision depends on the activity of certain photoreceptors                 
              called cone cells in the retina of the eye.  Humans generally                  
              have three cone types, classified by the sensitivity of their                  
              absorbing pigment to short-, medium-, and long-wavelengths of                  
              light.  The relative numbers of different cone types in the                    
              retina has been difficult to determine by direct methods, but is               
              fundamental to our understanding of human visual sensitivity and               
              color vision.  This information is essential for any quantitative              
              model of human color vision.                                                   
                                                                                             
              In this project, Dr. Cicerone will continue her novel work                     
              using precise psychophysical techniques rather than anatomy to                 
              obtain numerical estimates of the relative and absolute numbers                
              of different cone types.  Tests for discrimination of colored                  
              target signals allow calculation of thresholds for color                       
              perception, which may differ in different parts of the visual                  
              field if different parts of the retina contain different ratios                
              of cone types.  Certain kinds of color blindness are found where               
              only two kinds of cones are present in the retina; people with                 
              this trait are called dichromats, in contrast to the normal                    
              retina of trichromats.  Colored stimuli can be used to test for                
              the properties of mid- and long-wavelength sensitive cones in                  
              different parts of the human dichromatic and trichromatic                      
              retinas.  She will use this information to constrain and extend                
              models of human color vision, and these models will be important               
              for both perceptual psychologists and neuroscientists.
