Title       : Research Initiation: Temperature Prediction in Ultra- Precision Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1992      
File        : a9096199

Award Number: 9096199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don A. Lucca lucca@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project deals with the study of the temperatures in                  
              ultra-precision machining.  An analytical model will be developed              
              which generates the frictional heating at the tool-workpiece                   
              interface due to elastic recovery and possible flank wear.                     
              Heating at the shear zone, rake face and flank face will be                    
              coupled.  Functional dependence of the partitioning of heat and                
              the resulting temperatures on the process variables and                        
              tool/workpiece material combinations will be provided.  Cutting                
              tests will be performed on ultra-precision machine tools to                    
              provide model input data and verification.                                     
                   The resulting predictive capability and insight into the                  
              governing physics will significantly increase the understanding                
              of the mechanics of chip formation in ultra precision machining,               
              tool performance and wear, and the resulting workpiece subsurface              
              damage and residual stress state.  This will lead the way to                   
              improved accuracy and quality of the machined workpiece, in the                
              ultra precision machining process.
