Title       : The Effect of Teacher Inservice Programs on Elementary Students' Achievement and
               Attitudes in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1989  
File        : a9096111

Award Number: 9096111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Butler Kahle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many espouse the need for more students to enter the scientific                
              pipeline. While some claim that girls are socialized away from                 
              scientific and technological careers, others maintain that girls do not        
              have the prerequisite skills and experiences for the successful study of       
              science.  Research is needed to sort out the factors affecting girls'          
              attitudes and achievement levels in science.  Research in England              
              (Whyte, 1986) and the U. S. (Kahle, 1985 and 1987) suggests that the           
              teaching strategies which encourage girls are also effective with boys.        
              Other research (Resnick, 1987) indicated that activity-based science           
              generally leads to the development of higher order thinking skills.            
              Therefore, equitable science education may foster learning in science as       
              well as self-confidence and positive attitudes toward science.                 
                                                                                             
              Although there have been many intervention projects, each designed to          
              encourage more children to study science and/or math, there has been           
              little analysis of why a given program works or fails.  What leads to          
              change in teachers and in students?  How long do the new skills or             
              patterns last?  The purpose of this research is to sort out the factors        
              which may cause change and to identify what components are effective and       
              long-lasting.  The results will answer many practical questions for            
              school corporations as they propose and implement inservice education          
              programs in science for elementary teachers.                                   
                                                                                             
              The project is jointly supported by the Division of Teacher Preparation        
              and Enhancement and by the Division of Materials Development, Research         
              and Informal Science Education.
