Title       : Quantitative Concepts as a Foundation for Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9096275

Award Number: 9096275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $637100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick W. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alba G. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The problem of improving school students' mathematical                         
              understanding is too complex to approach from any one research                 
              perspective.  Learning, teaching, and curriculum influence each other in       
              significant ways.  The proposed project will extend a current research         
              effort in order to investigate the development of students' algebraic          
              reasoning in grades 5 through 7 as they are taught for three years from        
              a curriculum infused with instruction emphasizing quantitative                 
              reasoning.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project's first year will be devoted to assessing 5th-grade                
              students' concepts of quantity and quantitative operations, developing         
              cognitive objectives of instruction and materials to support                   
              experimental instruction aimed at achieving those objectives, developing       
              evaluation instruments and aligning them with experimental instruction,        
              and instructing classroom teachers on the objectives of teaching for           
              quantitative reasoning.  The subsequential three years will focus on           
              effects of instruction on student' quantitative and algebraic reasoning        
              and effects of teachers' participation on their knowledge of                   
              mathematical content and pedagogy.  Experimental instruction will              
              incorporate advanced software and materials developed for research on          
              teaching and learning quantitative reasoning by use of multiple, linked        
              representational systems.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The proposed study should have a significant impact on research on             
              mathematics learning, research on mathematics teaching, and research on        
              curriculum development.
