Title       : A New Method for the Analysis of the Motion of Quasi-Static Systems of Bodies in
               Contact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9096250

Award Number: 9096250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elbert L. Marsh                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Trinkle trink@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the analysis of the quasi static motion                
              of systems of contacting bodies.  A robotic system in contact                  
              with the local environment can in some sense be characterized                  
              dynamically as a system of interacting rigid and flexible bodies.              
              Some of these bodies are actively controlled while others respond              
              in a passive manner.  If the accelerations of these bodies are                 
              very small, then it is often useful to assume that acceleration                
              to be zero in the analysis of the motion of the passive bodies.                
              This type of system is said to be quasi static, and the law of                 
              static equilibrium is assumed to hold.  Mechanical systems                     
              amenable to quasi static modeling are those for which the motion               
              is dominated by the effects of contacts, i.e., a robot hand                    
              assembling workpieces into a fixture.  The approach used here is               
              based on Peshkin's Minimum Power Principle which states that the               
              instantaneous motion of the passive bodies is that which                       
              simultaneously minimizes power dissipation and satisfies                       
              kinematic constraints imposed by contact with active bodies.                   
              Application of this principle results in an algorithm which can                
              determine the velocities of the system's passive bodies and the                
              contact forces as functions of time.  The algorithm is less                    
              computationally intensive than traditional solution of the system              
              differential equations, and integration of the algorithm into                  
              existing mechanical assembly CAD/CAM systems will allow proposed               
              assembly procedures to be evaluated for contact forces, joint                  
              torques required, and stability and jamming conditions before                  
              beginning assembly.
