Title       : Genetic Parentage in Red-Winged Blackbirds: Tests of Alternative Reproductive
               Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9096306

Award Number: 9096306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tarri M. Joyner                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92800              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Westneat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project seeks to test several hypotheses about the                   
              ecological factors affecting the genetic parentage of red-winged               
              blackbirds (Agelaius phoeniceus).  This work will improve our                  
              understanding of the process of evolution and the genetic                      
              structure of populations.  Because in many animals, especially                 
              birds, individuals often mate outside the observed social bonds,               
              the factors influencing genetic parentage will ultimately                      
              influence how evolution proceeds and which genes are represented               
              within a population.  Only the use of genetic markers can uncover              
              the effects of such extra-bond matings.  Previous genetic methods              
              for analyzing parentage have not provided enough genetic                       
              information to completely analyze parentage.  This study will                  
              expand on those previous methods by using a new technique, known               
              as DNA fingerprinting, which can assay highly variable regions of              
              the genome.  These regions provide information sufficient to                   
              determine completely the parentage of every offspring.                         
                   This study will combine behavioral observations of free-                  
              living redwings with these new genetic analyses of parentage to                
              achieve several goals.  First, the study will uncover the effects              
              on genetic parentage of when a female breeds relative to other                 
              females.  Second, the effects of male behavior on genetic                      
              parentage will be tested by increasing male presence on the                    
              territory through supplemental feeding and by decreasing male                  
              presence by temporary removals.  Third, the genetic parentage of               
              young raised on territories will be analyzed in light of the                   
              characteristics of territory location and quality.  Fourth, the                
              effects of female mating behavior on genetic parentage will be                 
              assessed by detailed observations of females and subsequent                    
              analysis of parentage.  Finally, the impact of variation in                    
              genetic parentage on parental behavior and on the action of                    
              selection in natural populations will be documented.  Upon                     
              completion, this study will provide  information on a number of                
              ecological factors that might affect genetic parentage.  This                  
              information will be incorporated into general concepts about the               
              ecology and evolution of reproductive and about the influence of               
              such behavior on population structure.
