Title       : REU: Socioecology of Infanticide in White-Footed Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1990       
File        : a9096148

Award Number: 9096148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tarri M. Joyner                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 20,  1989  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry O. Wolff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Infanticide, the killing of infants by other members of the               
              same species, is a common phenomenon in wild animals.  Adult                   
              males often kill unrelated infants and then mate with the female,              
              whereas adult females kill strange pups to remove competition for              
              their offspring and to acquire the nest of the victim female.                  
              Little is known about the conditions under which infanticide                   
              occurs, the mechanisms males and females use to distinguish their              
              own from unrelated offspring, how infanticide affects population               
              growth, and whether or not the tendency to commit infanticide is               
              inherited.  In this proposed study the principal investigator                  
              will determine (1) what cues males and females use to recognize                
              their own offspring, and thus avoid killing related pups, (2) if               
              there is genetic basis for the tendency to commit infanticide,                 
              and (3) how population growth and stability are affected by the                
              presence of infanticidal and noninfanticidal animals.  The                     
              frequency of infanticide in a marked, wild population of white-                
              footed mice at high and low densities will be monitored, and                   
              breeding experiments will be conducted in the laboratory to                    
              determine the inheritance of infanticidal behavior.  Previous                  
              studies by the Principal Investigator have shown that about 50%                
              of the animals are infanticidal and 50% are noninfanticidal.                   
              Infanticidal and noninfanticidal animals will be introduced to                 
              different enclosures to determine the effects of infanticide on                
              social interactions and population growth.  The results will show              
              how a seemingly pathological behavior can actually be adaptive                 
              and spread through a population.  It will also shed light on the               
              significance of female aggression as a mechanism to protect her                
              pups from other members of her own species.
