Title       : Heat Transfer in Thin Semiconductor Film Melting and Recry- stallization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1990       
File        : a9096253

Award Number: 9096253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas P. Grigoropoulos cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Thin-film heat treatment by means of lasers is of growing                      
              importance to current microchip technology because it enables                  
                                                                                             
              the fabrication of novel electronic devices of high                            
              performance and improved circuit packing density.  In                          
              particular, the use of lasers to melt and recrystallize thin                   
              semiconductor layers has attracted great research interest due                 
                                                                                             
              to its potential for improving the electrical properties of                    
              the semiconductor.  This proposal presents a three-prong                       
              approach to the study of the heat transfer of radiatively                      
              induced crystal growth in thin semiconductor films:  i.                        
              Measurement of thin film optical properties at high                            
              temperatures up to the melting point; ii. Development of                       
              nonintrusive experimental methods for in-situ temperature                      
              measurement based on surface radiative data; iii. Construction                 
                                                                                             
              of numerical algorithms for simulation of the associated phase                 
                                                                                             
              change process.  The general goal of the program is to                         
              understand an quantify the effects of coupled light absorption                 
                                                                                             
              and thermal diffusion in polycrystalline thin films.                           
                                                                                             
              The proposed program is expected to make a substantial                         
              contribution to the knowledge base on a very important but not                 
                                                                                             
              adequately understood solidification/melting problem and could                 
                                                                                             
              lead to important process control technology.  In addition,                    
              this work will provide new quantitative information on little                  
                                                                                             
              known properties of thin films which may lead to new                           
              developments in the semiconductor industry.
