Title       : The Prehistory of the Osmore Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1992    
File        : a9096200

Award Number: 9096200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 31,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer aldenderfer@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Aldenderfer will continue his archaeological research in the               
              Osmore basin which is located in far southern Peru.  Three sites,              
              two situated in rockshelters and one in open air, will be                      
              excavated.  All are located well above sea level and sample                    
              different high altitude zones.  All date from the Middle Archaic               
              and Early Formative periods which extend from approximately 8,000              
              to 3,500 years before the present.  Dr. Aldenderfer and his                    
              colleagues will excavate large areas of these sites to identify                
              architectural remains and to recover artifactual, faunal, and                  
              floral remains.  Subsequent analysis will allow him to trace                   
              changing settlement patterns, diet, and social organization over               
              time.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              During the time period under investigation, a sedentarization                  
              process appears to have taken place in the Osmore region.                      
              Coincident changes in population size and density, in subsistence              
              - with the emergence of domesticated plants and animals - and in               
              degree of social complexity also seem to have occurred.  It was                
              during this period and general area that camelids and Andean                   
              tubers were domesticated.  Although the general outlines of the                
              process are known, it is still not clear how these different                   
              factors interacted and which played the primary causal role.  The              
              goal of this research is to answer these questions.                            
                                                                                             
              The shift documented in the Osmore basin occurred at roughly the               
              same time in many parts of both the Old and New Worlds.  Thus,                 
              the Osmore basin research may provide insight into this broader                
              process.  Because the region was a center for both plant and                   
              animal domestication and because preliminary work has shown that               
              faunal and floral remains are extremely well preserved at these                
              sites, the region provides an excellent context to examine this                
              issue.  The work will provide insight into the early stages of                 
              the process which led to the development of complex societies                  
              such as our own.
