Title       : An Examination of Equity Issues and the Global Greenhouse Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1991  
File        : a9096192

Award Number: 9096192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149877             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Moomaw william.moomaw@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Studies in Science, Technology and Society (SSTS) supports                     
              projects that examine the social, economic, political and                      
              intellectual contexts that influence the development and use of                
              science and technology.  Ethics and Values Studies supports                    
              projects that examine the social values and mutual obligations                 
              and responsibilities that arise in these interactions.  Recent                 
              interest in processes of global environmental change has led both              
              SSTS and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences at NSF to                
              encourage research on the human dimensions of these phenomena.                 
              This project examines these issues in the context of the                       
              phenomenon of global warming, one of a class of elusive hazards.               
              Elusive hazards are those which by their nature have effects                   
              which are difficult to attribute and occur only cumulatively and               
              after long periods of time.  These kinds of hazards are also                   
              politically elusive; attribution of cause and effect is difficult              
              and crosses national boundaries. Addressing global greenhouse                  
              effects raises two clusters of equity issues:  inter-generational              
              and intra-generational.  Furthermore, this is an area of                       
              scientific complexity and uncertainty.  Thus, as nations attempt               
              to reduce their release of gases that contribute to global                     
              climate change, they must be convinced that achieving uncertain                
              benefits in the future will be worth incurring costs now.  The                 
              problem requires a consideration of intergenerational                          
              responsibility; some way of thinking about what kind of                        
              environment those of us now living owe those who will succeed us.              
              Second, if a decision is made that preventative or adaptive                    
              action should be taken, there are issues of intragenerational                  
              equity; they concern how costs will or should be allocated among               
              those now living.  This project will consider these normative and              
              conceptual questions in the context of relevant scientific data                
              and realistic policy options, using a number of kinds of                       
              scientific models and negotiated agreements to assess the                      
              effectiveness and fairness of different proposed greenhouse                    
              reduction schemes.  It will analyse different theories about how               
              to determine economic obligations and moral responsibilities and               
              how to allocate costs for reduction in rates of change, and                    
              develop means for testing models to assess those economic and                  
              social issues.  A review panel will provide advice to and                      
              evaluate results from the project.  Results are expected to                    
              include some recommendations for international agreements.  A                  
              scholarly monograph and other publications, including some for                 
              public audiences, will result.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This study comes from a group of well-qualified researchers.                   
              Research and dissemination plans are appropriate; institutional                
              support is very good; the budget is adequate.  The project has                 
              important implications for our understanding of equity issues and              
              the global greenhouse effect, and should help to identify                      
              fruitful directions for further research.  Support is highly                   
              recommended.
