Title       : Multigrid Methods for Nonconforming Finite Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1989    
File        : a9096126

Award Number: 9096126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Izenman                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1989    
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne C. Brenner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              8904911                                                                        
              Brenner                                                                        
                   The multigrid method for finite elements is an optimal                    
              order algorithm for solving elliptic boundary value problems.                  
              The error of the approximate solution lies within the                          
              theoretical bound for the global error, yet the cost of                        
              computation is proportional only to the number of unknowns in                  
              the discretized equations.  Until recently, most of the                        
              research in this area concentrated primarily on nested                         
              conforming finite element spaces.  However, nonconforming                      
              finite elements are often used in applications because they are                
              easier to program.                                                             
                  In previous work, results on full W-cycle multigrid                        
              convergence for nonconforming finite elememts have been                        
              obtained by the principal investigator in the study of P1                      
              nonconforming finite element applied to the Poisson equation                   
              and the Morley finite element applied to the biharmonic                        
              equation on polygonal domains.  In this project, these results                 
              will be applied to the stationary Stokes equations and extended                
              to domains with smooth boundary.  Multigrid algorithms will be                 
              developed for nonconforming methods in linear elasticity and                   
              plate bending and also for mixed  methods that are equivalent                  
              to nonconforming methods.  The convergence of V-cycle                          
              nonconforming methods will be investigated.  Numerical                         
              experiments will be performed for each of these problems.
