Title       : Regional Labor Pool Formation and Occupational Structure in U.S.
               Defense-Oriented Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1990     
File        : a9096116

Award Number: 9096116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 18,  1989    
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59304              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Markusen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The location of industrial operations in the United States has            
              changed dramatically since the end of World War II.  Recent studies by         
              geographers, economists, and other scholars have found that a large            
              share of new industrial growth is generated by private firms that              
              contract with U.S. military services.  These labor-intensive firms have        
              tended to locate in certain northeastern, southeastern, south central,         
              and western states.  Although theories have been developed for other           
              industries to explain the locational patterns of production and                
              employment, rigorous testing of locational hypotheses regarding                
              defense-related industries has not been done on a national scale.  As a        
              result, relatively little is specifically known regarding the long-term        
              relationship of defense-related industrial operations, labor pools, and        
              other factors.  This project will test a set of hypotheses about the           
              temporal and geographical patterns of defense-related industrial               
              employment in order to determine the degree to which defense-industry          
              workers follow jobs rather than vice versa.  Data from the Bureau of           
              Labor Statistics, Department of Commerce, Department of Defense, and           
              other sources will be analyzed to explore (1) the magnitude and                
              occupational composition of defense-related employment, (2) changes in         
              occupational orientation to defense, (3) regional patterns of                  
              occupation by different industries, (4) migration of workers in                
              defense-related industries and occupations, (5) changes in the                 
              locational patterns of different occupational classes, and (6) the             
              socio-economic composition and earnings of defense-related workers.  In        
              addition to determining the ways in which workers have migrated to             
              regions of net increase in defense-related industrial employment, this         
              project will identify how workers respond when defense-related                 
              industrial employment declines.                                                
                   This project will make important contributions to both theoretical        
              and empirical knowledge.  By rigorously testing an integrated set of           
              locational hypotheses relating defense-related industrial production           
              and employment to the occupational composition, mobility, and socio-           
              economic characteristics of workers, this project will provide a basis         
              for comparison with other industries that already have undergone               
              extensive analyses.  General theories of modern industrial and labor           
              force location therefore will be enhanced.  The conclusions of this            
              research will also be of considerable interest to persons specifically         
              interested in the impacts of defense-related industrial activity on the        
              populations and labor forces of areas where such industries are                
              located.  By better understanding the processes of worker response to          
              industrial activity, policy makers will have more complete knowledge of        
              the ramifications of decisions to increase or reduce production in this        
              critical industrial sector.
