Title       : Integration of Orbital Cyclicity in Early Cretaceous DeepseaSediments of
               Northern Italy with Magnetostratigraphic and Biostratigraphic Timescales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1990      
File        : a9096118

Award Number: 9096118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberly O'Neal Moorer                  
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 30,  1989 
Expires     : November 30,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Herbert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Integration of Orbital Cyclicity in Early Cretaceous Deepsea Sediments         
              of Northern Italy with Magnetostratigraphic and Biostratigraphic               
              Timescales:                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the U.S.-Industrialized                
              Countries Program for the Exchange of Scientists and Engineers,                
              1987/1988 Competition.  The program is designed to enable U.S.                 
              scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research at research             
              institutions in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as well         
              as Japan, Australia and New Zealand.  Exchange awards provide                  
              opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of         
              unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental                 
              conditions in foreign countries.                                               
                                                                                             
              Awards are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to            
              his/her field of science, the propsective potential of the applicants          
              for professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering        
              of international cooperation in science and engineering.  The program          
              is particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking         
              on their research careers.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research project is in the area of paleoclimatic studies.                 
              Previous research has shown that a large fraction of climate variance          
              in the last 800 kyr is explained by cyclic variations in insolation            
              caused by regular perturbations in the earth's orbit ("Milankovitch            
              Cycles").  The principal investigator intends to conduct a combined            
              sedimentary time series and magnetostratigraphic study of a few                
              selected magnetozones.  If the orbital cycles are successfully                 
              resolved, new quantitative approaches to paleoclimatology will be              
              possible.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The project is under the direction of Dr. Timothy B. Herbert,                  
              Department of Geological and Geophysical Sciences, Princeton                   
              University, Princeton, NJ 08544, U.S.A., and Professor Hans R.                 
              Thierstein, Geological Institute, 5, Sonneggstrasse, Federal Institute         
              of Technology (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland.                                      
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate,             
              international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents                 
              allowance, if applicable, language training, if required, and a flat           
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
