Title       : Collaborative Research on the Geography of High-Technology Industry in Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9096117

Award Number: 9096117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin F. Kenney mfkenney@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   As new patterns of industrial growth and development have emerged         
              since World War II, scholars have developed new theoretical frameworks         
              to describe and explain these patterns.  One line of inquiry has sought        
              to examine the ramifications of changing labor requirements of                 
              different industries, while other social scientists have focused on            
              institutional dimensions of technological innovation.  This                    
              collaborative project aims to synthesize these and other approaches            
              through detailed study of the locational decisions made by four high-          
              technology industrial sectors in Japan -- semiconductors, computers,           
              biotechnology, and software.  With the assistance of scholars in               
              Japan, the principal investigators will gather data on the location of         
              these industries and of related activities in production complexes,            
              which will enable them to produce maps of the geographic patterns of           
              high-technology industries and complexes.  These maps will provide the         
              bases for a second stage of research, which will consist of a set of           
              related inquiries into the processes and conditions that have led              
              Japanese high-technology firms to develop new patterns of activity.            
              Central to these inquiries are the conduct of structured interviews            
              with a carefully selected sample of corporate officials.  Data from            
              these interviews and from other sources will be analyzed to test               
              hypotheses relating industrial organization and operations with                
              locational patterns and processes.                                             
                   This research will make significant contributions in a number of          
              diverse ways.  Through careful analysis of one set of industries in            
              Japan, the relative contributions of each of the major current                 
              theoretical perspectives can be assessed and possibly reconciled.  The         
              research also will provide valuable empirical data and interpretations         
              of value for those studying contemporary industrial geography in any           
              setting, and especially for those seeking more complete understandings         
              of the distinctive character of modern Japanese economic organization.
