Title       : RUI: Structrual Analysis of RNase P, An RNA Catalyst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1990  
File        : a9096271

Award Number: 9096271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Marsh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The dynamic capabilities of RNA have been fully realized with                  
              the discovery that RNA molecules can perform as catalysts in                   
              secondary reactions of the central dogma.  The endonucleolytic                 
              activity of RNase P RNA on its substrate, precursor tRNA, was                  
              the second such activity to be described.   It is proposed to                  
              continue the investigation on the structure of RNase P in order                
              to further define the mechanism of catalysis and the                           
              intracellular structure of RNase P.  Further it is proposed to                 
              extend the  understanding of the phylogenetics of this RNA                     
              catalyst as well as to begin a search for other physiologically                
              important small RNAs.  The structural analysis of RNase P RNA                  
              will make use of comparative sequencing of RNase P RNAs from                   
              several microorganisms as well as chemical and enzymatic probes                
              of structure at various temperatures and ionic conditions.                     
              The phylogenetics of RNase P will be explored by examining                     
              Deinococcus radiodurans, Micrococcus roseus, Clostridium                       
              sporogenes, Halobacter solanarium, and Thermoplasma acidophilum                
              using a synthetic precursor tRNA as substrate.  The                            
              intracellular conformation of the RNase P will be examined by                  
              the isolation of the activity under conditions that preserve                   
              macromolecular interactions and, alternatively, by asking what                 
              proteins bind to purified RNase P RNA.  Other small RNAs                       
              isolated will be tested for evolutionary conservation (hence                   
              physiological importance).                                                     
                                                                                             
              RNA has recently been found to catalyze certain reactions in                   
              its own maturation process.  This is contrary to the previously                
              held concept that only proteins could serve as catalysts                       
              (enzymes).  It also leads to the obvious possibility that RNA                  
              molecules were the first self-replicating units of life.  This                 
              proposal is to investigate the structure of these RNA particles                
              and to determine whether they are present in the most ancient                  
              forms of life still present on the planet, the archaeacteria.
