Title       : Magnitude of the Carbonate Dissolution Recycling Flux from Shallow Marine
               Carbonate Sediments: Evaluation from Pore Fluid and Sediment Geochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1989   
File        : a9096130

Award Number: 9096130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bilal U. Haq                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 8,  1989   
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Walter lmwalter@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will investigate pore fluid and sediment                          
              geochemistry of shallow marine carbonate sediments from Florida                
              Bay in order to assess their significance as recycling sites                   
              for calcium carbonate and organic matter.  Results of a pilot                  
              study suggest that, contrary to prior assumptions, significant                 
              carbonate dissolution occurs in sediment pore fluids, driven by                
              carbonic acid liberated from organic matter oxidation during                   
              sulfate reduction.  The expanded investigation will evaluate                   
              this process across a wider range of environments and water                    
              depths than were accessible in the pilot study.  The pore fluid                
              chemistry (emphasis on Ca/Cl, degree of sulfate reduction, and                 
              carbonic acid system parameters) will be determined and sulfate                
              reduction rates measured experimentally.  Sediment organic                     
              carbon contents and carbon isotopic compositions of pore fluids                
              will be determined to better constrain controls and                            
              consequences of sulfate reduction.  Results will provide a                     
              rigorous assessment of the role shallow carbonate shelf                        
              deposits play in the oceanic cycles of calcium carbonate and                   
              organic matter.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              The dissolution of calcium carbonate has long been thought to                  
              occur in deep water.  The results of the pilot project,                        
              however, prove that much dissolution occurs in shallow water.                  
              This project will collect sedimentary cores from Florida Bay                   
              and begin geochemical analyses of the sediments immediately                    
              after their collection.  This study will expand the knowledge                  
              of this important geochemical process to a new environment at                  
              greater depth to examine the role of other environmental                       
              parameters on the process.
