Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Properties of Schrodinger Operators and
               Hyperbolic Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1989    
File        : a9096136

Award Number: 9096136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 16,  1989    
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Hislop hislop@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1262      MODERN ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor Hislop's project in mathematical physics will                   
              investigate the resonances of Schrodinger operators with                       
              periodic potentials and an external electric field, and the                    
              relation between resonances and the meromorphic structure of the               
              S-matrix for these and more general two- and N-body Stark                      
              Hamiltonians. (As used here, the term resonance refers to a pole               
              of the meromorphic continuation of the resolvent of an operator                
              through the continuous spectrum.) The techniques involved include              
              commutator methods, semiclassical analysis, and geometric                      
              resolvent equations. These techniques will also be used to study               
              the spectrum of the Laplacian on a class of non-compact                        
              hyperbolic manifolds. Geometric conditions will be sought                      
              implying the absence of eigenvalues and the exponential decay of               
              eigenfunctions.                                                                
                    The research here envisioned involves the analysis of                    
              sophisticated mathematical techniques for the modeling of                      
              physical systems, especially at the microscopic level where                    
              intuition can lead one astray. Instead of representing physical                
              quantities by numbers, one is forced to use instead functions and              
              operators on spaces of functions. The Hamiltonian of a system is               
              an operator that corresponds roughly to energy. Its spectrum is a              
              set of real numbers defined mathematically that have the physical              
              interpretation of possible energy levels of the system. Physics                
              and mathematics play off one another in analyzing the spectrum of              
              a given class of Hamiltonians. Another context in which operators              
              arise naturally is geometry. Any surface (or higher-dimensional                
              analogue) on which coordinates can be assigned in a sufficiently               
              smooth manner has associated to it an operator called the                      
              Laplacian. (In the case of a surface, the spectrum of the                      
              Laplacian may be thought of as giving frequencies of natural                   
              modes of vibration.) Professor Hislop will investigate the                     
              spectral theory of geometrically defined operators using                       
              techniques developed in the mathematical physics part of his                   
              project.
