Title       : Intelligent Low-level Control of Multiple Manipulator Robotic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1990      
File        : a9096300

Award Number: 9096300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elbert L. Marsh                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 31,  1990      
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Hsu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two tasks, completely decentralized                   
              control of cooperating multiple robots sharing the same workload,              
              and control of robots in space.  Typically for cooperating                     
              robots, each robot is controlled by its own control module in a                
              parallel manner.  However, there is a real time communication                  
              channel, comprising a common bus structure, between modules to                 
              enable coordination between control modules.  For this                         
              configuration, the robots are said to be centralized.                          
              Unfortunately, for some conditions, i.e., when the robots are                  
              made by different manufacturers or when the controllers are                    
              located far apart, providing a common bus is not possible.  It                 
              then becomes necessary to completely decentralize the control                  
              scheme, that is , have them operate independently of each other.               
              This project investigates a method for achieving that goal.  The               
              conjecture is that each robot can accurately estimate the action               
              of the other by sensing the motion of the object being handled,                
              and by sensing the interaction force between itself and the                    
              object.  This hypothesis will be tested as the first task in this              
              project.  In the second task, the intent is to deal with the                   
              problem associated with the dynamics effects associated with                   
              interaction between a robot and the space system which it is in                
              contact with.  The research goal is to devise a scheme whereby                 
              both the robot and space system remain stationary in the large                 
              during interactions between the two.
