Title       : Physiology and Molecular Biology of Insect Parasitism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1990     
File        : a9096201

Award Number: 9096201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 31,  1990     
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Beckage nancy.beckage@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Parasites frequently cause their host to show developmental and                
              biochemical abnormalities which disturb the normal growth and                  
              reproduction of the organism.  Some effects appear to be mediated by           
              factors associated with the parasites such as bacteria or viruses, in          
              addition to the parasites themselves and the stress invoed by their            
              feeding and consumption of host nutrients.  Using the tobacco hornworm         
              and a braconid wasp parasite as a model system, Dr. Beckage has shown          
              that a virus injected by the parasite into the host stimulates                 
              biosynthesis of novel proteins found only in parasitgized larvae.  The         
              goal of this grant will be to characterize the proteins involved and           
              study their regulation to determine if the genes encoding for their            
              synthesis are components of the host, parasite, or viral genome (s) and        
              clarify the mode of their induction.  The tissues producing the                
              proteins will be identified and the physiological role of the proteins         
              will be studied to gain fresh insights into the developmental dynamics         
              of how the physiology of the host is modulated to facilitate successful        
              parasitism.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This parasitic wasp, Cotesia  congregata,  serves as"a biological              
              control of several insect pests, and many closely related species are          
              similarly important in agricultural and forest ecosystems.  Thus the           
              information gained from this study may have important implications for         
              design of novel strategies to control a variety of insect pests in             
              addition to serving as a valuable parasitological model which will             
              enhance our understanding of the mechanisms involved in regulation of          
              host physiology at txe host-parasite interface.  Biotechnology could be        
              used to express normally parasitism-specific genes in the unparasitized        
              state, for example, causing developmental arrest prior to reproduction.
