Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Coordination Compounds of Polyoxomolybdate
               Anions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1993     
File        : a9096316

Award Number: 9096316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pierre Perrolle                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8160               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon A. Zubieta jazubiet@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Jon                 
              Zubieta, State University of New York at Albany, and Dr. Yves                  
              Jeanin, Laboratorie de Chimie des Metaux de Transition, University             
              of Pierre and Marie Curie   Paris, France.  The objective of the               
              project is the investigation of coordination compounds of                      
              polyoxomolybdate anions.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Since heterogeneous metal oxide surfaces play an increasingly                  
              important role in the chemical industry, the chemical processes                
              which occur on these surfaces are of considerable interest.  The               
              chemistry of polyoxomolybdates with organonitrogen species is of               
              particular importance in providing chemical models for abiological             
              nitrogen fixation and industrial ammoxidation.  In this joint                  
              project, the investigators will exploit currently developed                    
              synthetic methodologies for organohydrazido complexes of polyoxo-              
              molybdates to the coordination chemistry of polymetalates with                 
              organoimido ligands.  The experimental plan will concentrate on the            
              synthesis of organoimido derivatives of organic soluble polyoxomo-             
              lybdates, of polyoxomolybdate complexes stabilized by coligands,               
              and of lacunary polyoxometalates.  The complexes will be character-            
              ized using X-ray crystallography, multinuclear NMR and electro-                
              chemistry.  Thermal and photochemical decomposition reactions of               
              the organoimido derivatives, as well as their reactions with                   
              allyalcohol and alkenes will be investigated.  The project will                
              benefit from the complementary expertise of the US and French                  
              investigators; the two laboratories have been studying related                 
              aspects of the coordination chemistry of polyoxometalates with                 
              organonitrogen ligands for several years.
