Title       : Tension Receptors in Crustacean Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1989  
File        : a9096112

Award Number: 9096112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : January 31,  1990    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500               (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Bernard Hartman hartman@duq2.cc.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Tension receptors are important links in the feedback system                   
              controlling movements and maintenance of position.  The                        
              PRincipal Investigator in this project has been studying such                  
              receptors in the limbs of crabs and crayfish.  These provide                   
              particularly favorable material with which to explore the                      
              mechanisms by which such receptors work and the ways in which                  
              the information obtained from them is used by the organism.                    
              This is because the behavior of the animals is relatively                      
              simple and the joints and muscles in which the receptors are                   
              found are rather easily accessible.  The studies here will use                 
              two species of crab and two of crayfish.                                       
                                                                                             
              There are four main objectives of this project:                                
                                                                                             
              1.  To study the output of individual tension receptors on the                 
              tendon that closes the joint, characterizing its action.                       
              2.  To obtain descriptions of the structure and general                        
              responsivities of tension receptors on other tendons of the                    
              walking legs.                                                                  
              3.  To attempt to determine if the muscle of the legs have                     
              length detectors as well as tension receptors.                                 
              4.  To compare the tension receptors in the pair of claws, one                 
              of which is much larger than the other.                                        
                                                                                             
              This exploratory work has considerable potential for leading to                
              a model system that can give important clues to the workings of                
              the proprioceptive sense.
