Title       : A Neuroanatomical and Electrophysiological Analysis of the Motor Units of the
               Major Flight Muscles in the Pigeon (Columba livia) and Starling (Sturnus
               vulgaris)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1990     
File        : a9096173

Award Number: 9096173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1989   
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83660              (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Goslow ted goslow@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed neuroanatomical and electrophysiological study of                 
              the major flight muscles of birds is designed to provide data                  
              relevant to 1) the evolution of neuromuscular design among                     
              tetrapods, and 2) the recruitment of motor motoneuron and muscle               
              unit (contraction speed, force production, fatigability)                       
              properties of functionally isolated motor units from the major                 
              depressor (pectoralis) and elevator (supracoracoideus) muscles of              
              the wing.  Glycogen depletion techniques will permit description               
              of innervation ratio and peripheral distribution patterns of each              
              unit type, as well as provide the first histochemical-                         
              physiological correlation for muscle fibers in avian flight                    
              muscles.  The distribution and general morphology of the motor                 
              nuclei within the spinal cord for each of these muscles will be                
              established with an anatomical tracer (horseradish peroxidase).                
              The significance of expected results is as follows:  First,                    
              Goslow's hypothesis that throughout the evolution of diverse                   
              locomotor systems among tetrapods, the neural control mechanism                
              for tetrapod shoulder function during locomotion has remained                  
              relatively conservative will be evaluated by examining the                     
              neuromuscular organization.  Second, within the pectoralis of                  
              pigeons during flight, recruitment between two muscle fiber                    
              species appears to be consistent with the "size principle."                    
              However, theory of muscle fiber mechanics and efficiency suggests              
              that the recruitment order in populations of aerobic fibers (80%               
              in pigeons, 100% in starlings) may not be ordered.  The proposed               
              study offers the first detailed account of the structural and                  
              functional organization of flight muscle motor units which will                
              allow evaluation of these hypotheses.
