Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Population Dynamics in the Chemostat and Gradostat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1990       
File        : a9096279

Award Number: 9096279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty M. Tang ATBYT@ASUACAD  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Many mathematical models for microbial ecosystems assume the              
              environment to be homogeneous, as simulated by the chemostat.  It              
              is well established that such an environment does not support                  
              competitive coexistence.  This project will focus on two factors               
              that can lead to coexistence: heterogeneous enviornment, and time              
              lag between nutrient consumption and population growth.  The                   
              gradostat is a laboratory system related to the chemostat and                  
              simulates ecosystems with spatial heterogeneity in the form of                 
              substrate gradients.  The mathematical model for competition in                
              the gradostat is an example of order.preserving dynamical systems              
              which have been studied in great detail in recent years.  The                  
              study will give better understanding of growth dynamics in                     
              gradient.like environments and suggest new experiments to be                   
              performed with the gradostat.  Growth delay has been observed                  
              experimentally but its mathematical models have not been studied               
              extensively.  The principal investigator will study model                      
              equations which are integrodifferential equations where delay is               
              described by a kernel in the Volterra integral which reflects                  
              growth being affected by consumption at all previous time, i.e.                
              distributed delay.  The goal is to determine if competitive                    
              coexistence can be expected with growth delay in general, or only              
              with certain special forms of delay.
