Title       : Enzymatic Technologies for Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9096252

Award Number: 9096252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith S. Kyler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program is supporting the research of Dr.                
              Keith S. Kyler of the Department of Chemistry at the University                
              of Miami.  This research will lead to the harnessing of                        
              biochemical reactions as new tools in the synthesis of complex                 
              molecules by mild and possibly nonpolluting processes. It has                  
              considerable potential to produce the new chemicals needed in                  
              modern agriculture and medicine.                                               
                                                                                             
              The development of new enzymatic methods for the                               
              preparative-scale asymmetric synthesis will be undertaken for                  
              biologically important organic compounds.  New applications of                 
              an enzymatic method for the synthesis of steroids will be                      
              undertaken using the sterol cyclase from microbial sources, and                
              demonstrate the use of this enzymic method for preparing                       
              valuable lanosterol, cholesterol, and cycloartenol steroids.                   
              Additionally, new enzymatic technologies will be developed for:                
              (1) the chiral oxidation of pentadienyl glutarates using                       
              soybean lipoxygenase as a method for the asymmetric                            
              hydroxylation of unsaturated alcohols; and (2) the enzymatic                   
              reduction of imino esters using dehydrogenases as a  new                       
              approach to asymmetric syntheses of alkaloids.  Lastly, a study                
              will be made into the use of synthetic peptide duplexes to                     
              function as synthetic pseudo-enzymes (SPEs) displaying                         
              molecular recognition properties of natural enzymes.
