Title       : Honey Bee Division of Labor: A Behavioral-Genetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1990       
File        : a9096139

Award Number: 9096139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 31,  1989    
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Page repage@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The organization of an animal society may be influenced by its                 
              genetic structure.  Dr. Page will test this principle of social                
              behavior with social insects, which live in some of the most                   
              complex colonies on earth.  He will determine whether or not                   
              genetic composition of a colony of honey bees influences one of                
              the most prominent traits of insect social organization, the                   
              division of labor among workers.                                               
                                                                                             
              The honey bee is an ideal species for studying the genetic basis               
              of colony organization because it exhibits an elaborate division               
              of labor, and because its colonies are genetically diverse, due                
              to the polygamous mating behavior of queens.  Methods of                       
              culturing and experimental manipulation are uniquely available                 
              for honey bees, allowing especially thorough study of behavioral               
              genetics.  Dr. Page's research is designed to determine whether                
              or not differences in division of labor among worker honey bees                
              have a genetic basis, and, if so, to delineate the relative                    
              importance of both genetic and environmental influences on worker              
              behavior.  Two genetic techniques will be applied to the study of              
              division of labor for the first time.  First, the effect of                    
              intracolonial genetic variation on the division of labor will be               
              examined in colonies of bees bearing biochemical genetic markers.              
              Second, a program of artificial selection will be conducted to                 
              produce lines of bees that differ in the tendency to specialize                
              on one task; these lines will be used as probes to study the                   
              interactions between genetic and environmental determinants of                 
              task performance.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The principal significance of this research is that it may chart               
              a new direction for the study of the insect societies, because it              
              has long been thought that differences in worker behavior are                  
              determined by the environment.  This study also provides an                    
              excellent opportunity to analyze the genetic and environmental                 
              determinants of behavior in an animal displaying a rich                        
              behavioral repertoire, because it will be possible to exert                    
              unusually precise control over both genetic and environmental                  
              conditions.
