Title       : John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1989     
File        : a9096106

Award Number: 9096106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1989     
Expires     : February 28,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12600              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Aspray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IEEE
	      445 HOES LANE
	      Piscataway, NJ  088544103    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              John von Neumann is one of the major scientific figures of 20th                
              century America.  He contributed to the mathematical disciplines               
              of logic, measurement theory, Lie groups, operator theory,                     
              mathematical physics, and numerical analysis.  He applied                      
              mathematics to the foundations of quantum mechanics, game theory,              
              economics, and automata.  He pioneered the early design,                       
              programming, construction, and scientific use of computers.  He                
              served as a productive faculty member at eminent mathematical                  
              research institutions in Germany and the United States.  He                    
              participated at high levels in the mobilization of science during              
              World War II and was a major advocate for the development of                   
              atomic energy after the war.  In short, von Neumann played a                   
              central role in mathematical science in all of its ramifications               
              in the United States.  A study of his work promises greatly to                 
              elucidate the growth of the United States as a scientific power                
              in this century.  Nowhere was his influence greater than in his                
              contributions to the development of the modern computer.  It is                
              this latter aspect of von Neumann's work that Dr. Aspray is                    
              studying.  Specifically, Dr. Aspray is examining von Neumann's                 
              work on the logical design of hardware systems, coding and                     
              programming, and the construction of modern computing equipment.               
              This work will complement Dr. Aspray's previous work on von                    
              Neumann's contributions to numerical analysis, scientific                      
              computation, and theory of computing.  Under this new project,                 
              Dr. Aspray will integrate the work of the two projects and set                 
              the general context in which von Neumann's work was carried out.               
              This work is based on an examination of published materials,                   
              archival materials, new and existing oral histories and                        
              conversations and correspondence with von Neumann's associates.
