Title       : Synchronic and Diachronic Relations Among Spoken and WrittenVarieties in Somali
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1991      
File        : a9096258

Award Number: 9096258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Biber douglas.biber@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project studies the effect of the simultaneous introduction               
              of an orthography for Somali and the establishment of Somali as                
              the official national language of Somalia in 1972.  The order was              
              followed immediately by two years of mass literacy campaigns                   
              followed by establishment of newspapers and magazines, then                    
              pamphlets and government documents, followed by textbooks,                     
              historical works, and works of literature in Somali.  The project              
              studies how spoken Somali has changed during this period of rapid              
              and broad-scale popular movement into literacy and how written                 
              Somali differs from spoken Somali.  Large amounts of Somali text               
              will be computationally processed to pinpoint and quantify                     
              differences and changes during this highly dynamic period.                     
                                                                                             
              Few studies to date have analyzed speech and writing in a non-                 
              western language.  Moreover, although quite a few languages have               
              recently been the recipients of standardized orthographies, most               
              of them remain marginal within their countries, whereas Somali                 
              has been the national language of its country for the last                     
              sixteen years.  In view of recent works on the relationship of                 
              literacy and cognitive style, this project provides empirical                  
              data for testing such hypotheses.
