Title       : Tagged Fluorescent Aerosols for Use as Tracers of Dispersionand Removal
               Processes in Clouds, and for Laboratory Studies of Aerosol Coagulation Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1992   
File        : a9096297

Award Number: 9096297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Harrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              I. Introduction                                                                 
                  The efficiencies with which atmospheric aerosols are                      
              removed form the air are not well known, either for wet or dry                 
              processes.  Much effort has been spent in modeling the                         
              probabilities that coagulating particles will stick to one                     
              another, or to nascent cloud droplets or ice crystals, or to                   
              the earth's diverse surfaces, as functions of particle type and                
              size.                                                                          
                   This research has the objective of designing a new tracer                 
              technology that detects and scales individually tagged                         
              fluorescent aerosol particles.  It has been demonstrated large                 
              improvements in detection sensitivity and utility over previous                
              techniques using fluorescent tracers, and practical calibration                
              for size-scaling by fluorescent amplitudes.                                    
                   A dual-wavelength fluorescent-scattering optical particle                 
              counter that can be optimized for low count rates, with                        
              capability for in-flight measurements will be constructed as a                 
              part of this effort.  Additionally improved techniques for                     
              dispersing tagged aerosols, to determine the effective ranges                  
              and times over which these particles can be detected, to                       
              measure the frequency- and size-spectra of naturally occurring                 
              fluorescent aerosols, and to measure the differential loss                     
               rated of hydrophobic and hydrophilic fluorescent aerosols,                    
              both in laboratory environmental chambers and in ambient clouds                
              will be investigated.
