Title       : The Structure of Similarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1990    
File        : a9096259

Award Number: 9096259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37439              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dedre Gentner gentner@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is concerned with the development and testing of                 
              psychological theories of similarity structure and similarity                  
              judgments.  Similarity is a concept fundamental to virtually                   
              all aspects of cognition, theoretical and applied.  For example,               
              theories of memory rely on the observation that people often are               
              reminded of similar events, and theories of learning predict                   
              transfer on the basis of similarity between learning and test                  
              conditions.  In everyday life, the errors people make are often                
              based on the use of inappropriate similarity matches, and a good               
              deal of learning and transfer of training appears to be governed               
              by what people find similar.  Thus, an adequate theory of                      
              similarity is essential for theoretical advances in understanding              
              cognition and in their application.                                            
                                                                                             
              This research stems from the fundamental insight that similarity               
              of two things depends not only on the similarity of features or                
              parts, but also on how those parts are put together, the                       
              relations among the parts.  Previous research has demonstrated                 
              the advantages of formal mathematical models in understanding the              
              role of attributes in similarity.  The current research will                   
              apply and extend these previous formalisms to incorporate the                  
              contribution of relations to similarity, in addition to the role               
              of attributes.  Separating structure from processing principles                
              is crucial for understanding a variety of experimental results,                
              such as (1) that the similarity of object A to object B may be                 
              different from the similarity of B to A, (2) that the similarity               
              of A to B may depend on what other objects are present, and (3)                
              that adding the same property to objects A and B may change which              
              one of the them is judged to be more similar to object C.                      
              Preliminary research indicates that these observations depend                  
              importantly on whether similarity is based on attributes,                      
              relations, or mixtures of attributes and relations.                            
                                                                                             
              Most of the studies involve presenting people with material                    
              (e.g., geometric forms, descriptions of objects) and asking them               
              to make similarity judgments.  In other studies, reaction times                
              and errors in various tasks will provide an indirect measure of                
              similarity.  Computer simulations of similarity and analogy will               
              model the experimental results.  The research will also begin the              
              study of the role of structural similarity in learning and                     
              concept formation.
