Title       : Igneous-related Metallogenesis of the Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1990   
File        : a9096294

Award Number: 9096294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane M. Ernst                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Barton barton@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A two-fold study of igneous-related metallogenesis of                     
              Phanerozoic plutons in the Cordilleran miogeocline of the Great                
              Basin is proposed:  (1) district-scale studies of late-stage                   
              magmatic and mineralizing processes related to Cretaceous                      
              granitoids, concentrating lithophile-element mineralization                    
              (LEM) associated with two-mica granites; (2) a comparative                     
              investigation of the magmatism and metallogeny of Jurassic,                    
              Cretaceous, and Tertiary intrusions in the miogeocline.  This                  
              proposal builds on the results of ongoing NSF supported studies                
              of LEM and its regional context.  Justifications for this                      
              approach include:  (1) the LEM is of a type that has been little               
              studied in the western United States, yet it shares many                       
              characteristics with important deposits elsewhere in the world;                
              (2) examination of igneous-related metallogeny in a single,                    
              geologically uniform (at a large scale) area nominally eliminates              
              lateral crustal heterogeneities as a cause for variation,                      
              enabling comparison of multiple examples of the same type of                   
              system and investigation of other factors such as long-term                    
              temporal changes in crustal thermal structure.                                 
                   Evaluation of LEM systems involves completing studies of                  
              local areas, and intensively studying one area (Birch Creek,                   
              CA), which contains a well exposed two-mica granite with related               
              deformation, metamorphism and hydrothermal alteration.  The                    
              approach combines detailed field work with geochemical and                     
              petrological studies.  These will be complemented by                           
              collaborative geochronological and geophysical measurements.                   
              The main goals are to refine the descriptive and genetic                       
              understanding of Great Basin-type LEM and to compare it with                   
              other areas.  Available data demonstrate the Great Basin                       
              Phanerozoic petrogeny and metallogeny correlate, and that they                 
              change systematically with time; they appear to reflect changes                
              in crustal thermal structure (Barton, in press).  Quantitative                 
              interpretation is hindered by insufficient data on the igneous                 
              rocks and ore deposits.  Geochemical reconnaissance (whole rock                
              and mineralogical, isotopic and elemental analyses ) of Jurassic               
              and Tertiary intusions is proposed to complement ongoing studies               
              of systematic variations in Cretaceous granitoids.  This survey,               
              along with continuing compilation of published data, will form                 
              the basis for better indentifying and interpreting regional                    
              temporal trends.
