Title       : Regulation of Microtubule Organizing Center Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9096261

Award Number: 9096261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale D. Vandre vandre.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Recent evidence has implicated a role for the phosphorylation and         
              dephosphorylation of specific MTOC components in regulating the                
              functional activity of the mitotic apparatus.  The purpose of this             
              proposal is to define the functional properties of the centrosome and          
              kinetochore with respect to the nucleation and capture of microtubules         
              respectively, to determine the role of phosphorylation of centrosomal or       
              kinetochore components in modulating their functional properties, and to       
              identify kinase and/or phosphatase dephosphorylation of the mitotic            
              microtubule organizing centers.  We will initially characterize the            
              microtubule nucleation capacity of the centrosome in lysed cell models,        
              and compare this activity with isolated centrosomes.  Functional               
              properties of kinetochores will be determined using isolated mitotic           
              chromosomes.  The phosphorylation state of the MTOCs will be analyzed by       
              32P incorporation and also the phosphate specific antibodies.  The             
              affect of dephosphorylation on the defined functional properties will be       
              determined following in vitro dephosphorylation.  The functional assays        
              will then be utilized to screen fractions of mitotic cell lysates for          
              appropriate enzymatic activities.                                              
                   Defining the role of phosphorylation in MTOC function is a key            
              facet of a detailed understanding of the molecular basis for the               
              regulation of cell division in general and the function of the mitotic         
              apparatus specifically.
