Title       : Metal Vinylidenes and Carbenes in Synthetic Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1992  
File        : a9096322

Award Number: 9096322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony G. M. Barrett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program is supporting the work of Prof.                  
              Anthony Barrett of Northwestern University.  Prof. Barrett is                  
              studying how  metals connected to carbon, organometallic                       
              compounds, can provide unique methods for preparing                            
              structurally complex molecules.  The project will study the                    
              details of how these organometallic compounds react,  and the                  
              limitations of their use.  Special attention will focus on                     
              methods for making chemical ring compounds.  Ring-containing                   
              compounds are common to Nature, and one of the important                       
              missions of organic chemists is to find new ways to build, in                  
              the laboratory, the  kinds of compounds that can be found in                   
              Nature.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The application of cationic iron?II! vinylidene reagents to the                
              construction of a diversity of heterocyclic and carbocyclic                    
              molecules will be investigated.  The reactions will be focused                 
              on novel cyclization approaches to heterocyclic and carbocyclic                
              rings.  The research will explore the fundamental questions of                 
              the mode of reactivity of the organometallic reagents.  As the                 
              scope of the newly-developing technology becomes known, the                    
              methods will be applied to  designing efficient routes to                      
              molecular skeletons of  interest to synthetic organic chemists.
