Title       : Development of Selective Connectivity in a Simple Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1991       
File        : a9096180

Award Number: 9096180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven C. McLoon                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney K. Murphey rmurphey@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A properly functioning brain requires development of the most                  
              highly precise connectivity known among cells.  Assembly of such               
              specific neural circuits during development depends on two very                
              different kinds of mechanisms.  First, individual neurons (nerve               
              cells) carry molecular labels that determine the outlines of the               
              circuit to be assembled; the mechanism called chemoaffinity                    
              allows the growing processes of a cell to "recognize" the                      
              molecular label on the proper target cells.  Second, there are                 
              ways in which this assembly from chemoaffinity can be modified.                
              Nervous systems are dynamic structures, and the wiring diagrams                
              may be affected by competition between cells for available                     
              contact sites, by internal irregularities and by different                     
              environmental circumstances acting on the animal.                              
                                                                                             
              This project is a high resolution examination of the dynamic                   
              aspects of circuit assembly.  A model system, the cricket, has                 
              been chosen because it contains large identifiable single neurons              
              that have been well defined for their detailed structure,                      
              specific connections, and physiological properties.  In crickets,              
              the growth stages are well defined, and regeneration of processes              
              allows examination of connection formation at a variety of                     
              stages.  Some of the defined circuits in the cricket are                       
              relatively simple structures that are very accessible for                      
              physiology and anatomy.  The synapses, which are the functional                
              sites of communication between nerve cells, will be examined to                
              see whether the physiological transmission of signals changes                  
              during maturation, whether there are changes at the                            
              ultrastructural in these synapses during reorganization, whether               
              the incoming process controls the strength of the synapse, and                 
              whether the strength of different terminals depends on                         
              competition of some sort.  Results will have an impact on both                 
              developmental biology as well as neuroscience; the need for fine               
              tuning of connections is a hallmark of all nervous systems.
