Title       : Flagellar Ultrastructure and Phylogeny of Golden Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1989   
File        : a9096172

Award Number: 9096172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1989   
Expires     : March 31,  1990      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      The structure of the flagella (swimming organelles) and                
              associated subcellular components will be examined in golden                   
              algae by Dr. Robert Andersen of DePaul University.  These algae                
              are photosynthetic organisms, but they have cell cytoskeleton                  
              features similar to animals.  The combination of photosynthetic                
              and cytoskeletal features with the small size and rapid growth of              
              the organisms makes the golden algae a good experimental model                 
              system where the results can aid in our understanding plants and               
              animals.  Two techniques, electron microscopy and monoclonal                   
              antibody immunofluorescent studies, will be employed.                          
                      Microtubules, which are major components of flagella and               
              cell cytoskeletons, will be identified using a fluorescent stain               
              conjugated to tubulin protein molecules.  The position of                      
              microtubules in "ordinary" cells will be compared to the position              
              of microtubules in dividing cells.  Furthermore, as one cell                   
              divides into two cells, the developmental process of producing                 
              two flagellar apparatuses and two cytoskeletons will be                        
              investigated.  Electron microscopy will be employed to provide                 
              fine details of these structures and processes.  The findings                  
              should help us better understand the structure and change in                   
              structure of flagellar apparatuses and cytoskeletons in golden                 
              algae.  In addition, the findings should also help us better                   
              understand evolutionary relationships among these and other                    
              algae.
