Title       : SBIR Phase I: Chemical Vapor Deposition-SiC-Coated Ceramic Bearing Elements of
               High Damage and Wear Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9660007

Award Number: 9660007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan-Fong Jue jjue@materialsys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials & Systems Resrch
	      5395 West 700 South
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841044403    801/973-1199

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9146,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop
              alternate ceramic bearing elements that can deliver the performance of silicon
              nitride (Si3N4) at significantly reduced costs.  Hybrid bearings incorporating
              hot-isostatically-pressed (HIPed) or sintered and HIPed Si3N4 elements (balls
              or rollers) have demonstrated excellent performance in the machine tool
              industry, the chemical processing industry, in vacuum pumps, vapor deposition
              and molecular beam epitaxy equipment and centrifuges and high-speed testing
              equipment. Despite this demonstrated performance the total world-wide market
              for Si3N4 bearing elements is discouragingly small (- $ 25 million in 1995). 
              The single-most important factor limiting the use of Si3N4 elements is cost.
              The premise of this research project is that bearing surfaces of SiC deposited
              by chemical-vapor deposition (CVD), and toughened by designed residual surface
              compression, will have the required microstructural homogeneity and surface
              toughness to deliver rolling-contact fatigue and wear resistance comparable to
              Si3N4 at lower cost.  The cost of the SiC bearing elements should be lower than
              that of Si3N4 because of the lower cost of the powders, processing and surface
              finishing.  SiC elements are also expected to show improved performance in
              severe environments due to their superior corrosion and oxidation resistance as
              compared to Si3N4.  Specific objectives of Phase I are to (1) optimize the
              magnitude of the residual surface compression in SiC coatings by tailoring the
              thermal expansion of pressureless-sintered SiC-TiC substrates, (2) establish
              optimum CVD conditions to avoid deleterious coating substructures, and (3)
              demonstrate life and wear resistance of SiC in RCF tests comparable to current
              bearing-grade Si3N4.  Phase II will address further lowering of the cost of
              manufacture of substrates and designing economical methods for SiC coating of
              balls in fluidized bed CVD reactors.       The CVD-SiC-coated balls and rollers
              to be developed will be used as bearing elements in hybrid ceramic bearings. 
              Hybrid ceramic bearings, in turn, will be used in the machine tool industry
              where the low density of the ceramic elements can lower the centrifugal thrust
              forces, in the chemical process industry to take advantage of the corrosion
              resistance of the SiC elements, and moderate temperature applications.  Cam
              followers in the automatic industry is another potential area to exploit the
              CVD-SiC coated rolling elements.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
