Title       : SBIR Phase I: Using Multimedia and Communication to Promote Conceptual Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9660334

Award Number: 9660334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74564              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Hillinger m.hillinger@lexiconsys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LIS
	      Beaver Meadows Road
	      Sharon, VT  05065    802/763-7599

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9660334  Hillinger   A sizable body of research has shown that students at all
              grade levels often hold views of the physical world that are inconsistent with
              scientific observations.  Once acquired, these misconceptions are difficult to
              overcome and can persist even after the student has been given the "correct"
              explanation in class.  For learning to occur, students must be made aware of
              these misconceptions and confronted with the discrepancy between the
              misconceptions and reality. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project to be carried out by LexIcon Systems will design and develop a
              prototype system that enables students to actively explore problems using
              multimedia simulations and provides integrated writing and communication tools
              as an avenue for highlighting and refuting any misconceptions.  This prototype
              will utilize a series of interconnected Quicktime videos to provide a simulated
              space for exploring mirror reflections and virtual images.  LexIcon will
              develop, test, and refine this prototype by including classroom teachers as an
              integral part of the instruction process.  Components of the system will be
              evaluated to determine whether the system provides a significant advantage over
              more conventional instructional methods and, if so, whether it is possible to
              partition the effect according to different system capabilities.  The
              feasibility of easily integrating the system into the middle school classroom
              as it exists today will also be determined.   The project has the potential to
              give some of the emerging capabilities of instructional technology a strong
              role in resolving misconceptions by giving students opportunities to explore
              and confront these discrepancies between how they think the world works and the
              reality of how it actually does work.  The product would be a series based on
              high-quality multimedia simulations on CD-ROM with a common set of
              communication tools.  Ultimately, some or all of this product could be
              distributed on the internet.
