Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Novel System for the Expression of Integral Membrane Proteins
               Using Halobacterium Halobium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9660815

Award Number: 9660815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74916              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Halladay Halladay@microbio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HaloGenetics, Inc
	      6 University Drive, Suite 140
	      Amherst, MA  010046000    413/256-0760

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1491,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660815  Halladay   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will evaluate a novel method for the production of integral membrane proteins
              using the halophilic archeon Halobacterium halobium.  Two key requirements for
              biochemical analysis of proteins involved in complex cellular processes are
              their production in quantity and their amenability to simple and rapid
              isolation.  To circumvent limitations frequently encountered in native systems
              where insufficient amounts of protein are produced, recombinant DNA technology
              has been developed and used to produce soluble proteins in a variety of
              heterologous expression systems.  Generally, however, these systems are not
              very efficient in expressing heterologous membrane proteins.  Thus, a reliable
              heterologous production system for this class of proteins is needed.
              Halogenics, Inc. will construct the appropriate plasmid vectors and evaluate
              the usefulness of an H. halobium based membrane protein expression system. 
              Several attributes of H. halobium indicate it will be an ideal system for
              production of membrane proteins.  First, tools necessary for the routine
              introduction, maintenance, and expression of foreign DNA have already been
              developed for this organism.  These include both a reliable transformation
              system for the introduction of DNA molecules, as well as plasmid vectors which
              can easily be modified and utilized as expression vectors.  Second, H. halobium
              naturally produces very large amounts of bacteriorhodopsin, an integral
              membrane protein that is very similar in structure to the G-protein dependent
              receptor family--a major class of membrane proteins.  H. halobium has a third
              advantage.  It is readily , lysed by gentle, gradual dilution with distilled
              water or buffers to release the expressed proteins. In contrast, other
              recombinant systems inherently require denaturing conditions such as
              sonication, manual disruption, or the use of detergents to release expressed
              proteins.   The proposed technology, combined with the low c osts associated
              with growing H. halobium and its easy lysis, will allow the inexpensive and
              simple production of integral membrane proteins in quantity.  Such capability
              is of intense interest to researchers both in academic and applied disciplines.
               The purified proteins resulting from the use of this system would be used in
              drug discovery and development processes, diagnostic test kits, and therapeutic
              applications.  ***
