Title       : SBIR Phase I: Real-time Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Thin Film Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9660014

Award Number: 9660014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shankar Krishnan shanky@containerless.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Containerless Research Inc
	      910 University Place
	      Evanston, IL  602013149    847/467-2678

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660014  Krishnan     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will test a novel method for spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) which is
              capable of lower cost and higher response rates than conventional SE
              instruments. SEs are used to measure thin film thickness, chemical composition,
              and defect concentrations in multi-layer films. However, speed and cost limit
              the use of SEs for real-time thin film process control applications. The
              proposed research exploits the facts that a diffraction grating not only
              disperses incident light into a spectrum, but also provides several orders of
              diffraction that contain information about the polarization state of the light.
              These two characteristics of gratings make it possible to design a Grating
              Division of Amplitude Photopolarimeter (G-DOAP) for spectroscopic ellipsometry.
              The G-DOAP is capable of (i) high temporal resolution and (ii) low cost
              manufacture because it contains no moving parts and has fewer optical elements
              than conventional SE equipment. In Phase I, this firm will develop and
              characterize the performance of a laboratory breadboard G-DOAP. They will also
              investigate analytical and numerical methodologies to achieve feedback control
              of thin film deposition using SE data. The G-DOAP is a recent invention,
              initially developed with NSF-DMR funding, and patented in 1995. The G-DOAP's
              spectroscopic capabilities have yet to be demonstrated and are a key issue for
              the proposed Phase I research. The research will be performed in collaboration
              with the University of New Orleans.    If successful, the research will show
              feasibility of low-cost, high-speed spectroscopic ellipsometry for intelligent
              control of thin film deposition processes.     The proposed spectroscopic
              ellipsometer (SE) would impact state of he art MBE, MOVPE, and MOCVD techniques
              by allowing growth of semiconductor materials under high-speed, real-time
              control, currently unavailable.  Appreciable market share for the SE is also
              anticipated in semiconductor ex-situ chara cterization applications.  ***
