Title       : SBIR Phase I: Point Sensor for Remote Off-Gas Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9660819

Award Number: 9660819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Miller pxl@superlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PXL, Incorporated
	      1-H Deer Park Drive
	      Monmouth Junction, NJ  08852    908/329-0505

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1493,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      96-60819  Miller      This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will focus on the development of point sensor for high
              sensitivity in-situ remote trace gas analysis. The proposed technology is
              expected to provide two or three orders of magnitude increase in sensitivity
              over existing near infrared technologies and allow the development of
              diode-based, portable instruments for high sensitivity (ppm-ppb range) point
              monitoring of trace gases. This technology also allows for the development of
              versatile sensors suitable for the detection of chemical/biological agents in
              both gas and liquid media for a broad scope of applications in science and
              industry. During Phase I, PXL will design and test a proprietary sensor
              component and will develop, and experimentally confirm a numerical model that
              simulates the proposed system. Using the confirmed model, numerical simulations
              will be conducted to develop the instrument's optimized design and to predict
              its performance. The Phase II research program will develop a point sensor
              based on the proposed technology for the remote monitoring of ammonia in
              off-gas waste streams in real time.   The proposed sensor will particularly
              benefit industrial process control, underground pipeline and tank leak
              detection, and geological exploration for oil and natural gas. It will also
              find applications in clinical/medical diagnostics, environmental monitoring,
              detection of battle field chemical and biological warfare agents, and other
              personal safety devices. The broad scope of applications indicates a large
              potential market for this technology. ***
