Title       : SBIR Phase I: Numerical Simulation of Cavitating Flows Using an Innovative
               Probability Density Function Model for Phase Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9660930

Award Number: 9660930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok K. Singhal aks@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                 This SBIR project will develop, validate and demonstrate a cavitation model
              suitable for multidimensional steady and transient simulations of cavitating
              flows. The lack of prediction capability for cavitating flows is a critical
              road block in the development of many engineering equipment and biomedical
              devices. The proposed model will employ a transport equation for vapor with
              full account of vapor generation/destruction and turbulent fluctuations in
              velocity and pressure. The phase change rates will depend upon thermodynamic
              properties of fluid, and the flow characteristics, particularly turbulent
              pressure fluctuations. The pressure fluctuations will be related to the
              turbulent kinetic energy of flow. A Probability Density Function (PDF) approach
              will be used to calculate the local time-mean phase change rates from
              instantaneous pressure values. In Phase I study, the model will be incorporated
              in a finite-volume, pressure-based, CFD code and applied to three benchmark
              problems e.g., orifice, venturi and hydrofoil. Phase II work will include
              several modifications (e.g., bubble dynamics and velocity slip), extensive
              validation and practical applications.   The developed cavitation model will
              enable improved designs of engineering equipment using pumps, propellers,
              orifices, hydrofoils, and hydrostatic bearings and biomedical devices such as
              mechanical heart valves. The cavitation model will be useable with various (and
              codes. CFDRC will commercialize it in conjunction with its commercial CFD code,
              CFD-ACE.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
