Title       : SBIR Phase I: Commercialization of a Mechanical Testing Instrument with In-Situ
               Surface Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9660789

Award Number: 9660789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73668              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lane Wilson lwilson@msys.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Microsystems of Buckhannon
	      14 East Lincoln Street
	      Buckhannon, WV  26201    304/472-7206

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                      This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              compact physical design and integrated control system to commercialize a
              recently developed high temperature mechanical testing instrument equipped with
              an in-situ surface analysis capability.  The base structure of the instrument
              consists of an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber which combines mechanical tensile
              testing and high temperature heating with careful control of the gas phase
              environment.  In-situ analysis is added to the mechanical testing in the form
              of Moire-interferometry (measuring solid mechanics full field surface
              deformations), and scanning electron microscopy with spectroscopic chemical
              mapping (measuring microstructural morphology and chemical transformations). 
              The integrated instrument will provide detailed in-situ experimental
              information applicable to both continuum mechanics modeling and microstructural
              materials science investigations of material systems exposed to harsh high
              temperature and reactive gas environmental conditions.  The scope of Phase I
              research, initiation of commercialization of the instrument, will be to improve
              the mechanical and optical design for smaller size, greater affordability, and
              increased performance.  The control of the various analytical components will
              also be integrated to enhance real time data interaction and remove
              redundancies in the control electronics.       The mechanical testing system
              with in-situ surface analysis is attractive to researchers studying high
              performance alloy systems with attention to both their solid mechanics and
              microscopic behavior in extreme environments of high temperatures and reactive
              gases.   The commercialized instrument will be of utility in materials science
              and engineering R&D laboratories as well as commercial materials testing
              facilities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
