Title       : SBIR Phase I: Sky Explorer: A Low-Cost Telescope/CCD Camera System,
               Incorporating Interactive Software, to Enrich High School Science and
               Technology Learning in Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9660693

Award Number: 9660693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74129              (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Tucker gtucker@bostoneng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston Engineering Service
	      87 Metacomet Street
	      Belchertown, MA  01007    413/323-7178

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660693  Tucker    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              to be carried out by Boston Engineering Service takes advantage of falling
              costs and increasing performance of small computer-assisted telescopes and
              charged coupled diode (CCD) cameras to achieve a new, lower cost design that is
              optimized for student learning and affordable for all schools.  Such a system
              of telescope and camera, combined with user friendly, interactive software that
              acts as an "intelligent tutor" in showing how to use the equipment and do
              projects, can allow high school students to perform projects of genuine
              scientific discovery, previously only attempted by adults with scientific
              training.  Such projects include Johnson-Morgan standard (UBVRI) photometry of
              variable stars and the discovery and tracking of asteroids.  The research
              objective is to arrive at a suitable telescope/camera design and an effective
              software user interface to meet cost objectives and student needs.  The
              research consists of extensive experimentation by a software developer and
              instrument designer with a group of high school students using a prototype of
              such a telescope/camera system on a set of astronomy projects.   This project
              offers students the opportunity to participate in scientific discovery and to
              become knowledgeable about the latest technology.  Potential commercial
              applications are a marketable educational instrument for secondary, middle and
              elementary schools, for universities, and the amateur astronomy and public
              education audiences.  ***
