Title       : SBIR Phase I: Mitigation of Coke Deposits on Heat Transfer Surfaces Via Ion
               Implantation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9660075

Award Number: 9660075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74028              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Warren dwarren@linkonline.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvest Technology
	      9253 Glenoaks Boulevard
	      Sun Valley, CA      818/767-3157

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660075  Warren     This project investigates ion implantation for
              modifying the properties of commercial metal alloys to mitigate the growth of
              catalytic coke which forms on critical heat transfer surfaces during many
              important high temperature processes including ethylene cracking, heavy oil
              refining, partial oxidation and substoichiometric combustion. These coke
              deposits are generated as byproducts of thermal cracking reactions and diminish
              heat transfer rates, thermal efficiencies, and reactor product yields. Work
              will focus on ion implantation of selected periodic elements, such as
              alkali/alkaline earth, phosphorous and aluminum, into commercial alloys to
              suppress coke formation by: ( I ) promoting the gasification of carbon, (2)
              altering the catalytic activity of metals for the formation of carbon radicals,
              and (3) impeding the process of carburization. Ion implantation offers a more
              durable method for treating critical heat transfer surfaces competed to
              conventional coating techniques such as electroplating and plasma spraying
              because it is less prone to cracking and delamination under extreme thermal
              environments. In Phase I, the coking rates of ion beam implanted metal coupons
              will be compared against data for conventional alloys under industrial thermal
              cracking conditions to assess the effectiveness of this technique. Phase II
              work will focus on use of emerging ion implantation techniques to allow
              application to more complex geometries including the inside of commercial
              furnace tubes.     Ion implantation of selected elements to mitigate coke
              deposits on high temperature metallic surfaces can significantly improve the
              operating economy and life of heat transfer equipment subjected to thermal
              cracking conditions.  Commercial applications will include treatment of thermal
              cracking furnace tubes and burner components.  ***
