Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Non-Destructive Method for Examining BridgeFoundations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9660071

Award Number: 9660071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Mercado EJMER@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North American Geotech Co
	      3 Lakewood Lane
	      Seabrook, TX  77586    281/474-4027

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop and
              refine non-destructive methods by which the lengths and numbers of piles and
              drilled shafts and the existence of severe structural defects in bridge
              foundations can be determined through non-destructive and non-invasive seismic
              survey means.  The survey techniques proposed are the shear wave reflection
              profiling survey (SWRS) method and the ambient vibration survey (AVS) method. 
              A secondary objective will be to determine through field experimentation any
              limitations that the methods may have.  A known limitation is that none of the
              currently available conventional methods can determine pile widths.  After the
              migration data processing step, it is possible to determine the pile width or
              shaft diameter and the number of piles in a pile group from the SWRS data  
              Measuring pile numbers/group, shaft separation and width/diameter is a function
              of the horizontal resolution obtainable from the data, which is controlled by
              the field data acquisition parameters of detector spacing and source peak
              frequency.  Specifically, shear-wave seismic reflection profiling surveys and
              ambient vibration surveys will be conducted, using traffic on the bridge as the
              exciting force, of bridge foundations along I-45 near the University of Houston
              in the Houston District of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) as a
              means of verifying the validity and utility of both methods.  The Houston
              District of TxDOT has indicated that they will assist the project in gaining
              access to the test sites and to the as-built construction records.       The
              Federal Highway Administration estimates that over the next 20 years $164.9
              billion must be invested to address the tremendous rehabilitation backlog and
              improve accruing bridge deficiencies.  The benefits of the proposed research
              would be very significant cost savings in the rehabilitation of bridge
              foundations by identifying which bridge foundations are safe and which need
              rehabilitation.  The potential for such significant cost savings will make the
              commercial availability of a survey system a profitable undertaking for both
              the system supplier and the end user.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
