Title       : SBIR Phase I: Tertiary Recycling Process for Polymer-Based Automotive Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9660673

Award Number: 9660673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Allred adherenttech@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adherent Technologies, Inc
	      9621 Camino del Sol NE
	      Albuquerque, NM  871111522    505/822-9186

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore a
              novel tertiary recycling process as an economical means for recycling scrap
              automotive plastics and composites.  The goals for the Next Generation Vehicles
              program require that significant vehicle weight reductions be attained.  Weight
              reductions will likely involve increased use of engineering plastics and
              composites that are difficult to recycle using conventional technologies. To
              address that problem, a more effective process for recycling scrap automotive
              plastics and composites is needed.  Early development work on a process for
              recycling scrap aerospace composites and scrap electronics shows that a variety
              of polymers and composites can be converted into low molecular weight
              hydrocarbons at temperatures below 200+C.  The hydrocarbons produced can then
              be reused as chemicals, fuels, or monomers.  Metal, glass, fillers, and fibers
              are separated from the hydrocarbons during the process and can be reclaimed or
              landfilled.  Initial laboratory feasibility studies have shown that the a
              catalytic conversion process is applicable to plastics and composites used in
              automotive parts.  This process does not require presorting of plastic wastes
              and allows fibers and fillers to be reclaimed for reuse. This research will
              study the application of this tertiary recycling technology for recycling of
              automotive waste plastics and composites with a bench-scale continuous process
              to identify design issues for the construction of a large-scale demonstration
              unit in Phase II.       If the research is successful, the recycling process
              will allow waste automotive plastics and composites currently being landfilled
              to be converted into valuable hydrocarbons for reuse as chemicals, fuels, or
              polymers.  Recycling machines based on this process may be scaled to use
              requirements of large and small cities, government installations, and
              industrial plastic scrap generators.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
