Title       : SBIR Phase I: Enhanced Photorefractive Quantum Wells for Compensated Laser
               Ultrasonic Receivers Using Real-Time Holography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9660966

Award Number: 9660966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin B. Klein mbklein@lasson.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lasson Technologies, Inc.
	      1331 Avenida de Cortez
	      Pacific Palisades, CA  90272    310/459-0101

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1493,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      96-60966  Klein     This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project addresses enhanced photorefractive multiple quantum wells for
              laser ultrasonic receivers. Laser-based ultrasound is a promising
              nondestructive evaluation technique that can provide remote measurements of
              parts which are at high temperatures or in hostile environments. It can also be
              used for parts which are moving rapidly or which require scanning of large
              areas. Most current receivers for laser-based ultrasound are based on various
              types of interferometers. One promising type of interferometer uses real-time
              holography in a photorefractive material to combine a signal beam that
              interrogates a vibrating surface with a reference beam for coherent detection.
              In this configuration, the real-time hologram acts as an adaptive beamsplitter
              to overlap the wavefronts of the distorted signal beam and the plane-wave
              reference beam. In spite of their promise, none of the interferometric
              receivers have performed near their theoretical capability due to limitations
              in the performance of the photorefractive material. In this Phase I research
              effort, photorefractive multiple quantum wells with optimized parameters for
              use as a real-time adaptive beamsplitter in a homodyne interferometer will be
              designed, grown and characterized. The goals are a low-cost laser ultrasonic
              receiver with improved signal-to-noise performance and the capability of
              operating at low light levels.   Laser-based ultrasound has applications in a
              wide range of industrial markets. It offers the capability to improve the
              inspection rate of existing scanning systems and it will enable the inspection
              of many parts that can not be tested with other techniques. It is particularly
              promising as an in-process diagnostic for 100% inspection of mass-produced
              parts. ***
