Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Approach to Local Area Damage Detection in Composite
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9660606

Award Number: 9660606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Sofge sofge@visuallink.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NeuroDyne Inc
	      One Kendall Square, Building 200
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/252-3360

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              new approach to detection and classification of damage to a structural
              composite part, thus providing a means for sensing structural degradation such
              as delaminations, fatigue and other damage.  Piezoelectric transducer
              technology provides a means for sensing various structural properties such as
              stress, strain, and elasticity when these sensors are mounted on, or embedded
              within, a material structure.  Structures may degrade due to improper
              manufacture, duty cycle wear, impacts, and material corrosion.  Embedded
              sensors may be used to signal changes, likely to be damage, to a structural
              composite part and permit off-line diagnosis independent of the long-range
              geometry of the part, so that the diagnostic instrument need not have records
              for individual parts.  This project uses high-frequency acoustic signals to
              diagnose damage, calibrating for local properties (density, thickness,
              stiffness).  Standard acoustic test pulses from the piezoelectric devices can
              be used to probe for damage located between pulse generators and sensors.  By
              using only the leading portion of the received signal it is possible to avoid
              the effects of geometry-dependent reverberation.  This greatly simplifies the
              interpretation of changes in the response as clues to structural degradation.  
                  The advanced structural monitoring concepts being sought have potential of
              commercial use in the civil transportation industry for aircraft, automobiles,
              trucks and boats, and in the commercial space industry for boosters and
              satellites.  Other application areas include the use of structural composites
              in load-bearing bridges, composite railroad cars, and numerous other areas
              where light-weight high-strength structural composites are replacing heavy
              metallic structures.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
