Title       : SBIR Phase I: Tunable Tailored Filters for High-SensitivityChemical Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9660752

Award Number: 9660752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Lieberman rlieberman@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physical Optics Corp
	      20600 Gramercy Place, Suite 103
	      Torrance, CA  905011821    310/320-3088

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0512200   Advanced Measurement Investment         
Program Ref : 1974,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                 This project will demonstrate a new class of optical devices that will form
              the heart of a low cost, versatile, field usable environmental monitoring
              system to be developed in Phase II. Specifically, Physical Optics Corporation
              will fabricate and test a solid state filter tailored to precisely match the
              spectral characteristics of target compound(s), either gaseous or liquid, in
              the near infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The filter will be
              easy to mass produce, small, and quite durable, and it will be capable of
              having its optical spectrum modulated in a straightforward, cost effective,
              way. The use of such novel devices will allow the near infrared `overtone`
              optical absorbance bands of many gases of environmental and industrial
              importance, including so called `greenhouse effect gases` and primary air
              pollutants, to be monitored remotely with rugged, compact systems either in
              situ or remotely via optical fibers. These detectors will have the extremely
              high specificity and sensitivity of systems based on modulation/correlation
              spectroscopy but without the need for expensive wavelength tunable laser diodes
              or bulky `reference cells` filled with target compounds.   Chemical detectors
              based on tailored modulatable solid state filters will be of great commercial
              value in remote monitoring of environmental contaminants, chemical process
              control, oil exploration, mine safety, and other applications where high
              sensitivity detection of target compounds must be accomplished under less than
              ideal conditions. Tailored filters can also be used for a wide variety of other
              applications, from instrument calibration to custom illumination.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
