Title       : SBIR Phase I: High-Speed, In-Line Gas Monitoring for Control of Gas Mixing in
               Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9660463

Award Number: 9660463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74889              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad M. Nelson chad@AFRInc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1502,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      9660463  Nelson     This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will develop a high-speed, in-line gas monitor for control of
              Gas Mixing in chemical vapor deposition systems. CVD has emerged as an
              important fabrication technique for advanced semiconducting and optoelectronic
              thin film materials. Without real-time monitoring and closed-loop control of
              the growth chemistry, it is extremely difficult to fabricate structures with
              multi-layered and graded compositional profiles. Fourier transform infrared
              spectroscopy has been demonstrated for process monitoring and recent
              innovations have improved the ruggedness and signal-to-noise ratio while
              reducing the size, weight, and cost of commercial instruments. In many
              applications, however, a long optical pathlength is required to achieve the
              desired measurement sensitivity. The use of standard, long-path "White" cells
              can significantly increase the pathlength while simultaneously increasing the
              sampled volume. This increased volume can increase the response time from
              spectral measurement and data analysis time to the time it takes to fill the
              cell with a representative sample, which can be on the order of several
              minutes. This Phase I project will develop a fast-response, in-line optical
              system to be used in conjunction with an advanced FT-IR spectrometer to provide
              real-time process and quality control in low flow systems such as CVD reactors.
                 In addition to process and quality control in CVD and other chemical
              reactors, the proposed analysis system will be capable rapid measurement (<1
              sec) of other gases such as automobile exhaust, waste-site effluents, and
              fugitive emissions. The rapid response time will improve the efficacy of FT-IR
              and other spectroscopic techniques for detecting process upsets, fires,
              explosive atmospheres, and hazardous workplace conditions. ***
