Title       : SBIR Phase I: Probabilistic Assessment for Embedded Underground Hazardous
               Facilities Subjected to Dynamic Loads Induced by Extreme Environmental Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9660321

Award Number: 9660321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan M. Ghiocel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevenson & Associates Inc
	      9217 Midwest Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  44125    216/587-3805

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1059,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
              applied technology that can be utilized by design engineers to perform risk and
              reliability assessments for hazardous facilities.  The research is focused on
              dynamic soilstructure interaction, a complex phenomenon with large randomness
              and modeling uncertainties.  Most of hazardous facilities include heavy and
              stiff concrete structures, partially embedded, embedded, or even buried, where
              the soil-structure interaction effects are essential for accurate predictions
              of their structural behavior under dynamic loads.  Emphasis will be given to
              risk, reliability, and environmental hazard associated with external blasts,
              explosions and earthquakes.  Probabilistic models will include uncertainties
              stemming from randomness and incomplete knowledge related to load parameters,
              soil properties and soilstructure interaction effects.  Advanced stochastic
              finite element techniques will be developed to ensure the suitability of the
              resulting algorithms for assessment tasks.   Probabilistic algorithms will be
              implemented in the state-of-the-art commercial computer code SUPER SASSI
              developed by the firm based on the original SASSI code of University of
              California, Berkeley.  This will enhance its advanced dynamic soilstructure
              interaction capability with probabilistic and risk assessment capabilities for
              decision making support.  For evaluating the external explosion pressure
              effects the program BLAST developed in-house by the firm will be used.      
              The reassessment of existing massive commercial and defense hazardous
              facilities remains a significant engineering challenge with high priority for
              the U.S.  The proposed research will make an essential step for developing an
              accurate probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) engineering tool for
              embedded/buried hazardous facilities under dynamic loads induced by
              environmental extreme events including soil-structure interaction.   The
              existence of a probabilistic computational tool will expedite these analyses
              and will drastically reduce the high costs of PRA studies.  Rapid
              commercialization of  the new development for a large number of civil
              engineering applications is expected.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
