Title       : SBIR Phase I: An In Situ Process Control Device for AsphaltPavements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9660137

Award Number: 9660137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Pearson rpearson@Internetcds.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tri-Valley Research
	      3466 Blueblossom Drive
	      Medford, OR  97504    541/608-7497

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will demonstrate
              an in situ process control device, based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
              for the analysis of asphalt pavement used in the highway industry.  This
              proposal is based on the work the Principal Investigator did under contracts
              from the Strategic Highway Research Program. That work showed how NMR can be
              used to measure the physical  properties of neat asphalt and the concentration
              of asphalt/aggregate mixes including cores.  This research will attempt to
              extend this technique to the measurement and study of the reaction that occurs
              between asphalt and aggregate when they are mixed.  The study of this reaction
              plus the development of NMR methods to measure the physical properties of the
              asphalt in situ in a mix or core will allow the design and the construction of
              a flat magnet NMR system that will determine the amount and physical condition
              of asphalt pavements, in-place, on a roadbed.        The device developed in
              this overall project can be used in a number of closely related applications in
              the highway industry.  The determination of the amount of asphalt in mixes and
              cores is an application that could result in sales of several hundred units in
              the United States alone.  The use of a flat magnet system for in situ analysis
              of asphalt in pavement could also have a profound impact on pavement
              maintenance.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
