Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Efficiency Polymer Phases for Planar Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9660860

Award Number: 9660860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna W. Seitz Anna.seitz@fenristech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fenris Technology Research
	      29 New Hampshire Ave., Suite 2
	      Portsmouth, NH  03801    603/436-7001

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0512200   Advanced Measurement Investment         
Program Ref : 1974,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660860  Seitz              This project will evaluate the feasibility of
              using toughened polystyrene to prepare high efficiency stationary phases for
              planar chromatography. It is based on technology that Fenris Technology
              Research, Inc., has developed to toughen porous polystyrene and control its
              morphology. It is anticipated that these materials will lead to planar
              chromatography phases that yield both-rapid and highly efficient separations.
              Furthermore, these materials can be used over a much wider range of conditions
              than currently available reversed phase materials for chromatography, e.g. high
              pH. The objectives of Phase I are: (1) to prepare a large number of stationary
              phases using a variety of polymer formulations and (2) to characterize the
              chromatographic properties of these phases including efficiency, retardation
              factor, rate of mobile phase transport and loading capacity. The company will
              prepare and characterize both free standing phases and phases covalently bonded
              to glass substrates. Phase I feasibility will be established if the company
              succeeds in preparing stationary phases that measurably improve on currently
              available commercial reversed phase materials for planar chromatography.       
                        By improving on current technology with respect to speed, efficiency
              and range of possible chromatographic conditions, these materials will be able
              to capture a substantial part of the market place that currently belongs to
              reversed materials prepared by bonding alkyl groups to silica. This technology
              opens up the possibility for a stationary phase material that can be used for
              both high efficiency planer and high performance liquid chromatography.   ***
