Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Multilayer Ceramic Capacitors Through
               Microfabrication by Coextrusion Melt Spinning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9660898

Award Number: 9660898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Hilmas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Ceramics Res, Inc
	      3292 E. Hemisphere Loop
	      Tucson, AZ  857065013    520/434-6392

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660898  Hilmas        This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research
              project will use a novel approach to fabricate multilayer ceramic capacitors 
              (MLCCs) having thin dielectric layers. The MLCCs will be fabricated through an
              adaptation of the low cost Fibrous Monolithic (FM) processing technology,
              currently under development by the proposer,  to produce advanced structural
              ceramics. It is based on the melt spinning of thermoplastic/powder blends to
              create novel hierarchical architectures beneficial to the ceramic industry. The
              project will incorporate BaTiOs and Ag-based powders as the dielectric and
              electrode materials, respectively, to fabricate 'in-situ' MLCCs.
              Microstructural characterization and electrical testing of these prototype
              MLCCs will be performed to demonstrate the feasibility of the overall concept.
              Phase I success will allow future iterations in order to optimize the desired
              electrical properties. The demand for multilayer ceramic capacitors  having
              high capacitance and high volumetric efficiencies has led to increased
              challenges in the manufacturing of MLCCs. The preferred method for increasing
              the performance of MLCCs, both in the U.S. and Japan, is to reduce the
              thickness of the dielectric ceramic layers below 10  m while maintaining a high
              dielectric constant. This has posed some critical challenges to current MLCC
              fabrication methods, such as tape casting, in order to meet these needs.   The
              successful adaptation of the FM processing technology from advanced structural
              ceramics to functional MLCC materials will allow the manufacturing of the
              latter at a low cost with a variety of architectures and incorporating a
              selection of dielectric layer thicknesses.  The optimization of this novel
              process will lead to higher volume MLCC production over current fabrication
              methods.  ***
