Title       : SBIR Phase I: Intelligent Prevention and Information System for
               Earthquake-Induced Fires (IPIS-EF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9660708

Award Number: 9660708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gui-Zhong Qi gzchi@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : InfraTech Inc
	      6 Valleyfield Court
	      Silver Spring, MD  20906    301/598-5101

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Phase I project focuses on technology for
              prevention, control and rapid extinguishing of the earthquake-induced fires in
              urban regions and is particularly important in earthquake hazard mitigation.  
              The objective is to develop an Intelligent Prevention and Information System
              for Earthquake-Induced Urban Fires (IPIS-EF).  Earthquake hazards are serious
              threats and have caused heavy damage and casualties.  In addition to the
              shaking, the `fire` following an earthquake is a major cause for loss of lives
              and properties.  An earthquake has the potential for initiating a chain of
              events that can turn a moderately damaging seismic event into a holocaust of
              disasters.  IPIS-EF consists of three components:  (1) Automatic Shut-Down
              System(ASDS) for gas and electric power lines: ASDS is for prevention of the
              ignition of fires following earthquakes;  (2) Advanced Tele-Communication
              System (ATCS) for prompt and accurate report of fires: The recent advance of
              sensor and telecommunication technologies has lent the possibility to transmit
              information from sensors via satellite to the emergency response center almost
              instantaneously;  (3) Intelligent Expert System for Signal Process (IESP): the
              ATCS component provides prompt and accurate report of fires following a strong
              earthquake.  The remaining crucial point is the evaluation and interpretation
              of the fire signals properly.  IESP component will be developed to achieve this
              goal by using modern signal processing techniques.       The potential
              commercial applications of IPIS-EF are numerous.  Users of the system would
              include public agencies responsible for safety at all levels of government, and
              heavy equipment factories and industrial plants.  IPIS-EF can also be used for
              prevention and extinguishing of conventional, non-seismic induced fires.  This
              hi-tech product can also be exported to foreign countries in earthquake
              disaster prone cities and regions over the globe.  The commercialization of
              IPIS-EF can save lives and properties in both seismic and non-seismic regions
              and enhance the competitiveness of American business.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
