Title       : SBIR Phase I: Investigation of Novel Genetic Resource for Rootworm Resistance in
               Corn
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9660146

Award Number: 9660146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary W. Eubanks eubanks@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sun Dance Genetics
	      8 Pilton Place
	      Durham, NC  27705    919/490-6324

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 1116,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660146  Eubanks     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will investigate transfer of rootworm resistance to corn via novel germ
              plasm.  Corn rootworm, Diabrotica spp., is the most expensive insect pest of
              corn.  Combined yield loss and pesticide treatment costs exceed $1 billion
              annually.  Larvae hatch from eggs deposited in soil and feed primarily on corn
              roots.  Root damage from larval feeding causes lodging, affects water uptake by
              the plant, and frequently causes up to 50% reduction in grain yield.    
              Tripsacum dactyloides, a wild relative of Zea mays, is resistant to corn
              rootworm larvae.  However, plant breeders have not been able to utilize
              resistance from Tripsacum effectively because corn-Tripsacum hybrids are male
              sterile and almost completely female sterile.  This problem can now be
              circumvented by a hybrid between eastern Gama grass and diploid perennial
              teosinte (Tipsacum dactyloides Xzea dipoloerennis), that is fully fertile and
              cross fertile with corn.  Developed by the principle investigator and referred
              to as Zea indiana, this hybrid is a genetic bridge that provides unprecedented
              opportunity to utilize beneficial Tripsacum genes in corn improvement. 
              Preliminary bioassays testing corn lines pollinated by Zea indiana indicate:
              (1) rootworm resistance is transferred to corn via this novel hybrid; (2) the
              effect is a combination of antibiosis and tolerance; (3) there is a gene for
              resistance that segregates in accordance with Mendelian ratios.   Statistical
              analysis in bioassays to verify resistance inheritance and DNA analysis to
              characterize molecular markers associated with resistance will provide
              necessary data to document feasibility of this novel genetic bridge to confer
              rootworm resistance to corn.  Results will further elucidate the mode of action
              and mechanism for inheritance of rootworm resistance.     If results confirm
              preliminary findings, a new approach to utilize genes from the wild relatives
              of corn for improvement of commercial corn line s will be confirmed.  The
              introduction of a high level of resistance to corn rootworm, a major pest of
              corn, will have significant commercial potential in reducing the need for
              chemical pesticides and increasing corn production.  This approach promises to
              be broadly effective, economically advantageous to farmers, and environmentally
              safe.  ***
