Title       : SBIR Phase I: Protein Crystals as Novel Materials for Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9660460

Award Number: 9660460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexey L. Margolin Margolin@Altus.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Altus Biologics Inc
	      40 Allston Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021394211    617/499-0500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This project deals with the development of a new type of stationary phase for
              chromatography and simulating moving bed (SMB) technology based on cross-linked
              protein crystals. While existing stationary phases can separate a wide variety
              of compounds, including mixtures of racemates, there are several limitations
              such as low loading, eluent limitations, narrow operational conditions and high
              cost, that preclude wider applications of chromatography. It is believed that
              some of these limitations can be successfully addressed by using Cross-Linked
              Enzyme Crystals (CLECá) or more broadly Cross-Linked Protein Crystals (CLPC).
              We have already demonstrated that cross-linked protein crystals are very
              stable, have porous structure, and demonstrate great affinity and chiral
              selectivity. In addition, they are mechanically stable and can be produced in
              large quantities. These crystals may have excellent performance characteristics
              as a new porous material and provide unique opportunities in at least three
              main types of liquid chromatography: size exclusion, affinity and chiral
              chromatography. In the Phase I study, the feasibility of using the five
              existing CLEC catalysts of lipases from Candida rugosa and Pseudomonas cepacia,
              subtilisin, thermolysin and penicillin acylase and a new CLPC derived from
              serum albumins as stationary phases for liquid chromatography will be
              demonstrated.      The portion of synthetic chiral pharmaceuticals introduced
              as single enantiomers represents about $15 billion in sales and is expected to
              reach $150 billion by the end of the century.  Chiral stationary phases could
              play and important role in producing and analyzing many of the final chemicals
              or intermediate used as optically pure drugs.  The high price of bulk CSP
              currently precludes the wide use of this technology in either preparative
              chromatography or simulating moving bed (SMB) technology.  This situation may
              dramatically change with the introduction of CSP based on protein crystals.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
