Title       : SBIR Phase I: Single-Switch Access to Science Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9660571

Award Number: 9660571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren E. Lacefield asiwel@acsw.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Academic Software Inc
	      331 West Second St
	      Lexington, KY  405071113    606/233-2332

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9660571  Lacefield  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
              be carried out by Academic Software, Inc.(ASI) seeks to provide single switch
              access to science software.  Utilizing WinSCAN--an innovative programmable
              single-switch control access interface lot PCs developed by ASI--in conjunction
              with existing high-quality science software, the project seeks to establish the
              capability of students with severe multiple disabilities to use this software
              to perform the same science activities in the classroom as their peers without
              disabilities.  Custom WinSCAN scanning control displays and detailed lesson
              plans for learning activities will be developed specifically for three selected
              science programs and for exploratory Internet access to science study.  These
              materials will be field-tested by mainstream classroom teachers and children
              with and without disabilities. Given evidence of the scientific and technical
              feasibility of the methodology in Phase 1, a fully and independently accessible
              set of supplemental science curriculum materials, lesson plans, and activities
              for children in grades K-5 covering a broad range of science topics and
              pursuits will be developed in the next phase of the project.  These materials
              will assist children with severe disabilities gain the hands-on experience
              needed to appreciate and gain confidence and competence in early scientific and
              technical training.  When fully integrated with curriculum materials, the
              single-switch access to science software will be of substantial value for early
              science education experiences for children with disabilities in kindergartens
              and elementary classrooms throughout the country.  Moreover, the materials will
              also benefit parents and children in homes which have access to inexpensive PCs
              and mass information utilities such as America On-Line.  ASI plans to market
              the modules through its own network of assistive technology dealers and to
              explore the interest of larger educational publishing houses which supply
              curriculum  materials and software to schools and school districts on a
              national basis.
