Title       : SBIR Phase I: Artificial Intelligence-Based Acoustic Emission Monitoring for Bit
               Wear During Deep Drilling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9660288

Award Number: 9660288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoqing Sun woodwall03@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AAC International
	      60 Mechanic Street
	      Lebanon, NH  037661521    603/448-6177

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660288  Sun    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will address the feasibility for the development of an intelligent
              measurement-while-drilling (MWD) devices for downhole monitoring of bit wear
              and warning of impending bit failure, including both bearing failure and worn
              bit.  The operating principle of the MWD device uses artificial intelligence
              (AI) based acoustic emission (AE) technologies.  This development will
              considerably reduce the cost in the current deep drilling operation and may
              eventually facilitate the development of smart drilling systems and unmanned
              drilling processes.  In the Phase I study, a field drilling experiment will be
              conducted.  AE signals generated at the bit-rock interface will be monitored in
              different stages of bit wear during drilling processes.  First, the AE signals
              will be studied with regard to frequency bandwidth, amplitude of dynamic range,
              and duration for further instrumentation development.  The feasibility will
              then be demonstrated by (1) development of suitable instrumentation for AE
              signal monitoring, (2) observation of recognizable features in AE signals from
              different stages of bit wear, and (3) using suitable pattern recognition (AI)
              algorithm to identify the degree of bit-wear, formation change and impending
              bit failure by the AE features observed.    After studies are conducted, it is
              anticipated that a new device will be developed using AI-based AE technology. 
              The device will be capable of sensing the degree of bit wear, formation change
              and warning of impending bit failure.  The device may significantly reduce the
              operating cost in deep ocean and land drilling and has very good commercial
              potential.  The concept developed in this research may be conveniently used in
              the "smart drilling system" and unmanned drilling processes.  ***
