Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electrocatalysts for Direct Methanol Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9660664

Award Number: 9660664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Wixom tjtec@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : T/J Technologies, Inc
	      PO Box 2150
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481062150    313/213-1637

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1417,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      9660664  Wixom     This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will result in the production of new electrocatalysts for use
              in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC). The development of electrocatalysts that
              efficiently oxidize methanol and are tolerant to CO and impurities in the fuel
              is a key challenge for the commercialization of DMFCs. The primary hypothesis
              of this proposal is that multifunctional Pt/metal oxide/metal carbide
              (PI/MO/MC) electrocatalysts will be effective for the electrochemical oxidation
              of methanol. This design combines two previous strategies that have proven very
              successful in improving the efficiency and CO tolerance of anodic
              electrocatalysts. Highly dispersed bifunctional sites will be produced on high
              surface area metal carbide support materials. The bifunctional sites and
              carbide support are inherently active and CO-tolerant. During Phase I, three
              process variables used in preparing the supported electrocatalysts will be
              varied. The compositional and microstructural properties will be characterized
              and the electrocatalysts will be fabricated into electrodes for standard
              electrochemical activity measurements. In Phase II the electrocatalysts and
              electrode designs will be optimized, and prototype DMFCs will be fabricated.
              These results will allow issues related concerning the commercialization of
              DMFCs based on PI/MO/MC electrocatalysts to be addressed.   The widespread use
              of fuel cells would be positively impacted by the development of a low cost,
              high efficiency DMFC. DMFCs offers several advantages over conventional fuel
              cells based on hydrogen in particular with respect to fuel energy density,
              delivery and storage. The demonstration of efficient, poison-tolerant
              electrocatalysts will significantly improve the feasibility of using DMFCs in
              next generation vehicles. DMFCs may also compete with gas turbines for
              generation of electricity. ***
