Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Ultra-Fast Signal Integrity Analyzer for Multi-Layer Electronic
               Packages and Boards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9660681

Award Number: 9660681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Y. Chen chen@sigrity.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sigrity Incorporated
	      2105 Hamilton Avenue
	      San Jose, CA  95125    408/377-2180

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 4720,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                ***  96-60681  Chen     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will determine scientific, technical, and commercial merit and
              feasibility of developing an ultra-fast signal integrity analyzer for
              multi-layer integrated-circuit chip packages and printed circuit boards. Ever
              increasing integrated-circuit transition speed and packaging density have posed
              severe challenge to electronic packaging designs. Accurate signal integrity
              analysis necessitates electromagnetic field simulations to be performed
              together with circuit simulations. Existing general-purpose commercial
              electromagnetic tools are unable to provide timely and cost effective solutions
              for practical electronic packages. This project will investigate a novel method
              that would be orders of - magnitude faster than conventional general-purpose
              tools in performing electromagnetic simulation in electronic packages. With the
              new technique, three-dimensional electromagnetic fields in multi-layer
              electronic packages are decomposed into several most significant modes, and
              each mode of field is solved with special fast algorithms. The proposed signal
              integrity analyzer integrates the fast electromagnetic field solver with
              transmission line and circuit solvers so that interactions between packages and
              IC chips are automatically taken into account. Applicability of the technique
              and feasibility of the proposed signal integrity analyzer for real-world
              packaging structures are to be investigated in this project.   It is 
              anticipated that the technique described in this proposal can dramatically
              reduce the electromagnetic field simulation time and lead to commercial signal
              integrity tools that can provide timely and cost effective means for the
              evaluation and design of electronic packages and printed circuit boards.  Such
              signal integrity tools are crucial for emerging high-speed electronic systems,
              and should have significant and immediate impacts once they are commercially
              available.  ***
