Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Efficiency Diamond Micro-Cold Cathode for Electron Field
               Emission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9660272

Award Number: 9660272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chenyu Pan mercorp@opusl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials & Elctrochem/MER
	      7960 South Kolb Road
	      Tucson, AZ  85706    520/574-1980

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  ABSTRACT      9660272  Pan     This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will develop a novel and high efficiency diamond micro-cathode
              and micro-cathode array by synthesizing and depositing nanocrystalline diamond
              thin films on conductive micro-fiber ends through a unique chemical vapor
              deposition (CVD) process. Diamond has recently emerged as a promising electron
              field emission cathode due to its unsurpassed electron field emission
              properties of low voltage and room temperature operation, operation robustness,
              simple design, and reproducibility. However, the present diamond cathodes are
              microcrystalline diamond thin films deposited on macrosubstrate (mm to cm size)
              by a conventional diamond CVD process. These microcrystalline diamond cathodes
              have been recently identified to have the following drawbacks. Only 1-10% or
              less of the diamond cathode surface is active and contributes nearly all the
              current produced, resulting in an overall low emission efficiency. The
              distribution of the minority populated active emission sites is also random and
              uncontrolled. The electron emission from each individual emission site can not
              be independently controlled either. These drawbacks are expected to be overcome
              by the development of this novel nanocrystalline diamond micro-cathode by the
              demonstration of significantly improved field emission efficiency, very high
              current density at low operation field, controlled emission performance and
              emission pattern.   The successful completion of the Phase I program will
              result in the development of a new generation diamond field emission cathode.
              The significantly improved efficiency, high available current density at low
              field, flexibility in emission control and emission pattern, operation
              robustness, and simple fabrication are expected to benefit a large variety of
              vacuum-electronic applications ranging from flat panel displays, TV and
              computer screens, aircraft vision displays to high energy accelerator physics.
              Because of the high efficiency,  the cost of the new diamond cathodes will also
              be substantially reduced. ***
