Title       : SBIR Phase I: Custom DNA-Based Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9660232

Award Number: 9660232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Wright Linkgene@Xmission.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Linkage Genetics, Inc
	      2411 South 1070 West, Suite B
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84119    801/975-1188

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 1116,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660232  Wright     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will test a low-cost approach to developing DNA-based diagnostic tests. 
              Molecular diagnostics are now used in medicine to detect genetic disorders,
              cancers, and infectious diseases.  However, high costs of development
              associated with expensive gene discovery and gene sequencing efforts preclude
              many lower-value applications.  In particular, custom uses in agriculture, food
              processing, and environmental biology are economically unfeasible.  The
              approach outlined here alleviates this problem.  It circumvents the need for
              gene discovery and extensive DNA sequencing, and instead uses DNA marker
              technologies as a rapid and inexpensive means to find unique base pair
              sequences that are either linked to, or diagnostic for, a trait or genotype of
              interest.  Polymorphic DNA fragments genetically linked to desirable genes are
              partially sequenced to identify underlying base pair variation.  In turn, that
              variation is used to design a diagnostic test employing the Polymerase Chain
              Reaction (PCR) technique and sequence specific primers that will amplify the
              diagnostic DNA sequence if it is present in a test sample.  The Phase I effort
              is designed to test the feasibility of the concept.  It will do so by
              developing two such tests; one designed to measure the purity of hybrid seed,
              and a second designed to screen cattle for a trait affecting meat quality.    
              If successful, the proposed research will broaden the use of DNA-based
              diagnostics in agriculture, food processing, environmental biology, and related
              fields.  Specifically, these molecular tools hold promise for use in: (1) plant
              and animal breeding to improve the effectiveness with which desirable traits
              are combined and moved through breeding programs; (2) quality testing of
              agricultural and food products to ensure genetic identity and safety; and (3)
              biodiversity conservation to help protect and restore populations of threatened
              and endangered species.  ***
