Title       : SBIR Phase I: Design of a New and Improved Print Reading Machine for the Blind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9660101

Award Number: 9660101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deane B. Blazie deane@blazie.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blazie Engineering, Inc.
	      105 East Jarrettsville Road
	      Forest Hill, MD  21050    410/893-9333

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  960101  Blazie     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase 1 project
              will test a new design of a print reading machine for the blind and ultimately
              replace the 25-year-old Optacon reading device for which manufacturing and
              support has been discontinued.  Blazie Research, Inc., together with its
              consultant team, responding to extensive interest among blind consumers, will
              investigate the feasibility of a new reader improving on Optacon functionality
              through the application of current technologies.  The research target is a
              reading aid that is easier and quicker to learn to use.  Such a reading aid
              will also make feasible faster reading speeds, be less expensive, and have an
              expanded range of uses.  This research effort has the potential of creating a
              new hybrid audio/tactile/haptec tool to allow students, especially in the
              sciences and mathematical studies, to explore and understand symbols and
              graphics and spatially arranged text.  The research plan will test
              modifications to the tactile images to make them easier to read, using image
              processing algorithms for improving letter quality and letter spacing.  The
              work plan will apply new technologies for building the tactile array
              envisioning the "comb" array structure of Piezo Systems, Inc. as a promising
              development for lowering the cost of manufactured goods.  Strategic advantages
              for blind readers will be tested by Blazie Research, Inc. through accessorizing
              the reading aid for the classroom and the market place.   The proposed new
              reading aid for the blind will facilitate improved reading speeds, and has
              expanded potential as a new hybrid audio/tactile/haptec tool to enable reading
              mathematical symbols and graphics.  The reading aid fills the void for
              immediate access to print materials by the blind reader in a variety of
              settings and in almost any language.  Blazie Engineering, Inc., in concert with
              the newly formed research company, Blazie Research, Inc., expect to test,
              productize, and manufacture the new device and present it for  sale to a
              worldwide market of visually handicapped consumers.  ***
