Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Automated Adaptive Cartesian/Prism Grid Flow Simulation
               Methodology for Arbitrary Moving Boundary Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9660943

Award Number: 9660943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Z.J. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1266,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660943  Wang     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will develop a new scientific-computation methodology for arbitrary
              moving-boundary problems.  In the immediate vicinity of boundaries adaptive
              prism grids will be used in order to exploit their ability to provide
              surface-conformal spatial discretization, enabling accurate and efficient
              computational resolution of viscous and thermal boundary layers.  These grids
              will move and deform with the boundaries around which they are built. Away from
              boundaries, a stationary, adaptive Octree-based Cartesian grid will be used to
              exploit its efficiency and flexibility. The Cartesian grid will be overlapped
              with the moving and deforming prism grids. Both types of grid will be adapted
              according to the physics of the unsteady flow field. For the coupling between
              the two grids, both conservative (expensive) and non-conservative (efficient)
              interfacing algorithms will be developed and demonstrated in the Phase I
              research. A second order flow solver based on a recently-developed all-speed
              flux splitting method capable of handing dynamic grids will be implemented,
              enabling highly-resolved solution of both incompressible and compressible
              flows. The unsteady flow fields will be displayed as they develop, through an
              on-line visualization capability. The overall system seamlessly integrates grid
              generation, flow solver, grid adaptation and post-processing to obtain maximum
              solution accuracy, efficiency and user friendliness.  In Phase I, the
              methodology will be implemented and demonstrated in two dimensions.  Extension
              to three-dimensions will be made in Phase II.     The accurate modeling of flow
              phenomena involving moving boundaries is the key to a understanding, to
              improvement of performance, and to the cost-effective, rapid investigation of
              new designs.  If successfully demonstrated in Phase I, the methodology will
              provide a reliable, computationally-efficient design and analysis tool that
              will have an immediate and far-reaching scient ific and economic impact in many
              distinct industries such as materials processing, aerospace engineering, and
              bioengineering.  ***
