Title       : SBIR Phase I: Design of a Spatial Decision Support System for the School
               District Planning Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9660670

Award Number: 9660670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74862              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Lemberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Isera Group Inc
	      5370 Hollister Avenue Suite 5
	      Santa Barbara, CA  931112399    805/967-3820

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1352,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660670  Lemberg   In an era of decreasing funding for school construction
              and increasing student enrollment, school district administrators are faced
              with many complex and sensitive decisions.  For example, in California alone,
              it is estimated that the deficit in school-related funding necessary to provide
              adequate classroom space that meets the minimum state standards has risen to
              $12 billion.  The School District Planning Problem (SDPP) may be defined as how
              to manipulate school district site capacities and attendance boundaries to
              optimally manage school district resources over the long term.  The problem
              becomes more complex when further constrained by the fact that district
              administrators must deal with the political feasibility of alternative
              solutions, evaluating parameters such as cost, travel distance, student
              disruption, class sizes, class scheduling, diversity, contiguity, etc.  Each
              school district has a set of objectives, constraints, and priorities unique to
              the community.  To assist school districts with this complex problem, this
              Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be carried out by Isera
              Group, Inc. proposes to develop a comprehensive Decision Support System (DSS)
              for the generation of alternative feasible solutions to the SDPP.  The DSS will
              provide a platform by which both the decision makers and interested parties
              (teachers, parents, students, and community members) may collectively formulate
              parameters and models, generate alternatives, and evaluate potential solutions.
               To complement such functionality, the proposed DSS will support protocols for
              communication or integration with existing geographic information systems
              (GIS), computer aided design systems (CAD), and student information systems
              (SIS).   The aim of this project is to implement a Decision Support System for
              school district facility planning and enrollment management.  The system will
              allow groups of school district decision makers across the nation to generate
              locally feasible long-rang e alternatives for district enrollment and site
              management, provide large cost savings in construction and/or building leasing
              costs, and reduce the frequency and severity of politically unpopular boundary
              shifts.  ***
