Title       : SBIR Phase I: Enhanced Airborne Beam-Steering for Ground Probing Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9660920

Award Number: 9660920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73539              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChT Engineering Systems
	      HC89-69, PO Box 228
	      Hermosa, SD  577440228    605/394-2458

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                 This Small Business Innovation Research project will apply  recent advances
              in ground probing radar (GPR) technology to the aerial reconnaissance of
              underground facilities (UGF). Ground probing radar is a proven technology for
              investigating subsurface targets and structures. Its application to subsurface
              monitoring from airborne platforms, however, has been limited due to clutter
              and signal strength problems.  The project seeks to overcome these problems by
              the use of a beamsteered antenna array that provides increased signal power and
              increased angular resolution.  The system will ultimately be suspended from an
              airborne platform to facilitate rapid coverage of a region of interest (ROI). 
              The narrow transmit array beam scans the ROI, and at the correct angle of
              incidence a strong reflection from the UGF is received.  The phase I project
              comprises three main tasks: first, simulating the proposed system; second,
              using the results of simulations to refine existing array control algorithms,
              and; third, testing the hardware prototype. A large part of the effort lies in
              software development in simulations and algorithm refinement. The results of
              Phase I will be used to develop and test a commercially marketable GPR system
              during the phase II effort. If the technology can be successfully developed, it
              will make airborne detection of near-surface UGFs in realistic environments
              feasible.   The system is designed to enhance existing commercial GPR systems
              and will greatly reduce the cost of data acquisition of areal targets while
              enhancing data quality.  The dynamic monitoring aspect of the instrumentation
              is unique and has application from the standpoint of characterizing extensive
              hazardous waste sites numbering in the thousands across the United States. 
              This option will provide a low-cost alternative to invasive monitoring
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
