Title       : SBIR Phase I: Computer Interactive Plant Biotechnology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9660647

Award Number: 9660647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. Graf edvotek@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : EDVOTEK Inc
	      PO Box 1232
	      West Bethesda, MD  208271232    301/251-5990

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660647  Graf   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
              be carried out by EDVOTEK, Inc. will investigate the exploration of computer
              interactive plant materials which have not been traditionally utilized in
              science education.  The project will amplify the use of resources already
              established and supported by Federal funds by utilizing plant material obtained
              through genetic and germplasm stock collections.  These materials will be used
              to develop experiments with problem-based approaches for teaching and learning
              various concepts in biology and biotechnology.  The project places emphases on
              incorporating information and feedback from science educators and strives to
              maintain consistency with the published aims of major science curricula reform
              strategies to enable students to develop higher-level critical thinking skills.
               The focus of research will be on identifying and testing new plant resources
              which can be used for problem-based experiment activities.  During the next
              phase of the project, these activities will be tested at three levels by engage
              practicing educators in evaluating the performance and reproducibility of
              experiments outside the research laboratory environment; by evaluating the
              performance and reproducibility of experiments in classrooms by students; and
              by assessing the efficacy of prototype experiments for meeting educational
              objectives.   It is anticipated that this project will help promote a
              revitalization and renewal of interest in plant-based studies in science
              education.  Products will include computer interactive plant-based
              biotechnology education experiments, plants, sees and related reagents,
              laboratory manual, teacher training workshops, and products for informal
              science education for the high school and college levels and for technology
              training.  ***
