Title       : SBIR Phase I: Application of Hybrid Foil-Magnetic Bearings for High Speed
               Turbomachinery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1996   
File        : a9660520

Award Number: 9660520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Polyshchuk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CHO-BRA Engineering, Inc
	      PO Box 2384
	      Akron, OH  443092384    330/375-1632

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research phase I project will develop a
              new type of `hybrid foil/magnetic bearing` with associated control systems. 
              The concept is based on the combination of the technology of the magnetic
              bearing with that of the foil bearing, the latter acting in an auxiliary or
              enhancement role.  Actuators incorporated in the foil bearing will allow active
              control of the foil to: (a) retract during normal magnetic bearing operation,
              (b) increase the load capacity of the entire support system during operational
              transients or peak load situations, (c) assist the magnetic bearing in passing
              through rotor critical speeds during start-up and coast-down while still
              maintaining small clearances, (d) act as a stand alone during magnetic bearing
              failure , and (e) lock-up the shaft to avoid damage to the magnetic bearing
              when the system is not powered.  Other innovative features of this research
              are: the use of either gas (e.g. air) or liquid fuel as a bearing lubricant,
              (b) the use of similar control action in both the magnetic and foil bearings,
              (c) the use of piezoelectric actuators for high bandwidth control of the motion
              of the foil.  Phase I of the research will be a feasibility study using both
              numerical simulation and experimental testing on the existing components.  A
              test rig will be constructed and run for testing and verification of the
              concept.  The results from this phase will be a) a reliable simulation and
              design algorithm, b) experimental knowledge base regarding the operation of the
              foil and magnetic bearings in tandem, as well as individually, c) the design of
              a preprototype, for experimentation in Phase-II, and d) the initiation of
              strategic alliances with industrial partners.       If successful, the hybrid
              bearings should find wide market applications in jet engines, compressors,
              turbopumps, and other rotating machinery.  In addition to its capability of
              reducing power loss and wear, the hybrid bearing also has excellent potential
              for supporting systems that experience repeated extreme transient loadings.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
