Title       : SBIR Phase I: Transport of Colloidal Size Particles Through Porous Media - A New
               Approach for the Formation of Impermeable and Reactive Subsurface Barriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9660022

Award Number: 9660022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dalibor Hodko hodko@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    409/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660022  Hodko     This project describes an innovative method for the
              formation of impermeable and/or reactive barriers in soil with possible
              applications in geo-engineering and environmental cleanup technologies. The
              installation of vertical subsurface barriers is standard practice in civil and
              mining engineering, however, methods for in situ construction of horizontal
              (bottom) barriers have not yet been satisfactorily developed. The primary
              weakness in all applications of horizontal barrier emplacement Is the inability
              of grouting contractors to completely define the extent and nature of the
              injected materials, i.e., verification of where the barrier material actually
              went. It is likely that the acceptance of any subsurface barrier technology in
              soil and groundwater remediation will depend on the ability to verify the
              barrier continuity. A novel approach for the formation of continuous horizontal
              and/or vertical subsurface barriers is proposed. An example of the formation of
              horizontal barrier which will be capable of containing and destruction of
              organic contaminants in polluted soil will be investigated. The feasibility of
              formation of cementitious impermeable subsurface barrier and two types of
              reactive permeable subsurface barriers will be tested.     The developed
              technology will be of considerable use to the Federal Government, as a cost
              effective method for the formation of both hydraulically impermeable and
              permeable reactive horizontal surface barriers for containment and destruction
              of organic pollutants in soil and groundwater.  Initial markets for the
              proposed technology could be repair and maintenance of subsurface landfill
              barriers, and treatment of polluted groundwater and soil at both industrial and
              military sites.  ***
