Title       : SBIR Phase I: Modern Design and Engineering Education in the Agile Engineering
               World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9660207

Award Number: 9660207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Japikse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concepts ETI Inc
	      4 Billings Farms Road
	      White River Junction, VT  05001    802/296-2321

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9660207  Japikse   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              to be carried out by Concepts ETI, Inc. seeks to enhance teaching effectiveness
              for the design process in mechanical engineering education.  Effective teaching
              of design poses a problem for universities.  Advanced design is an object-based
              discipline, whereas conventional courses are subject -based.  The skill of the
              designer lies in applying knowledge and creating something which did not exist
              before.  A designer must be able to judge the technical and economic worth of a
              design.  Class problems, however, that test or reinforce knowledge have a
              unique solution.  Design skills are required by industry because it is only by
              means of continuous design improvements that industries can remain globally
              competitive.  The investigator, three other university partners and a
              12-university advisory panel will cooperatively introduce realistic design
              features into engineering education via the development of an advanced product
              for environmentally friendly transportation applications.  The manifest goal is
              to design a hybrid-electric gas turbine automotive power plant.  The project
              creates an advanced design-based learning environment at a variety of
              universities; educational tools and methods not currently available; a template
              for similar programs for other disciplines; a viable engineering product of
              social and environmental value; and a bridge for education and design between
              universities and industry.   This project proffers new computer based
              courseware design teaching tools for a variety of U.S. engineering universities
              in an historically strong, but currently weak, engineering field; namely,
              turbomachinery.  The project will result in the development of a new hybrid
              electric gas turbine power plant with production in the commercialization phase
              of the project, and the approach lays the groundwork for a teaching model
              applicable to other design disciplines.  ***
