Title       : RUI: Cystallography of Magnetic and Non-Magnetic Subperiodic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9305825

Award Number: 9305825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Litvin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9229,
Abstract    :
              This is a theoretical renewal grant under the Research at                      
              Undergraduate Institutions program.  The principal investigator                
              will complete the theory and derivation of the group theoretical               
              and crystallographic properties of the non-magnetic subperiodic                
              groups, i.e., the layer, rod and frieze groups, and the                        
              relationships between the subperiodic groups and space groups.  In             
              particular, so called scanning tables will provide the relationship            
              between space groups and layer groups.  This work will be published            
              by the International Union of Crystallography in their series of               
              International Tables For Crystallography, and set the standards for            
              these groups for the international crystallographic and physics                
              communities.  The tensorial physical properties which distinguish              
              domains of ferroic crystals will be determined.  The scanning                  
              tables will provide a basis for a study to determine the layer                 
              group symmetry and properties of domain twins.  The study of these             
              groups will be extended to include the theory and derivation of the            
              group theoretical and crystallographic properties of magnetic                  
              subperiodic groups.  The tensorial physical property distinction of            
              domains based on their magnetic symmetry will then be considered.              
              This will provide the basis for a study of the magnetic layer group            
              symmetry and properties of magnetic domain twins.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The research funded through the NSF program for Research at                    
              Undergraduate Institutions involves developing the theory and                  
              deriving the properties associated with certain types of symmetry              
              groups.  These results will be readily available through the tables            
              to be published as a result of this work and will assist                       
              researchers in group theory, crystallography, condensed matter                 
              physics and materials science.
