Title       : Insect Cold-Hardiness and Diapause: Regulatory Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1994      
File        : a9305809

Award Number: 9305809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Denlinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              9305809  Lee     Collaborative research between investigators at Miami
              University and Ohio State University will focus on physiological mechanisms
              used by insects for overwinter survival. Both the entry into diapause and cold
              hardening are essential for survival of most temperature zone species. This
              study examines mechanisms utilized by two types of insects, one that can not
              tolerate freezing (the flesh fly, Sarcophaga crassipalpis) and a  species that
              tolerates extensive internal ice formation (the goldenrod gall fly, Eurosta
              solidaginis). The presence of ice nucleating agents play a critical role in
              determining the temperature at which an insects freezes. One part of the
              project will focus on the role of these ice nucleates, including yeast,
              bacteria and crystals of calcium phosphate, in determining seasonal changes in
              the supercooling point. A second part examines the nature of cold injury using
              crymicroscopy and vital dyes to directly observe the effects of chilling and
              freezing on insect cells. Additional experiments will probe the nature of cold
              injury inflicted on the neuromuscular system. Our recent discovery that insects
              produce stress proteins in response to cold exposure suggests that such
              proteins may play an important role in providing  cold tolerance. Experiments
              are designed are designed to determine the relationship between stress protein
              synthesis and the acquisition of cold tolerance. This work will not only
              provide an understanding of new mechanisms of cold tolerance, but may provide
              new tools for disruption of insect pest populations, and for long term storage
              of insects and other organisms at low  temperature.  ***   v       s  t        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        $         $          
                                   (                  F                    /                 
                                                                                             
                                                                C    Dutch (scalable)   
              Symbol  " Swiss (scalable)  5 Courier New                                 i   "
                          h        e   e          (             G   R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT 
                 Rochelle D Ray Rochelle D Ray                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
