Title       : NMR Studies of Defects in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1994  
File        : a9305780

Award Number: 9305780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Warren wwarren@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research involves the application of nuclear magnetic                     
              resonance (NMR) to the study of specific classes of defects in                 
              semiconducting materials. Studies of hydrogen complexed with                   
              dopants will be carried out in collaboration with industrial                   
              partners concerned about the effects of hydrogen introduced into               
              semiconductors during processing and device fabrication. The                   
              program will focus on three specific goals: The location and                   
              dynamics of hydrogen complexed with dopants in gallium arsenide and            
              silicon semiconductors will be determined using double resonance               
              techniques to selectively probe the complex. The identification and            
              characterization of thermally generated paramagnetic defects in                
              gallium arsenide and related materials will be undertaken using in             
              situ high temperature NMR techniques. The sites occupied by indium             
              impurities and characterization of vacancy-impurity complexes in               
              II-VI materials, including correlation of the results with                     
              concurrent studies of these defects using perturbed angular                    
              correlation techniques, will be studied.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              The performance of semiconducting materials used in electronic                 
              devices is dominated by the effects of impurities and crystalline              
              defects.  These effects can be constructive, as in the case of                 
              "doping," where specific impurities can be used to obtain desired              
              electrical properties. On the other hand, the incidental                       
              introduction of hydrogen into semiconductors from organic materials            
              used during material processing can be highly deleterious. Hydrogen            
              can "passivate," or neutralize dopant impurities, rendering them               
              electrically inactive.  Undesired and poorly characterized defects             
              in semiconducting materials lead to poor yields and device                     
              failures. Exploitation of well-understood defects holds the                    
              potential for development of advanced semiconducting materials with            
              improved characteristics. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) will be             
              used to characterize the location and motional properties of                   
              defects on the atomic scale in various materials of technological              
              importance including silicon, gallium arsenide, and cadmium                    
              telluride. This technique is highly selective and is capable of                
              probing individual chemical species in specific locations in a                 
              crystalline semiconductor. Recent improvements in NMR techniques               
              and the use of high field superconducting magnets make it possible             
              to investigate certain defect species at concentrations as low as              
              a few tens of parts per million.
