Title       : Intracellular Trafficking of Plant Peroxisomal Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9305395

Award Number: 9305395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Trelease TRELEASE.DICK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Three specific objectives are proposed.  The first is to develop             
              an in-vivo plant cell import system for experimentally determining             
              necessary and sufficient C-terminal targeting signals on plant                 
              peroxisome proteins.  Preliminary data indicate that the GUS gene              
              with an appended S-K-L-COOH and delivered biolistically to cultured            
              tobacco cells, is directed to putative peroxisomes.  Histochemical             
              and double indirect immunofluorescent staining suggest this system             
              will be worth pursuing.  The second objective is to discover                   
              whether the C-terminal tripeptides on plant peroxisome proteins are            
              necessary and/or sufficient for import in vivo into peroxisomes of             
              cultured mammalian cells.  In preliminary studies, the C-terminal              
              tripeptide A-R-M of cottonseed isocitrate lyase was found necessary            
              for import into CV-1 monkey kidney and CHO cells.  The third                   
              objective is to discover the targeting signal(s) necessary and                 
              sufficient for import of catalases into peroxisomes of plant and               
              mammalian cells. There are essentially no data elucidating the                 
              specific putative targeting signal(s) for any eukaryotic catalase,             
              the basic constitutive enzyme of all peroxisomes.  Through                     
              unexpected preliminary results, a means was discovered whereby it              
              is possible to distinguish experimentally-imported, native catalase            
              from endogenous peroxisomal catalase.  This breakthrough will                  
              permit the determination of whether internal signal(s) within C- or            
              N-terminal domains direct catalase to eukaryotic peroxisomes.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Compartmentation of enzyme reactions and/or entire metabolic                   
              pathways within organelles is essential to the overall coordination            
              of cellular processes and functions of all eukaryotic cells.                   
              Understanding biogenesis, differentiation, and function(s) of each             
              organelle is essential before we can comprehend the complex,                   
              integrated functions of cells.  One of the most active areas of                
              cell biological research which pertains directly to cell regulation            
              and function is intracellular protein trafficking to organelles.               
              The overall goal of the proposed research is to discover and                   
              elucidate molecular targeting signals on enzymes which are directed            
              to, and translocated into, plant cell peroxisomes.  Peroxisomes                
              occur in virtually all eukaryotic cells and conduct a variety of               
              essential metabolic function(s) related to the cell type in which              
              the peroxisome resides.  Recent experimental research on peroxisome            
              targeting signals revealed that a C-terminal tripeptide motif was              
              necessary and sufficient for import into mammalian and yeast                   
              peroxisomes.  Surveys of published DNA sequences and western blot              
              screens with antisera to a "consensus" tripeptide (S-K-L) indicated            
              that the motif was common for most, but clearly not all, peroxisome            
              enzymes among a variety of eukaryotic organisms.  Evidence also                
              exists for some internal and N-terminal cleavable peroxisome                   
              signals.  A primary reason that experimental data do not exist for             
              targeting signals on any native plant peroxisome enzyme is that                
              import systems, either in vitro or in vivo, have not been developed            
              for plant cells.  The aim of this project is to close that                     
              informational gap by developing and exploiting an experimentally               
              manipulable in vivo plant peroxisomal import assay system.
