Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interior Point Methods for Linear andNonlinear
               Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1995      
File        : a9305760

Award Number: 9305760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Florian A. Potra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9263,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9305760  Potra       The investigator studies the computational complexity and 
              superlinear convergence of interior point algorithms for linear  programming,
              quadratic programming, linear complementarity  problems, and some classes of
              nonlinear programming problems.   Both problems with feasible and infeasible
              starting points are  considered.  In order to better characterize algorithms
              with good  practical performance, worst case computational aomplexity results 
              are complemented, whenever possible, by probabilistic complexity  results. The
              goal of this study is to better understand practical  performance of interior
              point methods and eventually to develop  new interior point algorithms with
              superior numerical efficiency.       The advent of interior point methods has
              revolutionized the  field of mathematical programming.  On the theoretical
              side,  interior point methods have been used to prove that some important 
              classes of optimization problems have polynomial complexity, which  means that
              such problems are computationally tractable even when a  large number of
              variables are involved.  On the practical side,  interior point methods have
              been implemented in several very  efficient codes capable of solving large
              scale problems arising in  economics, science, and technology that cannot be
              solved with  classical methods.  The purpose of the present proposal is to 
              extend interior point methods to new classes of problems and to  investigate
              their properties in a systematic way both from a  deterministic and a
              probabilistic point of view.  Successful  completion of the research will
              contribute to new advances in the  theory of interior point methods with a
              positive impact on the  design of efficient practical algorithms.
