Title       : Mathematical Sciences: New Methodology for Predictive Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9305588

Award Number: 9305588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francoise Seillier-Moiseiwitsch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A non-parametric approach is developed to select models for  categorical and
              survival data, with a view to helping the  elicitation of predictors and
              prognostic factors. The tests put  forward take the form of central limit
              theorems for normalized  scoring functions. The sequential aspect of the data
              collection  is taken into account. The goal of the research is to establish 
              sound theoretical foundations for these diagnostics and to  demonstrate their
              practicality. For survival models, the  distributional properties of residuals
              from the probability  integral transform conditional on sufficient statistics
              will also  be studied. In the event that these properties are easily 
              characterized, conditions, under which a sequential application  of the
              transformation leads to a test of predictive validity of  the model, will be
              sought.  The construction of empirical Bayes  confidence intervals based on
              structured priors is set in a  predictive framework and will be addressed via
              both analytical  methods and bootstrap samples. Comparison with respect to
              several  validation criteria will discriminate between existing and  proposed
              techniques. Focussing on observables, the  characteristics of prediction
              intervals based on empirical Bayes  distributions will be looked into.  A novel
              approach for the selection models for categorical and  survival data, is
              developed. This methodology will help in the  elicitation of predictors and
              prognostic factors. The sequential  aspect of the data collection is taken into
              account. The goal of  the research is to establish sound theoretical
              foundations for  these diagnostics and to demonstrate their practicality. The 
              construction of empirical Bayes confidence intervals based on  structured
              priors in a predictive framework. The construction of  these intervals will be
              addressed via both analytical methods and  bootstrap samples. Comparison with
              respect to several validation  criteria will discriminate between existing and
              proposed  techniques.  Focussing on observables, t he characteristics of 
              prediction intervals based on empirical Bayes distributions will  be looked
              into.
