Title       : Identification of Functionally Important Sequences in H1 Histones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1994       
File        : a9305308

Award Number: 9305308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Brown dbrown@biochem.umsmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Sittman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mississippi Med Cen
	      2500 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392164505    601/987-3500

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9305308  Brown  The H1 histones are a multigene family of chromosomal proteins
              that are critically involved in  organizing chromatin structure.  H1s are major
              substrates for growth-related protein kinases and  phosphorylation of H1
              proteins has been suggested to be particularly important in regulated changes
              in  chromatin condensation during cell cycle progression.  The objective of
              this proposal is to identify and  investigate some of the structural features
              of the different H1 variants that are important to their  function in chromatin
              organization.  Over the past several years we have developed a system in which 
              genes for different H1 variants have been cloned into inducible overexpression
              vectors and transfected  into homologous mouse fibroblasts.  These
              transformants can be induced to overexpress the different H1  genes such that
              the product of the exogenous gene is the predominant H1 in chromatin.  We have 
              recently demonstrated that a transient inhibition of DNA replication can be
              induced in some of the H1  variant overproducing-cell lines.  This inhibition
              is associated with a high H1/nucleosome ratio.   Interestingly, different H1
              variants exhibit a different ability to maintain a high H1/nucleosome ratio.  
              For these proposed studies the cloned mouse histone genes will be
              systematically mutagenized in vitro  prior to transformation.  We will apply a
              number of  in vivo and in vitro assays to these transformed  cells to determine
              the effects of these mutations on replication and chromatin conformation. 
              Particular  emphasis will be placed on modification of the putative sites of
              phosphorylation of the histone H1 that  are believed to be important  in cell
              cycle-regulated alterations in chromatin conformation.  We will  also attempt
              to identifying the domains that lead to H1 variant specific effects on the
              cellular capacity to  replicate by constructing hybrid genes in which the
              coding portions of the major structural domains of  H1 and H1c have been
              systematically exchanged.  The result s obtained will be the basis of further 
              studies that will define the role of H1, H1 variants, and specific structural
              features  of H1s, in  chromatin.  %%%  The H1 histones are a family of proteins
              involved in packaging the genetic material.  Correlative data  has associated
              changes in histone content with alterations in cellular division.  The object
              of these  studies is to identify structural features of various key members of
              this protein family that affect a cells  capacity to replicate.  We have clones
              of the genes for various H1proteins.  We will systematically alter  sequences
              in these cloned genes and introduce them into cultured mouse cells in such a
              manner that  they are overexpressed and replace most of the cells preexisting
              H1 histones.  We will then determine  the effects these alterations have on the
              cells capacity to divide,  We already know that the H1 product  of one gene
              inhibits replication and the H1 product of another gene has no apparent effect
              on  replication.  Our studies will focus on the structural features of these
              two genes that set them  functionally apart.  The results will provide a basis
              for further studies that will specifically define the  role various members of
              the H1 protein family and their various structural features play in cell
              growth.   Such an understanding will extend our understanding of the mechanism
              of cell division and how it  relates to differentiation and unregulated cell
              growth characteristic of oncogenesis.  ***
