Title       : Conformational Disorder, Dynamics and Reactivity in Hemeproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9305769

Award Number: 9305769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel M. Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Absorption of visible light by ligand bound ferrous hemeproteins               
              such as hemoglobin (Hb) and myoglobin (Mb) results in a near                   
              instantaneous (less than 10-13sec) rupture of the iron ligand                  
              bond.  The photogenerated contact pair (heme plus ligand) can                  
              decay either  through reformation of the iron-ligand bond                      
              (geminate recombination) or through a progressive increase in the              
              iron ligand separation distance.  The objective of this project                
              is to determine the role conformational disorder plays in                      
              controlling or modulating geminate recombination in Hb and Mb at               
              ambient temperatures.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The following experiments are to be pursued:                                   
                                                                                             
              1.  A double pulse excitation experiment with sub picosecond                   
                  resolution designed to determine the time scale over which                 
                  the protein solution is effectively an inhomogeneous                       
                  distribution of conformational substates.                                  
                                                                                             
              2.  A time resolved (less than 1picosecond resolution) kinetic                 
                  hole burning experiment using Raman and absorption to                      
                  characterize the spectra of fast and slow recombining                      
                  conformations.                                                             
                                                                                             
              3.  An experiment narrow sub designed to follow in real time the               
                  thermally driven dynamics of a population of conformational                
                  substates.  The narrow distribution is to be generated by                  
                  using a weak 620nm femtosecond excitation pulse.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              A protein molecule can have any of a very large number of                      
              slightly different micro conformations.  At biological                         
              temperatures, a given molecule undergoes rapid interconversion                 
              among these different conformational substates.  It is possible                
              that reactivity of a given protein is controlled by how                        
              frequently the protein assumes some highly reactive                            
              conformational substate.
