Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interpretation of Data from Chaotic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9305659

Award Number: 9305659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Sauer tsauer@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9215,9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9305659  Sauer       The focus of this research is the interpretation of data 
              collected from chaotic processes and simulations.  Using  univariate or
              multivariate time series produced by a  deterministic physical process, the
              phase space of the process  can be faithfully reconstructed.  Topological and
              diffeomorphic  embedding theorems guaranteeing this in various physically 
              verifiable contexts have been the results of previous and ongoing  research by
              the investigator and coworkers.  Among the many  applications of these
              mathematical foundations are computational  techniques for noise reduction
              (filtering) and time series  prediction, to enhance and/or replace conventional
              methods from  the fields of signal processing and time series analysis, which 
              are of limited applicability for data from chaotic processes.  A  related task
              that is targeted by this research is the development  of reliable diagnostics
              with which to distinguish linear and  nonlinear noise processes from nonlinear
              dynamics, on the basis  of data measured from experiment or the environment. 
              New  techniques for these applications are developed in this project, 
              involving methods from numerical analysis used in conjunction  with existing
              signal processing methods.  The study of the  validity of computer simulations
              of chaotic processes by means of  shadowing is also pursued in conjunction with
              collaborators.       The central goal of this research is to identify and
              analyze  nonlinear behaviors in systems, by measurement and analysis of 
              quantitative signals produced by that system.  New techniques  allow
              exploitable deterministic descriptions, using the paradigms  of deterministic
              chaos, for some systems written off earlier as  noise, or as too difficult to
              study.  Complex phenomena of this  type are being identified in physical,
              chemical, engineering and  biological/medical settings.  As an example,
              hippocampal slices  from mammals and other small neural systems are being
              studied by  the investigator, in conjunction with a g roup of medical 
              researchers headed by a neurosurgeon specializing in epilepsy,  with the
              purpose of detecting deterministic information  processing in the brain.  The
              first mathematical foundations of  the reconstruction techniques pursued in
              this proposal were  disseminated in 1980, which led almost immediately to
              intensive  research across several scientific disciplines, the impact of  which
              has not yet been fully felt.  The investigator has done  previous work on
              expanding these conceptual foundations and  developing related computational
              implementations, and under this  proposal will widen their areas of validity
              and increase their  power for the study of complex systems in natural,
              experimental,  and engineering-related contexts.
