Title       : Connection to Pennsylvania Research and Economic PartnershipNetwork
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9305053

Award Number: 9305053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry L. Moyer KMOYER@MILLERSV  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State System of Higher Edu
	      
	      Harrisburg, PA  17108    /   -

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9305053   Moyer       The State System of Higher Education (SSHE) of
              Pennsylvania  on behalf of its member institutions, proposes to connect the 14 
              System Universities (at 22 sites) to the Pennsylvania Research  and Economic
              Partnership Network (PREPnet).  Since it is not  economically feasible to
              individually connect each site to  PREPnet, the sites must first be connected
              as a single entity to  gateway to PREPnet.  PREPnet will in turn provide access
              to  NSFNET, the Internet, and other national networks. The  educational
              institutions that will participate include:  Bloomsburg University, California
              University of Pennsylvania,  Cheyney Univ., Clarion Univ., East Stroudsburg
              Univ. Edinboro  Univ., Indiana Univ. of Pennsylvania, Kutztown Univ., Loch
              Haven  Univ., Mansfield Univ., Millersville Univ., Shippensburg Univ., 
              Slippery Rock Univ., and West Chester Univ..        The network will provide a
              consistent statewide architecture  for NSFNET access for a broad variety of
              entities engaged in  education and research.  This cooperative network will
              provide  gateways to regional, national, and international networks and  will
              be consistent with their standards.  It will further the  institutions' work in
              enhancing the state's economic development  through a well-educated workforce,
              accessible training  opportunities, and research and development partnerships. 
               Another goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative  projects and
              sharing of resources between institutions, including  those outside the state. 
                   The universities need greater functionality and network  speed to be able
              to access supercomputers, libraries, and make  file transfers along with being
              able to implement a more reliable  mail system. Students and faculty research
              will benefit from the  link.  This is also a unique opportunity for the schools
              to  explore innovative educational resources.  ***
