Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Microwave Processing of Ceramic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1993 
File        : a9305828

Award Number: 9305828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Kriegsmann grkrie@micro.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator proposes to model and analyze a class of                 
              physical problems arising in microwave processing of ceramics.                 
              These problems give rise to challenging nonlinear initial                      
              boundary value problems, the mathematical statements of which                  
              involve one or more nonlinear parabolic equations, governing the               
              diffusion of heat and the diffusion of a chemical concentration,               
              and the time-harmonic version of Maxwell's equations.  These                   
              equations are coupled in a nonlinear fashion and, in addition,                 
              nonlinear heat balances are required in certain applications                   
              where surface temperatures produce significant thermal radiation.              
              The investigator proposes to develop and use asymptotic methods,               
              dictated by certain physical limits, to simplify the mathematical              
              systems and to develop and use numerical methods to  solve the                 
              reduced problems.                                                              
                   The goals of the proposer are twofold.  The first is the                  
              mathematical understanding of the basic physical mechanisms which              
              make the processes work.  Such an understanding would give                     
              scientists and engineers involved in microwave processing of                   
              ceramics the basic scientific underpinnings by to judge and                    
              interpret their experimental findings.  The second is the                      
              development and application of asymptotic, numerical, and other                
              approximate methods required to obtain an accurate description of              
              more realistic and complicated processes.  The successful                      
              completion of the proposed research would allow engineers and                  
              scientists to design more efficient sintering and joining                      
              processes for ceramics which would produce higher quality                      
              materials.  It would also help in the design and implementation                
              of microwave assisted vapor deposition processes which are highly              
              promising in the construction of composite ceramic materials.
