Title       : Diffraction Studies of the Structure and Structural Evolution in Conducting
               Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1994   
File        : a9305289

Award Number: 9305289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Winokur winokur@romano.physics.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9305289  Winokur    This project is a fundamental study of the intrachain and 
              interchain molecular organization existing in various prototypical  conducting
              polymers.  The primary goals in this undertaking are to  develop quantitatively
              accurate models for describing the molecular  organization, to identify subtle
              changes in this structure which  arise during synthesis or processing and to
              correlate this  microstructural variation with changes in the electrical or
              mass  transport properties.  An additional goal will be to elucidate key 
              size-scaling relationships and other novel properties that result  from the
              subtle interplay of various competing interactions at the  molecular level
              within these highly anisotropic guest-host  composites.  Both x-ray and neutron
              scattering will be employed in  combination with highly refined modeling
              algorithms which have been  modified to accommodate the special structure
              characteristics  intrinsic to polymeric materials.  %%%  This project is an
              intensive investigation of the fundamental  submicroscopic structure of
              conducting polymers--a novel and  technological important class of polymers. 
              Objectives are to  develop quantitatively accurate models for describing the
              molecular  organization, to identify subtle changes in this structure which 
              arise during synthesis or processing, and finally to correlate  these
              microstructural variations with changes in other physical  properties (e.g.,
              electrical conductivity, mechanical strength, or  mass diffusion).  In addition
              to resolving issues directly related  to conducting polymers and their
              applications, the experimental  probes and data analysis techniques developed
              in this research will  enable analogous studies of structure in more
              conventional polymer  host materials.  ***
