Title       : Dynamic Studies of the Adhesion, Deformation and Fusion of Monolayers, Bilayers
               and Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1995      
File        : a9305868

Award Number: 9305868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob N. Israelachvili jacob@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Zasadzinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9305868  Israelachvili    This project continues the investigation of the roles
              of  different interbilayer forces and bilayers fluidity on the  molecular-scale
              deformations of adhering and fusing bilayers  using novel electron and atomic
              force microscopy and surface  force measurements.  Past experiments identified
              a particularly  important role for hydrophobic forces in adhesion and fusion.  
              In this follow-up project, a variety of techniques are used to  study the
              dynamics of surfactants, lipids and domains (lateral  diffusion, overturning or
              'flip-flop', and exchange) during   nonequilibrium interactions such as
              adhesion, fusion and  membrane structural transitions.  The aim is to asess how
              these  dynamic processes and their rates - in contrast to equilibrium 
              properties - affect structural changes, adhesion and fusion.   The
              investigators will attempt to achieve similarly high time  and spatial
              resolution of ionic effects on membrane interactions  by using 'cages' calcium
              compounds to liberate divalent ions at  a specific time and place. 
              Complementary surface force  apparatus and cyro-electron microscopy
              measurements will be made  how calcium induces membrance structural changes,
              adhesion and  fusion with millisecond time resolution.  Additional structural 
              information will be provided at the sub-molecular scale by  studying the
              effects of divalent ions on simple Langmuir-  Blodgett membranes using the
              atomic force  microscope.
