Title       : Low Latitude Glaciations in the Precambrian? Paleomagnetic Constraints from
               Southern Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9305121

Award Number: 9305121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Kirschvink kirschvink@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Late Proterozoic glacial sequences are known from almost all of            
              the major cratonic areas, including North America, the Gondwana                
              continents, and the Baltic Platform.  A major controversy involves             
              the probable latitude of formation for these deposits--were they               
              formed at relatively high latitudes as were those of the Permian               
              and our modern glacial deposits, or were many of them formed much              
              closer to the equator?  Arguments supporting a low depositional                
              latitude for many of these units have been discussed extensively               
              for the past 30 years, beginning with the field observations that              
              some of the diamictites had a peculiar abundance of carbonate                  
              fragments, as if the ice had marched over carbonate platforms.                 
              Paleomagnetic data have been involved to both support and attack               
              the low-latitude interpretations of these deposits.  However, much             
              of the older paleomagnetic data is not as convincing as it should              
              be, particularly in terms of using geological stability tests to               
              constrain the time that the remanent magnetization was acquired.               
              A recent and important exception to this is the paleomagnetic work             
              on the varved sediments of the Elatina formation of South                      
              Australia, which formed during the uppermost Marinoan glaciation.              
              At least on one continent, these extensive, sea-level deposits were            
              formed by widespread continental glaciers which came to within a               
              few degrees of the equator.  If this is also true of other                     
              continents such as Africa, the results would be difficult to                   
              interpret in any fashion other than that of a widespread equatorial            
              glaciation of global extent.  This Australian example demonstrates             
              the need for similar, rigorous paleomagnetic studies on other                  
              Proterozoic glacial units.  During the past 10 years, geological               
              work on Proterozoic glacial sequences in Southern Africa has                   
              clarified their regional stratigraphic framework and tectonic                  
              setting.  Several new targets for paleomagnetic work are now                   
              available which are of exceptionally low metamorphic grade and lend            
              themselves to detailed micro-fold and conglomerate tests.  Funds               
              are requested in this proposal to support the field sampling of                
              these units in Southern Africa and Namibia during June and July of             
              l993, and to support the laboratory paleomagnetic analyses in the              
              first half of 1994.
