Title       : Brillouin Scattering Studies of Glasses, Melts, and Aqueous Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9305071

Award Number: 9305071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112512             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay D. Bass j-bass@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Kieffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9305071  Bass  A qualitative understanding of fluid migration in the Earth 
              requires accurate values of viscoelastic properties and the  compressibility of
              fluids.  We propose an experimental and  theoretical study of the elastic
              properties  (compressibility), relaxational properties (attenuation, 
              viscosity), and the equation of state of fluids of  geological importance, in
              particular, silicate melts and  supercritical aqueous solutions.  Physical
              mechanisms of  these properties and data reduction methodologies are  largely
              the same for both groups of materials, as is the  experimental data to be
              obtained for each.  In this sense,  it is natural and appropriate for silicate
              melts and aqueous  solutions to be encompasses in a single study of geological 
              fluids.  Specifically, we will measure the compressibility  and viscosity of
              silicate glasses and melts up to 1600oC  using the Brillouin light scattering
              technique.  Experiments  will be done under both dry conditions and in the
              presence  of H2O in order to investigate the effect of water on the  high T
              viscosity and elasticity of melts.  Similar  measurement on aqueous fluids will
              be made at lower  temperatures (T<700oC) and at high pressures up to 10 GPa 
              using an externally heated diamond anvil cell.  These  experiments will require
              a full analysis of the lineshape of  the Brillouin spectra.  Although the
              Brillouin technique  yields directly high frequency, unrelaxed properties, a
              full  analysis of the lineshapes allows the low frequency, relaxed  properties
              of the fluids to be extracted from the  measurements.  We can therefore
              investigate the frequency  dependence of the observed properties.  In addition,
              for  some of the systems investigated we will obtain data  sufficiently high
              temperature that the relaxed properties ar  obtained directly.  Molecular
              dynamics (MD) computer  simulations of the fluid properties will be used to
              identify  specific atomic mechanisms with the features displayed in  the light
              scattering spectra, and to extrapol ate the  properties beyond the range of
              measurements.  High frequency  dielectric permittivity of aqueous fluids will
              also be  obtained from the proposed optical measurements and compared  with
              results of MD simulations over a wide range of  frequencies.  These studies
              will allow more quantitative  models of fluid thermodynamic and transport
              properties and  fluid-rock interactions to be constructed.
