Title       : The Role of Kinesin-like Motor Proteins in Astral and Spindle Forces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9305703

Award Number: 9305703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Aist JRA2@CORNELL.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olen C. Yoder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Gillian Turgeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,9161,
Abstract    :
                This project focuses on how the chromosomes of a fungus, Nectria             
              haematococca, are separated during mitosis.  Previously, the time-             
              course and ultrastructural details of mitosis were determined and              
              the presence of pulling forces in the asters and pushing forces in             
              the spindle was demonstrated, both of which contribute to                      
              chromosome separation during anaphase B.  The present objectives               
              are to determine how these mitotic forces are generated.  To do                
              this, advanced technologies of cytology and molecular biology will             
              be combined to examine the role of kinesin-like, microtubule-                  
              associated motor proteins (KLPs) in mitosis.  The strategy is to               
              clone as many KLP-encoding genes from an N. haematococca genomic               
              DNA library as possible, localize the gene products in the mitotic             
              apparatus in situ using immunofluorescence microscopy, determine               
              the polarity of force produced by each gene product in an in vitro             
              motility assay and then disrupt each of these genes in the genome              
              by site-specific mutation.  The effect of each mutation on                     
              progression through mitosis will be observed in vivo by video                  
              microscopy.  For each gene, the hypothesis that (1) elimination of             
              the KLP blocks or inhibits mitosis, and (2) overproduction of the              
              KLP increases the rate of mitotic movements will be tested.  Laser             
              microbeam experiments will then be used as a confirmation of the               
              suspected roles of the KLPs in mitotic force generation.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is a complex system of structural,                 
              chemomechanical (motor), and regulatory proteins which serve as                
              both an internal scaffolding for cells and as the machinery for                
              virtually all cellular and intracellular movement, including the               
              movement of chromosomes at the time of cell division (mitosis).                
              This work represents a unique opportunity to correlate specific                
              motor proteins with in vivo-demonstrated mitotic forces of known               
              polarity (i.e., the pushing and pulling forces that result in                  
              chromosome movements).  The strategy of testing functional                     
              inferences by performing laser microbeam experiments on KLP-                   
              deficient mutants is unique and should lead to unequivocal                     
              conclusions as to which KLP is responsible for which mitotic force.            
              Thus, the work has the potential to be the first to fully elucidate            
              the molecular basis of both the astral pulling force and the                   
              spindle pushing force during anaphase B.  In doing so, it would                
              contribute substantially to our understanding of the mechanisms of             
              microtubule-mediated movement of chromosomes during mitosis.  In               
              addition, it will add substantially to the information base needed             
              in order to exploit biological motors as novel biomolecular                    
              materials for bio(nano)fabrication and biomimetic reverse                      
              engineering.
