Title       : Paleoflood Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9305252

Award Number: 9305252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor R. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine K. Hirschboeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Paleoflood hydrology is a technique that combines elements of                  
              geology and surface water hydrology to reconstruct magnitude-                  
              frequency characteristics of floods that occurred prior to direct              
              measurement or systematic observation.  Slackwater deposit-                    
              paleostage indicator (SWD-PSI) paleoflood studies use specific                 
              evidence of flooding to define paleoflood levels in stable                     
              (bedrock-controlled) channel environments and use hydraulic                    
              modeling and geochronological methods to reconstruct the magnitude             
              and frequency of individual flood events.  Regional SWD-PSI studies            
              provide data that are indispensable in relating spatial and                    
              temporal variations in flood frequency to global-scale variations              
              in climatic conditions over long time period (1000s of years).  We             
              are proposing to establish a systematic method for incorporating               
              paleoflood data into a hydroclimatological context to aid in                   
              understanding fundamental linkages between global climate and                  
              regional flood frequency.  This method will rely on detailed                   
              analysis of observed hydroclimatic data sets to develop a scale-               
              sensitive, circulation-based conceptual framework for use in                   
              assessing hydroclimatic variability over time scales represented by            
              paleoflood records.  In the course of development, we plan to use              
              this method to address the flood-climate linkage in areas                      
              particularly sensitive to climatic variations.  The methods will               
              also be used in a continuation of research on the relationship                 
              between the regional paleoflood characteristics of Arizona and                 
              global climatic variations over the past 5000 years.  Our work in              
              southern Arizona will focus on small drainage basins(<25km2) to                
              augment previous studies in the region that have focused on                    
              considerably larger basins subject to flooding from different                  
              hydroclimatologic mechanisms.  The results of our proposed research            
              will offer important new insights into the response of extreme                 
              events to climatic variation and may have important implications               
              for future changes in global climate.
