Title       : Novel Optical Techniques for Studying Polymer-Metal Interfaces: Surface Second
               Harmonic Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9305881

Award Number: 9305881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dr. Hilary Lackritz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research represents the                       
              application of a new approach to a "mature" research area:                     
              vinyl polymerization.  This research will characterize the gas                 
              phase photopolymerization of vinyl monomers onto metallic                      
              substrates as a function of processing conditions.  Solvent-                   
              free, gas phase photopolymerization shows promise in creating                  
              defect-free, uniform thin films with excellent electrical and                  
              optical properties for commercial applications such as                         
              protective coatings and electrical insulators.  The issues to                  
              be considered in this work are how the final film quality is                   
              related to the interface and the polymerization mechanisms and                 
              kinetics, and the characterization of the gas phase reactions.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research will develop surface second harmonic generation                  
              to  characterize the dynamics at the metal/polymer interface.                  
              Surface second harmonic generation techniques are powerful                     
              methods for probing surfaces, and have general applicability                   
              in examining reaction dynamics at many surfaces and                            
              interfaces.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The ultimate goal of the work is to show that second order                     
              nonlinear optical techniques such as surface second harmonic                   
              generation will be excellent methods for multi-disciplinary                    
              studies of many surface phenomena including reaction,                          
              adsorption, and adhesion.  This initial work specifically                      
              addresses polymerizations of well characterized vinyl monomers                 
              onto well characterized metallic substrates in order to                        
              validate the use of surface second harmonic generation as an                   
              analytical technique to perform real-time characterization of                  
              the surface dynamics.  There is a strong need to develop novel                 
              methods for characterizing surfaces and interfaces,                            
              particularly methods that are efficient, have high resolution,                 
              and can be used to monitor in-situ processing.
