Title       : Workshop on High Performance Computing in Chemistry: Opportunities and
               Challenges, Bethesda, Maryland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1993      
File        : a9305615

Award Number: 9305615
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Dunning   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Bair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricky A. Kendall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Reinhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BMI Battelle Nthwst Labs
	      
	      Richland, WA  99352    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9256,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Thom Dunning is supported by a grant from the Theoretical                  
              and Computational Chemistry Program to organize a workshop on                  
              High Performance Computing in Chemistry: Opportunities and                     
              Challenges.  The workshop will be held from March 8 through                    
              March 10, 1993 at the National Institutes of Health Campus in                  
              Bethesda, MD.  The workshop will focus on three primary issues:                
              1) survey of current work in chemistry on parallel computers                   
              with a special emphasis on massively parallel computers; 2)                    
              details of chemical problems which are likely to benefit                       
              substantially from the use of massively parallel computers; and                
              3) impediments, both programming and otherwise, which might                    
              prevent the migration of existing codes to, and the development                
              of new codes for, massively parallel computers.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              In order for chemists to make the best use of the opportunities                
              afforded by the emerging massively parallel computer                           
              architectures, they will have to overcome a number of obstacles                
              which are primarily associated with crude operating systems and                
              specialized algorithm development.  It is important during this                
              early stage of development that chemists working in the area                   
              share their experiences with each other and with computer                      
              scientists in an effort to surmount these obstacles.  The                      
              workshop which is supported by this grant will help to                         
              disseminate this sort of information to a large community of                   
              computational chemists, and help to circumvent several of the                  
              difficulties which chemists may have in migrating their                        
              computational codes to massively parallel computers.
