Title       : The Interactions of Pseudomonas Syringae Harpins, HRP Secretion Proteins, and
               AVR Proteins in Eliciting Either theHypersensitive Response or Pathogenesis in
               Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9305178

Award Number: 9305178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Collmer arc2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305178  Collmer  The hypersensitive response (HR) of higher plants is
              characterized  by the rapid, localized death of plant cells at the site of 
              invasion by an "incompatible" pathogen (a microorganism that causes  disease
              only in another plant) and is associated with resistance  against many
              nematodes, fungi viruses and bacteria.  Elicitation of  the HR by Pseudomonas
              syringae and other plant pathogenic bacteria  is controlled by hrp genes, which
              are also required for the  multiplication and pathogenicity of these bacteria
              in their  respective host plants.  The overall goal of the research is to use 
              two recent advances to dissect the functions of the hrp genes and  to determine
              the general basis for the phenotypic dependence of avr  genes on hrp genes.  We
              expect that (i) harpins are needed for P.  syringae strains to initiate a
              metabolically active interaction  with the plant, (ii) HrpH and several other
              Hrp proteins are needed  for the secretion of harpin, (iii) harpin production
              must be  carefully regulated for successful pathogenesis, and (iv) Avr 
              proteins depend on the Hrp secretion system and/or harpin to  produce their
              phenotypes.  The work will involve potentially three  strains of P. syringae:
              (i) P.s. syringae 61, whose cloned cluster  of hrp genes has been extensively
              characterized and is unique in  that, it functions in nonpathogens like E.
              coli. (ii) P.s. glycinea  race 4, which becomes incompatible with Rpg1 soybean
              cultivars upon  acquisition of the cloned avrB gene, and (iii) P.s. tomato
              DC3000,  whose compatibility with Arabidopsis thaliana is reversed by 
              acquisition of avrB.  Early work on the project will determine  whether P.s.
              glycinea race 4 or P.s. tomato DC3000 will be the  focus of work on Avr protein
              function.  We intend to (1)  Characterize the P.s. syringae 61 hrpZ gene and
              the encoded harpin  with respect to primary sequence, elicitor-active domains,
              and  subcellular location.  (2) Determine the relative effects of hrpH  and
              hrpZ mutations on the initial interac tion of P.s. syringae 61  with bean and
              tobacco (or of P.s. tomato DC3000 with A. thaliana or  of P.s. glycinea race 4
              with soybean). (3) Clone and characterize  the P.s. glycinea race 4 (or P.s.
              tomato DC3000) hrpZ gene,  construct derivatives that are deficient in harpin
              overproduce  harpin produce harpin instead of harpin or contain a hrpZ
              promoter-  uida fusion in trans; determine the phenotype of these derivatives 
              (with or without an avrB+ plasmid) on tobacco and differential host  cultivars.
               %%%   Because homologs of Hrp secretion proteins are present in some  animal
              pathogens, successful testing of these hypothesis should  have a broad impact
              on research addressing bacterial pathogenicity.  ***
