Title       : Raman Spectroscopy and Pressure Studies of Protein Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9305711

Award Number: 9305711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfons Schulte afs@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9305711  Schulte  Variations in pressure and temperature are combined with time-
               resolved Raman spectroscopy to study reaction parameters and  motions relevant
              for protein function.  The principal focus is on  two prototype processes: 
              ligand binding to myoglobin and light  energy transduction in the proton-pump
              bacteriorhodopsin.  The  protein is brought to a particular state of the Gibbs
              free energy  surface by changing pressure and temperature.  A sudden external 
              perturbation, for instance a pressure jump or a laser flash,  initiates a
              reaction or a relaxation.  Kinetic studies of  vibrational modes that change in
              position and intensity explore  the highly degenerate energy surface and
              relaxation phenomena.   In addition to monitoring Raman bands in the visible we
              use  excitation in the near-infrared to obtain Raman spectra in the  absence of
              undesired photochemistry and resonance enhancement.   These investigations
              provide new information on the arrangement  of the conformational energy
              surface in myoglobin and  bacteriorhodopsin, pressure effects on protein
              dynamics and on  the molecular structure of bacteriorhodopsin activation.  %%% 
              The dynamics structures which proteins maintain to perform  biological
              functions are distinguished by changes in energy and  volume from the unfolded
              polypeptide chain.  Site-selective  spectroscopic studies at variable
              temperature and pressure  provide insight into the relative energy scales of
              molecular  interactions in the stabilization of the biologically active 
              molecule.  Vibrational marker bands are used to monitor  structural changes and
              motions in myoglobin and bacteriorhodopsin  and correlate them with protein
              function.  Since proteins share  similarities in the thermodynamic, structural
              and dynamic  properties with many disordered systems such as glasses, new 
              insights from this research will have an impact on models for  disorder and
              complexity in other fields of science.  ***
