Title       : CAA: Using Statistical and Exploratory Data Analysis in Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9305643

Award Number: 9305643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Winifred Creamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Winifred Creamer will            
              analyze a large series of ceramic materials collected through                  
              archaeological excavation in the U.S. Southwest. She will also take            
              a series of computer, statistical and mathematics courses, mostly              
              at the University of Northern Illinois, to improve her analytic                
              skill. This will permit her to approach her study using the most               
              appropriate techniques.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Anthropologists generally believe that Native American population              
              size decreased dramatically around the time of European contact.               
              However the exact nature, timing and cause of this decline probably            
              varied from area to area. It is also possible that in some regions             
              population was not affected. The Southwest is a particularly                   
              interesting both because of the high level of social complexity                
              achieved before European contact and because decline seems to date             
              well before Spanish influence was felt. The largest ruins in the               
              Anasazi region were abandoned before Columbus arrived in the New               
              World. Dr. Creamer wishes to reconstruct Anasazi population size               
              both pre and post contact and learn how it changed over time. On               
              this basis she will try to understand the causal mechanisms                    
              involved. To do this however a fine-scale chronological control is             
              necessary and at the present time it is not possible to date sites             
              with sufficient accuracy. Dr. Creamer will study ceramic remains               
              which have been recovered in secure stratigraphic contexts, examine            
              how this body of material culture changes over time and then use               
              the ceramic sequence to date individual sites.                                 
                                                                                             
              In this Career Advancement Award, Dr. Creamer will also expand her             
              own skills. Research of this kind requires computer, statistical               
              and mathematic expertise which Dr. Creamer does not possess.                   
              Through a series of university courses and hands on learning she               
              will acquire the necessary expertise.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              information of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase               
              our understanding of the processes of culture change and contact               
              and finally it will assist in the training of an accomplished                  
              scientist.
