Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9305758

Award Number: 9305758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Ferry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator intends to study a number of topics in                   
              controlled topology and differential geometry.  The most pressing              
              of these concern the nonresolvable homology manifolds discovered               
              by the investigator, J. Bryant, W. Mio, and S. Weinberger.                     
              Simply put, he wishes to study these spaces and see to what                    
              extent the classical theory of manifolds carries over to this new              
              category of spaces.  This study is closely related to the                      
              well-known Borel and Bing-Borsuk Conjectures.  Other problems                  
              involved include applications of controlled Gamma-surgery to the               
              study of topological embeddings in codimension two, the Borel and              
              integral Novikov Conjectures for certain classes of groups, and                
              applications of controlled topology to differential geometry.                  
                   There are a number of potential applications for this work.               
              The new spaces being studied have the global properties of                     
              manifolds modelled on euclidean space, but have very different                 
              small-scale properties.  Such spaces could be of interest to                   
              workers trying to reconcile large-scale and small-scale models of              
              the universe.  The Borel and Novikov Conjectures are conjectures               
              involving the rigidity of certain classes of manifolds.  Typical               
              results say that manifolds which are "close together" in some                  
              topological sense are the same.  This appears to be a naturally                
              occurring instance of quantization in geometry and topology.
