Title       : Hormonal Control of Lipid Metabolism in Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9305544

Award Number: 9305544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Sheridan Mark_Sheridan@ndsu.nodak.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9305554  Sheridan    Recent studies have indicated the existence of multiple
              forms of  somatostatin, a peptide originally isolated from the brain and  found
              to contain 14-amino acid (from gene I) and to inhibit  growth hormone
              secretion, but subsequently found to be located in  the pancreas,
              gastrointestinal tract and elsewhere of many  vertebrates. The special
              significance of multiple forms (14-amino  acid forms and N-terminally extended
              forms) of somatostatins, and  the roles of these factors in regulation of lipid
              metabolism,  have yet to be determined. With the proposed work, Dr. Sheridan 
              seeks to evaluate the role of somatostatins in the coordination  of lipid
              metabolism in fish. Fish offer a unique system for the  study of  these
              questions because of their evolutionary position,  diversified lipid storage
              strategy (partitioning of lipid  reserves among several depots: mesenteric fat,
              liver and dark  muscle), and segregated endocrine pancreas (Brockman body) 
              possessing abundant amounts of N-terminally extended somatostatin 
              (somatostatin-25; from gene II). He will demonstrate for the  first time the
              differential effects of gene I and gene II  somatostatins on lipid metabolism.
              This analysis will demonstrate  important interactions among the various
              pancreatic hormones  (e.g., somatostatins, insulin, glucagon, pancreatic
              polypeptide)  and evaluate the direct effects, including cellular mode of 
              action, of somatostatins on hepatic lipolysis. He also will  evaluate for the
              first time the binding of somatostatin to liver,  a major lipid depot of fish,
              and examine alterations in  somatostatin binding characteristic (affinity,
              capacity) in  response to nutrient (glucose) and hormonal (INS, GLU) treatment.
               While pertaining specifically to fish, this research will provide  novel
              information concerning somatostatin phsyiology generally.  These results will
              contribute significantly to the basic  understanding of  hormonal control of
              hepatic lipid metabolism  and provide important insight into the  evolution of
              lipid  metabolism control schemes.  ***
