Title       : Identification of the Molecular Basis of Spontaneous Frameshift Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9305475

Award Number: 9305475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn S. Ripley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305475  Ripley  Fundamental biochemical processes underlying spontaneous
              frameshift  mutagenesis are being investigated.  Spontaneous mutations arise 
              from a multiplicity of kinds of errors, whose properties are  largely
              undefined.  Among spontaneous frameshift mutations, only a  fraction of
              frameshift sequence changes can be mechanistically  described in the most
              general way; the basis of the remainder is  totally unknown,  In these
              unexplained cases, no model connects the  mutations to the specific DNA context
              in which they arise and no  dependence on a specific enzyme, metabolic process
              or DNA damage is  yet identified.  Low frequencies of spontaneous mutations
              have led  some to think of their patterns of occurrence as random.  However, 
              when mechanistic studies have identified underlying causes,  mutagenesis
              specificity has been found to be nonrandom and to  directly reflect
              characteristics of the underlying mutational  mechanism.  Spontaneous
              frameshift spectra are complex because  multiple mechanisms contribute to the
              total.  The particularly  powerful genetics and frameshift detection system of
              the  bacteriophage T4, coupled with complementary in vitro approaches,  have
              been successfully used to separate and characterize distinct  frameshift
              mechanisms.  This work is presently incomplete.   Identifiable subsets of
              frameshift specificities have not yet been  studied and thus, remain
              mechanistically unexplained.  Previous  work has demonstrated that mutagenic
              specificity can be related to  the specificity of the enzymes participating in
              mutagenesis and /or  to non-standard DNA structures associated with particular
              DNA  sequences.  This research investigates the enzymology and DNA  structures
              involved in spontaneous frameshift mutagenesis  associated preferentially with
              palindromic DNA sequences.  We are examining the molecular basis of frequent
              frameshift arising  spontaneously in vivo, focusing on frameshifts arising at
              the bases  of DNA hairpins.  Our attention was drawn to this context  by two 
              observation: (1) spontaneous +2 bp and -2bp frameshifts share this  context
              feature, but no other context previously recognized as  associated with high
              frequencies of frameshift, and (2) the  serendipitous discovery of a new
              hotspot for 2bp duplications  associated with a local context change which
              produced a hairpin.  We will use DNA sequence manipulation to confirm the
              relationship  between frameshift hotspots and their hairpin contexts.  We will 
              also use frameshift mutagenesis in the hotspots as a specific assay  for
              identifying the enzyme(s) involved in this type of spontaneous  mutagenesis. 
              If a clear association of frameshift hotpots with DNA  hairpins is demonstrated
              a major hypothesis to be tested is whether  the frameshift specificity in vivo
              arises because the DNA hairpin  stems, analogues of DNA recombination
              intermediates, serve as  substrates for misprocessing by the T-4encoded
              Holliday-junction  resolvase in a manner that leads to frameshifts.  %%%  This
              research will contribute to our understanding of how mutations  occurs in the
              absence of agents known to damage DNA.  ***
