Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations Under Minimal Smoothness
               Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9305753

Award Number: 9305753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53166              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell M. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research in the area of                  
              partial differential equations.  The work concerns boundary value              
              problems in domains with relatively coarse boundaries, that is                 
              boundaries on which discontinuities in the derivative are allowed              
              such as those with corners.  Both elliptic and parabolic                       
              equations will be treated.  Although considerable work has been                
              done in the area in the past few years, little attention has been              
              given to mixed boundary value problems.  In particular attention               
              will be given to the question of regularity: if the                            
              boundary components are known to be integrable of a certain order              
              then one would like to establish the best power integral of the                
              gradient. A second line of work focuses on spectral properties of              
              elliptic operators.  Here the problem is that of locating                      
              spectral resonances in domains which consists of a cavity joined               
              to an unbounded exterior domain by a thin tube.  The point of                  
              this type of investigation is to quantify the extent to which the              
              operator may be modelled by separate elliptic operators on the                 
              individual parts.  Finally, work will continue on questions                    
              involving inverse boundary value problems.  In its more practical              
              setting, one wants to know the extent to which quantities such as              
              charge on the surface of a body uniquely determines current                    
              across the surface.  The goal of this work is to look at cases                 
              where the underlying differential operator may have nonsmooth                  
              coefficients.                                                                  
                   Partial differential equations form a basis for                           
              mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of                      
              mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as                
              it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about                
              the solutions.  This may include answers to questions about                    
              uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis                      
              often develops methods for approximation of solutions and                      
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.
