Title       : Molecular Characterization of Vacuolar H+-Translocating Inorganic
               Pyrophosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9305281

Award Number: 9305281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Rea parea@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305281  Rea  The vacuolar membrane of plant cells contains two primary proton 
              pumps: a V-type ATPase (EC 3.6.1.3) and a pyrophosphate (PPi)  energized
              proton-translocating inorganic pyrophosphatase (V-PPase:  EC 3.6.1.1).  Both
              enzymes mediate electrogenic H-translocation  from the cytosol to vacuole lumen
              to establish an inside-acid pH  gradient and inside-positive membrane
              potential.  This may then be  used to energize the secondary H-coupled
              transport of a wide range  of solutes.  The project planned is based on our
              recent molecular  cloning of cDNAs encoding the substrate-binding subunit of
              the V-  PPase from Arabidopsis thaliana and Beta vulgaris and the isolation  of
              genomic clones from the former organism.  Two main areas will be  examined. 
              (1) Studies will be finished to characterize Arabidopsis  clones and to
              determine if they correspond to isoforms of the  substrate-binding subunit, to
              additional unidentified subunits of  the V-PPase containing sequence identities
              with the substrate-  binding subunit, or to non-V-PPase genes.  (2) Experiments
              will  also be performed to study the in vivo function of the V-PPase in 
              Arabidopsis and Nicotiana plumbaginifolia by expression analysis,  and the
              formation of antisense and overexpression transformants.   Results will shed
              light on the overall subunit composition of V-  PPase and the possible
              existence of nuclear-coded homologs in other  organelles.  The possible
              involvement of the V-PPase in primary K  ion-translocation, as well as
              proton-translocation, and the  increasing recognition of PPi as a key
              metabolite in plant systems,  implicate the pump in pH stasis, resistance to
              anaerobiosis,  sucrose mobilization, turgor regulation and stomatal function.  
              Perturbation of one or more of these processes in transgenic plants  with
              different degrees ofV-PPase expression, will facilitate  elucidation of the
              true physiological function of the V-PPase.  %%%  Proton-translocating
              pyrophosphatases (PPase) have been found in  energy-coupling membranes  of
              mitochondria and in phototrophic  bacteria.  The so called V-PPase, however, is
              the first example of  a pyrophosphate-driven ion translocase in a "non-energy
              coupling"  membrane.  This in conjunction with its unique origins, membership 
              in a new category of ion-translocases, and its abundance and  ubiquity in
              plants, makes the thorough characterization of the  system important for
              general knowledge.  The work described may  contribute new insights into the
              role of PPi in plant sucrose  metabolism, the mechanisms underlying the
              regulation of plant cell  turgor and nutrient composition, and in strategies
              peculiar to  plants for ensuring cellular pH regulation and sustained metabolic
               activity under conditions of limited oxygen availability.  ***
