Title       : Structure and Function of MDM1, an Intermediate Filament Protein of Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9305338

Award Number: 9305338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Yaffe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The distribution of subcellular organelles during cell division              
              is essential for the proliferation of eukaryotic cells, yet little             
              is known of its molecular basis or control.  Previous studies                  
              identified the MDM1 protein (Mdm1p) as  a central component                    
              mediating mitochondrial distribution during mitosis in yeast.                  
              Mdm1p is an intermediate filament-forming protein that defines a               
              cytoplasmic structural system essential for both nuclear and                   
              mitochondrial inheritance.  The goal of this project is to                     
              characterize the function and assembly of the  Mdm1p-cytoskeleton.             
              There are four objectives: 1,to analyze dynamics of the Mdm1p-                 
              structures within intact cells; 2, to generate and characterize new            
              mutant alleles of mdm1; 3, to characterize the interaction of Mdm1p            
              with mitochondria; and 4, to identify proteins that associate with             
              Mdm1p and play a role in the assembly or function of the Mdm1p-                
              containing structures.  A long-range aim is to understand how the              
              function of Mdm1p is coordinated with overall cellular metabolism              
              and the cell division cycle.  Study of the Mdm1p-network will                  
              involve a combined cellular, biochemical, and genetic approach.                
              Dynamics of the Mdm1p-network will be analyzed in intact cells                 
              harboring mutations affecting a variety of other cellular                      
              structures or cells treated with various chemical inhibitors.                  
              Indirect immunofluorescence microscopic analysis will reveal                   
              changes in Mdm1p distribution and allow assessment of assembly and             
              disassembly of the network.  New alleles will be created by in                 
              vitro mutagenesis of the cloned MDM1 gene, analyzed microscopically            
              to identify those conferring phenotypes different from the original            
              mdm1 allele, and identified by DNA sequence analysis. This                     
              component of the study should permit a detailed structure-function             
              analysis of Mdm1p.  The interaction of Mdm1p with mitochondria will            
              be studied using binding assays employing purified Mdm1p and                   
              isolated mitochondria.  Binding studies combined with chemical                 
              crosslinking procedures should lead to the identification of                   
              mitochondrial proteins that mediate Mdm1p-mitochondrial                        
              interactions.  Biochemical and genetic approaches will be developed            
              to identify additional cellular components that mediate Mdm1p                  
              function and participate in the distribution of mitochondria during            
              mitosis.  These studies will reveal new details of the Mdm1p-                  
              cytoskeletal system.  They should lead to new insights into                    
              cellular organization and processes basic to normal cell growth.               
              %%%                                                                            
              The appropriate partitioning of cellular components at the time of             
              cell division is critical to the survival of the daughter cells.               
              In prior NSF-supported work, this laboratory identified an                     
              essential gene in yeast which plays an important role in                       
              partitioning of mitochondria to daughter cells during yeast cell               
              division, and discovered that the gene product is a yeast homologue            
              to animal intermediate filament proteins.  This project will extend            
              those studies to the questions of how the yeast intermediate                   
              filament-like network is assembled, and how it interacts with                  
              mitochondria.  The results will provide fundamental and important              
              new knowledge concerning the organization of cytoplasm.
