Title       : Support for Compactors for the LACM Invertebrates Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9305552

Award Number: 9305552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk Fitzhugh fitzhugh@bcff.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The University of Southern California's (USC) Allan Hancock                    
              Foundation (AHF) polychaete collection was donated to the Los                  
              Angeles County Museum of Natural History (LACM) in 1988.  The                  
              collection is the largest of its kind in the western United                    
              States and second largest in the country, maintaining the most                 
              extensive holdings in eastern Pacific polychaetes in the world,                
              yet is cosmopolitan in its total coverage.  Following this                     
              acquisition, the LACM hired a polychaete collection manager in                 
              1988 and a curator in 1990.  Along with a small wet collection of              
              sponges, platyhelminths, nemerteans, and tunicates donated to                  
              LACM in 1992 by USC, the polychaete collection and staff are                   
              still housed on the USC campus under extremely crowded                         
              conditions.  As part of its commitment to these collections and                
              personnel, the LACM is presently constructing office/research                  
              space for the polychaete staff, and completely remodelling an                  
              expansive ground floor room to specifically accommodate                        
              compactors and rails for the polychaete and miscellaneous                      
              invertebrates collections.  With this collection space utilizing               
              compactors, the areas storage capacity can be fully minimized,                 
              allowing ample growth of the polychaete collection.  This project              
              will support the purchase and installation of all compactor                    
              rails, carriages, and shelves designed for this space.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Collections of this sort are fundamentally important not only as               
              resources for primary research endeavors but also for a broad                  
              spectrum of other activities.  For example, specimens and their                
              catalogues are essential resources for environmental impact                    
              assessment.  As well these collections provide valuable exhibit                
              and educational opportunities with appeal to all levels of                     
              application.
