Title       : An Atypical Calcium Dependent Protein Kinase Homologue in Carrot and Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9305321

Award Number: 9305321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jung H. Choi jung.choi@biology.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305321  Choi    A variety of environmental signals that influence plant growth,
               such as light, gravity and wind cause transient calcium fluxes in  plant
              cells.  To understand how plants respond appropriately to the  different
              environmental stimuli that employ calcium as a common  second messenger, it is
              necessary to characterize the intracellular  calcium receptors, their
              functions, and their distribution in  various plant cells, organs, and tissues.
               This laboratory has  cloned a gene for a calcium-dependent protein kinase
              (CDPK) that  has its own calcium receptor in the form of a C-terminal 
              calmodulin-like domain with 4 EF-hand motifs.  CDPK appears to be  the plant
              homologue of the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein  kinases in animals.  A
              CDPK related kinase (CRK), whose C-terminal  domain has diverged, with
              nonconservative substitutions in the EF-  hand motifs has also been cloned. 
              Other features in the CRK  sequence predict that CRK may be myristoylated,
              possibly for  membrane localization, and that CRK may be phosphorylated by CDPK
               and/or cell-cycle kinases.  Distinct homologues of CRK and CDPK  appear to be
              present and in both monocotyledonous and  dicotyledonous species, implying that
              both have conserved  functions.  This research will use a variety of molecular
              and  biochemical approaches to characterize further the structure and  function
              of these enzymes and to test the hypothesis that CDPK and  CRK are involved in
              transduction of intracellular calcium signals.   It will be determined whether
              CDPK and CRK are differentially  expressed in plant tissues and organs that
              respond to stimuli that  evoke calcium fluxes, and whether the levels and
              specific  activities of CDPK and CRK respond to changes in intracellular 
              calcium levels.  The significance of CRK sequence features will be  tested by
              determining whether they are conserved in Arabidopsis CRK  homologues and by
              direct biochemical characterization.  This  research will examine whether CDPK
              and CRK are involved in  intracellu lar calcium signaling, and provide insights
              into how  their roles may differ.  %%%  A variety of environmental signals that
              influence plant growth,  such as light, gravity, and wind, cause transient
              calcium fluxes in  plant cells.  To understand how plants respond appropriately
              to the  different environmental stimuli that employ calcium as a common  second
              messenger, it is necessary to characterize the intracellular  calcium
              receptors, their functions, and their distribution in  various plant cells,
              organs, and tissues.  This laboratory has  cloned genes for two
              calcium-dependent enzymes that are likely  important in the signal transduction
              pathways involving calcium.   The goals of this project are to characterize
              these enzymes further  and study their function in plants.  The results of this
              research  will increase our understanding of cellular calcium receptors and 
              how plant cells respond to changes in their environment.  ***
