Title       : Biogeochemical Cycles and Mixing in Lake Baikal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1993       
File        : a9305664

Award Number: 9305664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly K. Falkner kfalkner@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray F. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher I. Measures  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   As the most voluminous, deepest and longest continually                   
              existing freshwater lake on the surface of the earth, Baikal                   
              presents unparalleled opportunity for paleo-climate reconstruction             
              at a key continental site in southeastern Siberia.  Here, it is                
              proposed to complete our investigations of the fundamental mixing              
              and biogeochemical characteristics of the modern lake and its                  
              tributaries.  This study will provide groundwork essential for                 
              deciphering Baikal sedimentary paleo-climate records.  In addition,            
              baseline data needed to establish the nature and magnitude of                  
              perturbations caused by expanding human activities in the Baikal               
              watershed will be contributed and the chemical conditioning of the             
              source waters of the Yenisei, one of the most important rivers                 
              emptying into the Arctic, will be defined.                                     
                   Findings from our June, 1988 expedition include:  1) Deduction            
              of a unique mechanism, related to thermobaric instabilities, by                
              which mixing of this deepest of lakes occurs ?Carmack and Weiss,               
              1991!;  2) Determination, based on CFC, O2 and nutrient                        
              distributions, of an 8 to 10 year average rate of ventilation for              
              the lake and confirmation that Baikal is highly oligotrophic with              
              nitrate as the limiting nutrient ?Weiss et al., 1991!; 3) Cycling              
              of major elements in the lake is dominated by riverine throughout;             
              hydrothermal activity known by temperature anomalies and                       
              subsequently observed by submersible, does not impact the chemistry            
              of the modern lake; lake waters are undersaturated with respect to             
              calcite phases, consistent with lack of their occurrence in lake               
              sediments; lake waters are also undersaturated with respect to                 
              opal, however, high diatom productivity assures a sufficient rain              
              rate to result in the preservation of siliceous materials in                   
              sediments which constitute a sink for Si; of the minor elements,               
              only Ba showed non-conservative behavior in the lake ?Falkner et               
              al, 1991!.                                                                     
                   A second expedition to the lake was undertaken in July, 1991              
              during which a method by which to use deep water temperature and               
              oxygen profiles to adequately constrain the extent of ventilation              
              was established.  Sampling, by trace-metal clean techniques was                
              extended to rivers and land-based hot-springs surrounding the lake             
              in order to better constrain elemental budgets and to allow                    
              analyses of trace elements which tend to be more sensitive                     
              indicators of impact by human activities.  Funds are being                     
              requested from NSF to complete chemical and isotopic analyses of               
              this sample suite and to extend our observations through                       
              intercalibration and coordination with ongoing efforts by Russian              
              scientist.  In addition, a workshop to collate, discuss and publish            
              the findings of our interdisciplinary group will be held in order              
              to provide the most complete understanding of mixing and                       
              biogeochemistry of the modern lake possible.
