Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Specific LexA Cleavage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9305092

Award Number: 9305092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Little   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9305092  Little  Treatment of E. coli by agents that damage DNA or inhibit 
              replication triggers the SOS response, a global response to the  damage that
              promotes cell survival by a variety of means.  This  response involves the
              action of two regulatory proteins: LexA,  which represses about 20 SOS genes
              during normal growth, and RecA,  which is activated by inducing treatments to a
              form that catalyzes  the specific cleavage of LexA repressor, inactivating it
              and  leading to induction of the SOS genes.  Hence, specific cleavage  plays a
              crucial role in the SOS response.  In addition to this  central regulatory role
              of LexA cleavage, this reaction is of  considerable biochemical interest. Its
              mechanism is unusual, in  that LeA cleaves itself in an intramolecular reaction
              termed  autodigestion, and activated RecA acts to stimulate LexA  self-cleavage
              under physiological conditions.  In these conditions,  LexA cleavage is
              designed to proceed slowly, but at the same time  to be capable of large rate
              increases.  This view raises two  related questions: What is the mechanism of
              LexA autodigestion, and  how can RecA protein facilitate this reaction? Three
              complementary  approaches are proposed to address these questions.  The first
              is  to continue to isolate and characterize mutations that influence  the rate
              of LexA cleavage.  The second approach is to continue to  develop the
              bimolecular LexA cleavage reaction, in which one  molecule of LexA or lambda
              repressor acts as an enzyme to cleave  other molecules of LexA.  The third
              approach is to look for  physical evidence that LexA can exist in two different
               conformational states.     %%%  An increasingly large number of biologically
              important reactions  are being discovered that are intramolecular.  These
              include self-  splicing RNA introns, autophosphorylation and autophosphatase 
              activity of chemotaxis proteins, and autophosphorylation of  oncogene proteins,
              growth factor receptors, and other important  proteins. The proposed work is of
              general signifi cance for the  insights it is expected to yield regarding the
              properties of  intramolecular self-processing reactions, and the means by which
               the rated of these reactions can be regulated by interactions with  other
              effector molecules.  ***
