Title       : Mechanism of X-Chromosome Inactivation During Gametogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9305858

Award Number: 9305858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. McCarrey johnmc@darwin.sfbr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Fdn for Biomed
	      P.O.Box 760549
	      San Antonio, TX  78245    210/258-9544

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1119,9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305858  McCarrey    This is an application for renewal of an ongoing project to
              study  the regulation of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) during 
              spermatogenesis and oogenesis in mammals using the laboratory mouse  as a model
              experimental system.  The goal of these studies remains  to understand the role
              of XCI during mammalian gametogenesis, and  its relationship to meiosis and to
              the development and  differentiation of functional gametes.  Results from the
              previous  grant period suggest that XCI in germ cells (gcXCI) of both sexes 
              may differ from that in somatic cells (scXCI), especially in the  stringency of
              repression of transcription from affected X-linked  structural genes.  This
              may, in turn, be related to the fact that  gcXCI is a developmentally transient
              phenomenon, whereas scXCI  leads to terminal repression of affected genes. 
              Additional results  indicate that a gene that may regulate XCI, the Xist gene,
              is  expressed both in germ cells and somatic cells, suggesting that the 
              primary mechanism of XCI may be similar in both cell types.  In  this
              application, we have proposed experiments focused at the  molecular level to
              learn more about both the mechanism of  transcriptional inactivation of
              X-linked structural genes and the  mechanism by which gcXCI is initiated and
              terminated during germ  cell development.  We will examine two exemplary
              X-linked genes  encoding common metabolic enzymes, phosphoglycerate kinase
              (Pgk-1)  and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (Hprt).  We will  measure
              parameters at the molecular level, including cessation of  active transcription
              in spermatogenic cells and re-initiation of  active transcription in oogenic
              cells, and potentially associated  changes in nuclease sensitivity, protein-DNA
              interactions, and  methylation at CpG dinucleotides in the promoter regions of
              these  genes in premeiotic and meiotic germ cells.  This will allow us to 
              determine whether gcXCI affects genes in a similar manner in the  germ cells of
              each sex, and to what extent thi s resembles the  effects of scXCI in XX
              somatic cells.  To learn more about the  potential mechanism of gcXCI, we will
              study the Xist gene at the  molecular level, including its regulation, its
              expression, and the  developmental relationship between Xist expression and the
               occurrence of gcXCI.   ***
