Title       : RUI: Predicting Transport Through Heterogeneous Facies Assemblages:
               Geostatistical Anatomy of Buried-Valley Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9305285

Award Number: 9305285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Ritzi robert.ritzi@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Dominic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The inability to sufficiently characterize the spatial distribution            
              of hydraulic conductivity (K) is an obstacle to constructing                   
              reliable predictive models of ground-water flow and pollutant                  
              transport, to remediating ground-water contamination, and to                   
              effectively managing and protecting ground-water resources.  In                
              glacially derived aquifers, it is common to have low-K facies (e.g.            
              till or lacustrine clay) juxtaposed with high-K facies (e.g. sand              
              and gravel outwash).  In the buried-valley aquifers of the western             
              and central plains of North America, assemblages of permeable                  
              outwash facies form large and productive regional aquifer systems.             
              Although the exact geometry of the high-K  and low-K facies can                
              only be determined by a prohibitive amount of subsurface                       
              information, conditional indicator simulation provides a way to                
              compute a number of realizations of facies distributions that have             
              identical spatial covariance structure and that honor available                
              data.  Running transport simulations using a large number of these             
              realizations, and examining the central tendency and variance of               
              simulated contaminant travel times, or the simulated contaminant               
              pathways, can give insight into how contaminants will move through             
              the real system.  However, conditional indicator simulations                   
              require that an adequate indicator variogram model of the spatial              
              covariance of the facies assemblage can be defined from field data,            
              when in fact the field data are often insufficient for this                    
              purpose.  The objective of the proposed research under the Research            
              at Undergraduate Institutions Program is to determine variogram                
              models from field data at a number of locations in a buried-valley             
              aquifer system.  Two undergraduate students will be involved in                
              field work that will create the basis for their senior research                
              projects.  One M.S. student will be involved in the geostatistical             
              analysis of the data.  The conceptual model of a specific facies               
              assemblage will be combined with the variogram model to crate a                
              quantitative hydrofacies model.  As we begin to catalogue                      
              quantitative facies models, we will compare them for similarities              
              and begin to test the hypothesis that one or more archetypal                   
              quantitative hydrofacies can be developed for general types of                 
              facies assemblages in buried-valley aquifer systems.
