Title       : Crystal Structures and Functions of Limulus Hemocyanin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9305250

Award Number: 9305250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Magnus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9305250  Magnus  This project will employ x-ray diffraction methods to establish
               the three-dimensional structures of an important class of  biological
              macromolecules known as hemocyanins ("blue bloods").   Proteins that bind and
              carry oxygen are of fundamental importance  to multicellular animals. 
              Hemocyanins are of particular interest  because they are larger and more
              complex aggregates of subunits  than have routinely been studied previously and
              because of the  interest in the chemical nature of the interaction between
              copper  and oxygen.  The structures of hemocyanins, copper-containing 
              oxygen-transport molecules found in a variety of invertebrates  including
              shrimps, lobsters, crabs, scorpions and spiders, show  the oxygen binding
              geometry in atomic detail.  Because the data  collection time for an x-ray
              diffraction experiment usually spans  several days, the actual mechanistic
              steps involved in binding,  which occurs on a millisecond time scale, are not
              observed  directly.  Instead by studying the protein structure in the  presence
              and absence of oxygen, it is possible to deduce which  the 628 amino acid
              residues that comprise the hemocyanin protein  subunit are likely to be
              involved in oxygen binding and its  regulation.  These predictions may be
              tested by using molecular  biological techniques to produce genetically
              tailored versions of  hemocyanin whose properties may also be examined 
              crystallographically and spectroscopically.  %%%  The goal of the proposed
              project is to extend understanding of  how protein structure effects control of
              functions in  hemocyanins.  These copper-containing proteins are responsible 
              for facilitating oxygen uptake and delivery in a variety of  invertebrates. 
              Cooperative ligand binding in the large molecular  weight subunit aggregates
              that comprise hemocyanin is modulated  by an assortment of effectors including
              protons, divalent cations  and chloride ions.  The proposed x-ray
              crystallographic studies  of the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus, will prov
              ide  information of the conformations of high and low affinity forms  of
              hemocyanin, leading to a better picture of how cooperative  ligan binding
              occurs.  Complementary functional studies will be  performed using
              spectroscopic and kinetic measurements to  characterize hemocyanin fragment,
              subunits, aggregates and  chemically modified forms.  ***
