Title       : Analysis of the Calvin Cycle enzyme Phosphoribulose kinase in a marine autotroph
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9305923

Award Number: 9305923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose Ann Cattolico racat@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              62        Life Science Clinical Medical           
Program Ref : 9117,
Abstract    :
              9305923  Cattolico  Two enzymes, Rubisco (ribulose 1,5 bisphosphate carboxylase)
              and  PRK (phosphoribulose kinase) are exclusively limited to Calvin  cycle
              function.  The structure of PRK differs among organisms. For  example, Purple
              and Cyanobacteria have a PRK holoenzyme containing  6-8 subunits of 240,000
              mwt.  Chlorophytes display a dimeric,  90,000 mwt kinase.  These organisms also
              significantly differ in  the mechanisms by which PRK is regulated.  To date, no
              published  paper exists concerning the biochemistry or genetics of PRK in a 
              marine plant.  The laboratory had no success, after extensive  study, using
              either chlorophytic or purple bacterial PRK  hybridization probes in localizing
              PRK in a chromophytic alga.   These data suggests that additional evolutionary
              signature(s) might  exist for PRK.  The primary goal of this project is to
              identify and  characterize the PRK gene in a marine chromophytic plant.  To
              this  end investigators will isolate and purify PRK to homogeneity using  the
              unicellular alga Heterosigma carterae as a model system.   Microsequencing of
              the purified kinase should allow construction of  appropriate oligonucleotide
              probes which can then be used to locate  the organellar coding site of PRK. 
              This site, once identified,  will allow the gene to be cloned and sequenced. 
              Putative domains  of PRK gene function will be assessed, and phylogenies will
              be  constructed in which the 9 known bacterial and chlorophytic plant 
              sequences will be compared.  The long term goals of this research  will address
              questions concerning the effect of light on PRK  protein (using antibodies) and
              gene (hybridization) regulation in  this golden-brown alga.  %%%  The process
              by which all plants and some bacteria convert CO2  (a"greenhouse" gas) into
              more complex organic molecules is known as  autotrophy.  The Calvin cycle ranks
              as the most universal mechanism  by which autotrophs fix CO2.  Although 1/2 of
              the total carbon  fixed on earth is processed by marine autotrophs that live in
              the  l ighted strata of the ocean, information on Calvin cycle function  in
              eukaryotes has been derived almost exclusively from terrestrial  plants and
              green algae (Chlorophyta).  The research presented in  this proposal on the
              analysis of the Calvin cycle enzyme,  phosphoribulose kinase represents a
              continued aggressive attempt to  address biological questions of survival by
              ocean dwelling  organisms at the molecular level.  The lack of centers
              emphasizing  molecular biotechnology transfer and student education in the
              ocean  sciences is well recognized.  ***
