Title       : Low Temperature Nuclear Spin Relaxation and the Structure and Dynamics of
               Defects in Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9305344

Award Number: 9305344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Norberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Fedders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9305344  Norberg    This project will provide support for a joint theoretical
              and low  temperature experimental study of quantum solids and films and of 
              defects in materials.  Theoretical and pulsed nuclear magnetic  resonance
              investigations will be carried out on molecular hydrogen  and deuterium and
              rare gas atoms physisorbed as thin films on  magnesium oxide, boron nitride,
              and silicon.  These molecules and  atoms will also be studied as
              matrix-isolated species in non-  magnetic hosts and at high pressures in a
              cryogenic nuclear  magnetic resonance (NMR) diamond anvil cell.  Multiple spin
              echoes  unique to adsorbed species will be used to examine dynamics and  phase
              transitions at high densities and under restricted  dimensionality.  A closely
              related effort will examine hydrogen and  deuterium in amorphous semiconducting
              films under conditions where  light-induced metastable changes in the
              electronic properties of  the materials occur.  The theoretical effort will
              include first  principles molecular dynamics simulations on large supercells of
               amorphous silicon containing various dopants.  %%%  This project will provide
              support for a joint theoretical and low  temperature experimental study of
              quantum solids and films and of  defects in materials.  Theoretical and pulsed
              nuclear magnetic  resonance investigations will be carried out on molecular
              hydrogen  and deuterium and rare gas atoms physisorbed as thin films on 
              magnesium oxide, boron nitride, and silicon.  These materials will  also be
              examined at high pressures.  The research involves  fundamental topics as well
              as technologically important subjects  related to defects in materials and the
              role these defects play in  determining materials properties.  For example,
              amorphous  semiconductors doped with various atoms will be investigated to 
              learn more about the properties of these materials which are used  in
              photoconducting solar cells.  The research should shed light on  the metastable
              properties of the photocells which at present li mit  their efficiency and
              practical utility.  ***
