Title       : Characterization of Calcium Binding Proteins Involved in Calcium Regulation in
               Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9305941

Award Number: 9305941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent R. Franceschi vfrances@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305941  Franceschi    In plants, calcium is taken up and transported along with
              water.  The amount taken up in many plants is directly proportional to the 
              amount of calcium in the soil solution.  The water evaporates from  the
              surfaces of the plant and, over time, large amounts of calcium  can accumulate
              in various organs, which necessitates high capacity  calcium sequestration
              systems in the organs of such plants.  It is  hypothesized that calcium oxalate
              formation has evolved as a  mechanism in plants for removing calcium when it is
              present at  levels that can no longer be controlled by the lower-capacity 
              mechanisms common to all cells.  The observations that most plant  families
              produce calcium oxalate, that this product can account for  up to 85% of the
              dry weight of some plant species, and that 90% of  the calcium in plants can be
              in this form, support this hypothesis.   Calcium binding proteins have been
              identified that are specific to  those cells (crystal idioblasts) that produce
              calcium oxalate.  One  protein is cytosolic and shows antigenic similarity to
              animal  calsequestrin.  It is hypothesized that this protein is responsible 
              for buffering the activity of the large fluxes of calcium which  must be
              passing through the cytoplasmic compartment during the  rapid process of
              crystal formation.  Three other proteins have been  found to be associated with
              the calcium oxalate crystal matrix, and  antibodies have been raised to these
              proteins.  These matrix  proteins are thought to be responsible for regulating
              nucleation  and/or growth of the crystals.  The next general goal of this 
              research is to characterize the structure and function of these  unique
              proteins to further understand how they function in calcium  regulation in
              plants.  Specific objectives are to: (1) Characterize  of the molecular
              properties of the matrix proteins by obtaining and  analyzing cDNAs for these
              proteins. (2) Determine the chemical  properties of the matrix proteins.  The
              effects of purified matrix  proteins  on crystal nucleation and growth will be
              studied in vitro.  (3) Resolve the molecular relationship of matrix proteins
              and  crystal matrix.  Immunocytochemical techniques will be used to  determine
              the pattern of protein intercalation in the crystal  matrix. (4) Characterize
              the calsequestrin-like protein.  Using  antibody and cDNA probes to animal
              calsequestrin, a cDNA will be  isolated from a library constructed from Pistia
              stratiotes.  The  cDNA will be sequenced and characterized. (5) Determine the 
              subcellular location of the calsequestrin-like protein by  immunocytochemistry.
               %%%  Calcium is involved in the control of many physiological processes  in
              plants, but excess calcium can be harmful.  Thus, regulation of  calcium is
              critical to normal plant growth, development and  productivity.  Previous
              results from this laboratory suggest that  formation of calcium oxalate
              crystals is a mechanism used by plants  to sequester excess calcium.  This
              research will examine the  mechanisms by which plants form calcium oxalate
              crystals.  The  results will contribute to our understanding of how plants
              regulate  their internal calcium levels.  ***
