Title       : Regulation of Middle Transcription of Phage Mu
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9305924

Award Number: 9305924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha M. Howe mhowe@utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305924  Howe  Bacteriophage Mu is an excellent model system for the study of 
              mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of gene expression.   During lytic
              development Mu exhibits a highly regulated  transcriptional cascade.  Early
              transcription is carried out by  host functions; middle transcription requires
              the middle operon  product C.  This project will involve detailed molecular
              analysis  of the protein factors and DNA sequences involved in regulation of 
              middle operon expression and the role these factors and DNA  replication play
              in middle promoter (Pm) activation.    I.  The role of potential regulatory
              factors discerned from  examination of the promoter DNA sequence--namely, Mu
              repressor and  A proteins, and integration host factor--will be examined.  The 
              proteins will be assayed for their effect on in vitro transcription  from Pm,
              for binding to Pm DNA, and for the effect of mutations  which knock out the
              proposed binding sites.  Mutations which reduce  Pm expression will be isolated
              and examined for their effects on  Mor binding.  The role of the dyad symmetry
              element t9.2 will be  assessed by assaying the effect of mutations in t9.2 on
              Pm  transcription and by determining the effect of increased and  decreased
              transcription at t9.2 on Pm expression.  II.  The DNA binding domain of the Mor
              protein will be localized to  the amino or carboxyl terminus of Mor by making
              hybrid proteins  between Mor and the closely related C protein and determining
              which  end confers promoter specificity.  Then, detailed cassette  mutagenesis
              of the DNA binding domain will be carried out to  isolate suppressor mutations
              which allow Pm promoter-down mutants  to function.  This analysis will indicate
              the amino acids involved  in DNA binding and help to define whether or not Mor
              uses a helix-  turn helix motif for binding.  III.  The mechanism of the
              replication dependence of middle  transcription will be examined by analysis of
              the effect of DNA  supercoiling on Pm transcription, identification of middle
              pro moter  bases contacted by protein factors in dimethylsulfate (DMS) 
              methylation protection assays, and identification of bases which  become single
              stranded during open complex formation by potassium  permanganate (KMn04)
              treatment.  Lastly, a comparison will be made  of the DMS methylation
              protection and KMn04 patterns of replicating  and non-replicating Mu DNA to see
              if there is altered protein  binding or DNA conformation between the two DNA
              forms.  ***  Organisms have evolved a number of regulatory mechanisms which 
              allow them to maintain an appropriate balance of various life  processes.  One
              energy efficient mechanism is to regulate the  expression of specific genes
              such that their products are made only  at the times they are needed.  Viruses
              provide excellent model  systems for the study of these mechanisms, since their
              development  involves the sequential expression of specific sets of genes. 
              This  project involves the molecular analysis of the mechanisms  regulating a
              set of genes expressed at intermediate times during  development of the Mu
              virus, which infects and grows in laboratory  strains of the bacterium E. coli.
               The project will involve precise  definition of the viral and host proteins
              that effect this  regulation by interaction with the regulatory target
              sequences of  the genes and identification of those target sequences and the 
              events occurring at them which turn the genes on and off.  The  approach will
              include isolation and analysis of the effects of  mutations which alter the
              proteins and regulatory sites as well as  biochemical characterization of the
              events occurring under normal  conditions and determination of the role that
              DNA conformation  plays in these processes.  %%%
