Title       : SGER: The Initiation of Mammalian Puberty: Transcriptional Regulation by
               POU-Domain Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9305583

Award Number: 9305583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio R. Ojeda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Reg Primate Res Ctr
	      
	      Beaverton, OR  970063499    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9179,9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There is very little doubt that one of the most meaningful events              
              in the life span of an individual is the acquisition of puberty.               
              Over the years, extensive efforts have been devoted to unravel                 
              the neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying this stage of                         
              development.  Because the neuroendocrine mechanisms involved in                
              the control of puberty are exceedingly complex, progress, to                   
              date, has been slow.  It is clear, however, that the                           
              hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis is the anatomical and                      
              functional core of the process.  Moreover, puberty does not                    
              result from an isolated event, but is rather the consequence of a              
              cascade of interdependent processes initiated very early in                    
              development.  Within this framework, the initiating events are                 
              thought to occur in the brain, where they result in the                        
              synchronous activation of neurons that secrete luteinizing                     
              hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH).  Although the onset and                      
              progression of puberty depends upon the increased production and               
              secretion of LHRH, little is known about the molecular and                     
              cellular events that activate this event.  Dr. Ojeda is one of                 
              the few scientists attempting to tackle this intricate and                     
              perplexing problem.  With this Small Grant for Exploratory                     
              Research (SGER), he will define the gene hierarchy controlling                 
              within the brain the events underlying the initiation of puberty.              
              Dr. Ojeda will examine whether the POU-domain family of homeobox               
              genes are "upstream" components of the hierarchy of genes                      
              controlling neuronal functions relevant to the pubertal                        
              activation of the LHRH neuronal network.  The genes are likely                 
              candidates because they are abundantly expressed in the embryonic              
              hypothalamus, the brain region where LHRH neurons are primarily                
              localized.  Moreover, the expression of some of the genes persist              
              in this LHRH region during post-natal development and even in                  
              adulthood.  Dr. Ojeda will use an experimental model in which                  
              hypothalamic lesions are used to accelerate puberty in immature                
              females.  The results will not only impact greatly on our                      
              understanding of mammalian puberty but would open new avenues for              
              exploring the fundamental role that regulatory genes play in the               
              nervous system.
