Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Spatial Dynamics of the U.S. Investment -
               Management Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9305714

Award Number: 9305714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney A. Erickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9305714  ERICKSON       The tremendous growth of producer-services employment in
              the  United States in the last few decades has resulted in a  proliferation of
              research on the location of producer-service  activities.  General theories of
              producer-services locations have  been evolving, with special attention in
              recent years given to  two divergent perspectives regarding the relative
              importance and  impact of factors like market size, agglomeration economies, 
              labor costs and quality, infrastructure, and amenities.  One  perspective holds
              that the knowledge-intensive nature of many  producer services requires
              frequent face-to-face contact and  sophisticated telecommunications equipment
              usually found in  higher-density urban concentrations.  The other perspective 
              posits that producer services follow firms in the goods-producing  sector and
              gravitate to lower-cost sites outside higher-ordered  urban centers.  This
              doctoral dissertation project will examine  the spatial dynamics over the last
              decade of one set of firms,  the U.S. investment-management industry.  Special
              attention will  be given to examining the spatial distribution of firms and
              their  assets, to assessing the impact of communications and information- 
              handling technologies on locational tendencies, and to  identifying the factors
              that account for the location of  different types of firms.  Both primary and
              secondary data will  be used to examine the pattern and structure of
              investment-  management industry location in 1983, 1987, 1990, and 1993, and a 
              mail questionnaire will elicit from leaders of firms factors that  influence
              their locational decisions.  Follow-up interviews will  explore important
              issues in greater depth, especially the extent  to which information transfer
              via telecommunications links has  become a viable substitute for face-to-face
              communications.       This industry-specific research will contribute to the 
              emerging body of knowledge about producer-services location, and  it will
              provide the basis for furthe ring analyses of the impacts  of telecommunication
              technologies and infrastructure on the  spatial concentration of financial
              services.  As a doctoral  dissertation improvement award, this award also will
              provide  support to enable a promising student to establish a strong 
              independent research career.  ***
