Title       : Crustal Genesis and Mineralization in the Eastern Dharwar Craton, South India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9322645

Award Number: 9322645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31194              (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Rajamani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jawaharlal Nehru Univ
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9322645  Rajamani    Description:  This project supports  collaboration by Dr.
              Gilbert Hanson of State  University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook  with Dr.
              V. Rajamani of Jawaharlal Nehru  University (JNU) in New Delhi on geochemical 
              study of the Eastern Dharwar Craton (EDC) in  South India.  The study is aimed
              at a  hypothesis that the EDC is made up of  accretionary terranes and that
              gold  mineralization occurred associated with  accretion of the terranes.  If
              there are  different terranes, it is intended to determine  the histories of
              the rocks within the various  terranes and determine the timing of their 
              assemblage.  The field work will continue  geological studies in the Ramagiri
              Schist Belt,  and begin studies of the Hutti-Maski Schist  Belt 500 Km north of
              the Kolar Schist Belt  along regional structural trend.  The work will  include
              collecting samples by the U.S. and  Indian scientists in the field, to be
              followed  by chemical analysis mainly at the SUNY  laboratory by the U.S. and
              Indian co-  investigators.  Some of the chemical analysis  will be done at JNU
              by Dr. Rajamani and his  students.    Scope:  This project is building on a
              well-  established working relationship by the two  scientists.  They have
              several joint  publications as a result of their previous  work.  This project
              is likely to continue this  productive scientific cooperation.  U.S.  Graduate
              students and post doctorates, from the  SUNY at Stony Brook, are involved in
              the field  work, and are expected to gain experience in  international research
              efforts.  ***
