Title       : Research Experiences in Marine Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9322221

Award Number: 9322221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Kent bkb@mdibl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Towle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9322221  Kent  This award provides funds to establish an REU Site at the
              Mount Desert Island  Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine.  Ten
              undergraduate biology students, the  majority of whom are expected to be
              African-American, will spend eight weeks during  the summer working at the
              bench, paired with a senior scientist leading a research team  working on
              timely questions involving marine physiology.  Using sharks, skates, flounder 
              and other sea animals, students will explore questions involving marine  
              physiology.  Using sharks, skates, flounder and other sea animals, students
              will explore  questions at the mechanistic level concerning reproduction,
              osmoregulation, acid base  balance, and ion transport.  Orientation lectures on
              basic concepts of marine physiology  and molecular biology during the first
              week will be supplemented by weekly evening  lectures on these subjects
              designed to encourage discussion by the students.   Undergraduates will attend
              the three weekly laboratory-wide science seminars on topics  related to marine
              physiology.  They will participate in a special ethics course taught  around
              expert lectures and group discussions of cases illustrating the ethical issues
              with  which scientists are confronted.  The research experience will be
              completed by each  student giving a talk to the lab community on his/her
              results and writing a research  paper for publication in the laboratory
              Bulletin.  ***
