Title       : Photovoltaic Hydrogen Production, U.S.-Pakistan Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9322623

Award Number: 9322623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86604              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nejat Veziroglu veziroglu@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5943,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9322623  Veziroglu    Description:  This project supports the  participation of
              two U.S. scientists, from the  Clean Energy Research Institute (CERI), 
              University of Miami, with The National  Institute of Silicon Technology (NIST),
              in  Islamabad, Pakistan, in a project to conduct  theoretical and experimental
              studies for  photovoltaic hydrogen production.  Two systems  will be
              investigated, one with a storage system  to even out the diurnal and seasonal 
              insolation, and the other without such storage.   The theoretical study will
              determine the  optimum variables of each of the two systems  under various
              conditions.  In the experimental  investigations, to be carried out in
              Pakistan,  a PV Hydrogen Production demonstration system  will be designed,
              built, operated, and  evaluated.  The results will be used to refine  the
              theory.    Scope:  This project addresses one of the major  problems facing
              many developing countries.   Pakistan is one such country with no oil 
              reserves, but which may be able, by virtue of  being in the sunbelt, to utilize
              solar  radiation for energy and for industrial  applications.  The
              collaboration by the CERI  with the NIST in Pakistan provides a strong 
              combination of complementary capabilities.  The  NIST is backed by the Pakistan
              Ministry of  Science and Technology which has already  allocated the necessary
              resources for the major  part of the project, the experimental part.   The
              project can lead to major benefits to the  U.S. in supplying much of the
              materials and  technology needed, and can benefit Pakistan and  other
              developing countries utilize an endless  source of energy for various
              applications and  industries.  ***
