Title       : Dynamics in Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9322504

Award Number: 9322504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Fayer fayer@fayerlab.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      9322504  Fayer      This research examines fast dynamics and the
              relationship of dynamics to local structure in a variety of condensed matter
              systems using multiple time scale non-linear experiments. The materials to be
              examined include low temperature glasses, high temperature glasses near the
              glass transition, glass forming liquids and the glass transition, and liquids
              with local structure such as liquid crystals and polymer melts.  The proposal
              is divided into three subsections for organizational purposes: (A) Psec
              Vibrational Photon Echoes in Condensed Matter Systems; (B) Optical Coherence
              Studies of Low Temperature Glasses and Glasses and Liquids Near the Glass
              Transition; and (C) Dynamics of Complex Liquids: Glass Forming Liquids, Polymer
              Melts, and Liquid Crystals Probed with Fsec Transient Grating Experiments. The
              information in (A) will provide: 1) a direct method for examining the
              interactions of a molecule's vibrational degrees of freedom with its dynamic
              environment, and 2) detailed insights into dynamics in glasses and liquids and
              dynamical intermolecular interactions. In (B), fluctuation rate distributions
              are mapped out for liquids and glasses. The experiments examine homogeneous
              dephasing and spectral diffusion over a wide range of temperatures and time
              scales. The subsection (C) includes examination of the role of local structure
              on the dynamics of complex liquids.  The experiments span time scales of tens
              of fsec to hundreds of nsec and longer.  %%%  Using laser-based techniques,
              this proposal addresses a number of basic questions concerning the interplay of
              dynamics and structure at the microscopic level.  The materials to be examined
              include low temperature glasses, high temperature glasses near the glass
              transition, glass forming liquids and the glass transition, and liquids with
              local structure such as liquid crystals and polymer melts. The questions to be
              answered are as follows. On what time scales do dynamics in molecular condensed
              matter systems occur? How  do dynamics of a medium influence the mechanical and
              electronic degrees of freedom of an embedded molecule? How does local structure
              determine the nature of dynamics occurring on a molecular level? What are the
              time scales and pathways for the flow of energy into and out of molecules? How
              do differences in the nature of glasses, liquids, and crystals influence
              dynamical processes? How do dynamics in structured liquids, e. g., liquid
              crystals, in polymer melts, and in glass forming liquids differ from dynamics
              in simple liquids?
