Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Summer Undergraduate Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9322368

Award Number: 9322368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winship Herr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9322368  Herr  This award provides funds to continue a successful REU Site
              at Cold Spring Harbor  Laboratory.  The program annually sponsors between ten
              to twenty undergraduates from  throughout the United States for an intensive
              ten-week long summer research  experience.  The students are housed on grounds
              and each one is assigned to a  permanent Laboratory staff member to perform an
              independent research project in the  mentor's field of expertise.  Each student
              begins his or her project with the advisor's  close guidance and is
              subsequently encouraged to work independently.  This allows  students to
              develop to their full potential and to sample first hand the excitement of 
              experimental science.  During the program the students present two series of
              seminars:  one in which the students describe their proposed research and a
              final series in which  the results of each project are summarized.  There is
              also a series of seminars specifically  for the undergraduates in addition to
              daily lectures given as part of the Laboratory series  of post-graduate biology
              courses.  This undergraduate research program is very  oversubscribed and,
              therefore, focuses on selection of individuals who, with proper  direction, are
              likely to make a contribution to science in their ensuing careers.  Strong 
              emphasis is placed on recruiting women, underrepresented minorities, and
              students who  attend undergraduate institutions where research opportunities
              are not easily available,  and on encouraging these individuals to pursue
              research careers.  The success of the  program is evidenced by the number of
              past participants who go on to excellent graduate  schools and have become
              eminent scientists.  ***
