Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Ecology and Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9322162

Award Number: 9322162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy J. Hatch hatch@umbsky.cc.umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322162  Hatch  This award provides funds to continue a successful REU SITE at
              the University of  Massachusetts, Boston for another three years.  The two
              complementary components of the  program are:  (1) individual research projects
              in which each student works closely with an  advisor/mentor experienced with
              undergraduates, and (2) weekly lectures/discussions for all  the students. 
              Eleven undergraduates will participate in research with nine faculty sponsors
              in  the Department of Biology.  Students will be recruited intensively in the
              Boston area and also  elsewhere in New England and further afield, with
              particular attention to women, minorities  and non-traditional students.  The
              research is focused on issues of biodiversity and  conservation ecology but
              topics are intentionally diverse.  They include three on the  behavioral
              ecology of rare/endangered vertebrates, and others on the physiological ecology
              of  Lepidoptera, the diversity of bacteria, the genetics of endangered plants,
              and the genetic  diversity of deep-sea mollusks.  Each student will prepare a
              report and present a short paper  in a student research symposium.  The group
              meetings will address the theory and practice of  research and its conduct or
              its implications, including ethical issues.  Some of these ethical  components
              will be shared with REU students at Wellesley College and Boston University.   
              Participants will also visit two or more field sites and learn directly about
              each others'  projects.  A small hands-on workshop on molecular techniques will
              show the great potential  of such methods for ecology.  An end-of-session
              retreat at the University Field Station on  Nantucket Island will serve to
              articulate impressions, explore philosophical issues, and weave  together some
              of the summers' threads.  ***
