Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Prairie Ecology at Prairie Research
               Natural Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9322177

Award Number: 9322177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Post dpost@ksuvm.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Dale Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  This award will establish an REU Site at the Konza Prairie/Long-Term
              Ecological  Research Site.  The program will offer ten undergraduates the
              opportunity to study tall  grass prairie ecology.  Foci of Long-Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) project on Konza  Prairie include the study of fire and grazing
              on native tallgrass prairie.  To facilitate  investigation of these impacts,
              watersheds on Konza Prairie have been assigned to  different burn regeims. 
              Additionally, native and domestic grazers have been introduced  to many
              watersheds.  Thus, Konza Prairie offers a unique opportunity for the study of 
              many aspects of prairie ecology.  The REU project will involve several
              components  including, independent student research, rotation through existing
              LTER core research  projects, student journal discussion groups correlated with
              faculty seminars, an eight-  week ethics course, and several field trips.  In
              order to enhance their professional  development, students will participate in
              two national scientific meetings.  Each REU  student will have both a faculty
              and graduate student mentor to support their research   research efforts.  At
              the conclusion of the summer, students will make an oral  presentation of the
              results of their research and, in conjunction with their mentors, will  prepare
              and submit projects to journals for publication.  The Konza Prairie REU 
              experience will offer students a unique opportunity to study the ecology of the
              tallgrass  prairie in a productive and supportive environment.
