Title       : Theory of Tetrahedral Amorphous Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9322412

Award Number: 9322412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Drabold drabold@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9322412  Drabold  This is a new award for computationally-intensive theoretical 
              research to study tetrahedral amorphous carbon.  It has recently  been
              demonstrated that a fourfold-coordinated form of amorphous  carbon, tetrahedral
              amorphous carbon, is a semiconductor; can be  doped both positive and negative;
              shows photoconductivity and has  been employed to make simple devices.  A
              theoretical research  program will be undertaken to determine the properties of
              this  material.  The research will provide detailed studies of the atomic 
              scale structure and electrical properties using first principles  methods. 
              Defects in the amorphous network will be identified and  their effects on
              carrier transport will be examined.  The  properties of several impurities, but
              especially the demonstrated  shallow donors, will be explored.  A limited study
              of the effects  of hydrogen on material properties will be performed.  The
              surface  structure of the material will be determined with a view to  producing
              surface structural models that will be useful to future  atomistic or Monte
              Carlo growth studies.  The vibrational  properties and stability of the
              material will also be investigated.   A complementary effort will be directed
              toward improvement of the  efficiency of existing computational techniques for
              first  principles simulations of tetrahedral amorphous carbon and other 
              chemically bonded materials.  %%%  This is a compuational research project to
              study the properties of  an amorphous form of carbon.  This material has been
              shown to have  many interesting properties which may have significant impact on
               microelectronics - not the least of which is that it is a  semiconductor. 
              Thus, the material seems to have many of the  desirable electronic properties
              of diamond.  The research will  provide one of the first comprehensive
              theoretical studies of this  new material.  ***
