Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates Site Project: Undergraduate Research in
               Plant Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9322342

Award Number: 9322342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Blanton brrlb@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9322342  Blanton  This award provides funds to the Department of Biological
              Sciences at Texas Tech  University to establish a Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates Site.  The goal of this  project is to involve undergraduate
              students in basic research in plant biology.  Students  often have an inherent
              bias towards research involving animals.  This program will try  and overcome
              this bias by presenting the students with the opportunity to participate in a 
              plant-focused program involving a variety of disciplines, approaches, and
              techniques.   Eleven plant scientists in three department have volunteered to
              serve as mentors.  They  included biochemists, cell biologists, developmental
              biologists, molecular biologists,  physiologists and systematists. 
              Opportunities exist for both field-oriented and laboratory-  oriented research.
               Available research techniques include DNA sequencing, protein  electrophoresis
              and immunoblotting, immunocytochemistry, light and electron  microscopy, in
              situ hybridation, analysis of genomes using PCR-based methods, isozyme 
              analysis, spectrophotometric analysis of enzyme activities, plant tissue
              culture, plant  transformations, and a variety of molecular biological methods.
               Aspects of the program  that should enhance its potential for success include:
               (1) a group orientation session in  which the students will learn basic
              laboratory skills, engage in radiation and chemical  safety training, and be
              introduced to using the library to find scientific literature; (2) an  effort
              to develop student camaraderie by presenting the students with the opportunity
              to  participate in group activities with the other plant biology students as
              well as a larger  group of biology undergraduate research students; and (3) the
              provision by a related  program of funds for quests speakers in the plant
              sciences, student travel funds to attend  meetings, and student research supply
              funds.  ***
