Title       : Role of Coenzyme Q in Regenerating Vitamin E
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1994       
File        : a9322598

Award Number: 9322598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerian Kagan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kagan  9322598  The reduction of ubiquinones by electron transport results in
              the  formation of ubiquinols which donate electrons to phenoxyl radicals  of
              vitamin E, thereby regenerating the vitamin and conserving its  limited supply.
               In the absence of vitamin E (in vitamin E  deficiency), redox-cycling of
              ubiquinones may result in the  generation of oxygen radicals and oxidative
              damage of membranes;  these are prooxidant effects of ubiquinones.  We suggest
              that the  involvement of ubiquinones:  electron transport-dependent 
              antioxidant function in the presence of vitamin E and prooxidant in  the
              absence of vitamin E is the subject of this proposal.  The  present proposal is
              to undertake a limited feasibility study to  determine the limits of
              sensitivity in detecting phenoxyl radicals  of vitamin E generated from
              endogenous levels of the vitamin in  microsomal membranes so that the
              hypothesis can be critically  tested.  An increase in sensitivity and spectral
              resolution is  expected by using a pulsed Fourier transform ESR spectrometer 
              recently commissioned at London University.  The instrument will be  used to
              characterize phenoxyl radicals of vitamin E and possibly  ubisemiquinone
              radicals and provide preliminary data for use in  drafting a fuyll proposal for
              NSF funding of a new initiative aimed  to understand the role of coenzyme Q in
              mechanisms of vitamin E  regeneration in membranes.  %%%  Vitamin E and
              Coenzyme Q (ubiquinones) are indispensible components  of cellular membranes. 
              In mitochondria, ubiquinones act as key  elements in energy producing
              machinery.  We suggest that  ubiquinones have an additional function in
              mitochondria and other  electron transport membranes: they are involved in
              membrane  antioxidant protection by interacting with vitamin E.  Vitamin E is 
              the major lipid-soluble antioxidant of membranes which protects  membranes
              against oxidative stress.  The reduction of ubiquinones  by electron transport
              results in the formation of ubiquinols which  can recycle vitamin E  thus
              conserving its limited supply.  This  antioxidant function of ubiquinones is
              vitamin E-dependent.   Moreover, in the absence of vitamin E (in vitamin E
              deficiency),  ubiquinones may be involved in the generation of oxygen radicals 
              and oxidative damage of membranes.  We suggest that the involvement  of
              ubiquinones in vitamin E recycling is the major mechanism of the  ubiquinone
              antioxidant action in electron transport membranes.  An  investigation of these
              two roles of ubiquinones - as an electron  transport-dependent antioxidant in
              the presence of vitamin E and as  a prooxidant in the absence of vitamin E - is
              the subject of this  proposal.  ***
