Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Shift Dynamics, Symmetry and and Algebriac K-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9322498

Award Number: 9322498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Wagoner wagoner@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9322498  Wagoner       This project will investigate the dynamics of shift
              spaces  and flows, their symmetry groups, and connections with algebraic 
              K-theory.  There are generally many ways of describing or  constructing shift
              systems which have essentially the same  dynamical behaviour.  Even in the
              one-dimensional case,  effectively recognizing when two concrete models are
              equivalent  is a fundamental open problem.  Another natural and related 
              problem is to understand the different equivalences or symmetries  between two
              systems.  One approach to the classification and  symmetry group problems for
              one-dimensional shift systems which  has led to progress on some of the main
              problems in the field in  recent years involves analogies from algebraic
              K-theory.  In  turn, the geometry of both discrete-time and continuous-time 
              dynamical systems and their symmetry groups has very naturally  given rise to a
              new type of positive algebraic K-theory for  ordered rings, using the usual row
              and column operations on  matrices, but with certain inequalities imposed.     
               The main mathematical structures under investigation here,  shift dynamical
              systems and Markov chains, are useful models for  phenomena in areas ranging
              from differential equations, to  statistical mechanics, to information and
              coding theory.   However, their usefulness is impaired by the surprising 
              difficulty of deciding when two shift systems which arose in  different ways
              enjoy essentially the same dynamical behaviour.   This is related to
              understanding the different equivalences or  symmetries between two systems. 
              (Symmetries of a given system  are often called reversible cellular automata.) 
              Now the  investigator has shown that a very abstract algebraic theory  known as
              algebraic K-theory can be invaluable in addressing some  of these problems. 
              Analogies from algebraic K-theory have led  unexpectedly to exciting progress
              on some of the main problems in  symbolic dynamics.  Moreover, looking at
              matters the other way  round has led  to a new type of K-theory, whose problems
              are of  interest both intrinsically and for the insight they will bring  back
              to dynamical systems and their symmetries.  ***
