Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Markov Dependence in Statistics andInformation Theory
               and Statistical Problems in Physical Mapping"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9322817

Award Number: 9322817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bin Yu binyu@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the main goals of the Human Genome Project is to produce  physical maps
              of the human chromosomes.  Such maps are important  steps on the path to the
              complete sequencing of chromosomes, and  have other important applications,
              such as assisting in the  localizing of disease genes.  A common method for
              constructing  physical maps is based on fingerprinting random clones. The 
              proposed research uses information theory notions to quantify  information
              needed for the completion of a physical map, and  information obtained from
              random clone data.  Maximizing the  mutual information between a configuration
              variable and data is  also proposed as a design criterion to select the
              hybridization  probability parameter.  Numerical and analytic approximations to
               the criterion will be considered in the simple pairwise  comparison case, on
              which most current physical mapping  strategies are based.  Optimal values of
              the parameter can then  be obtained using these approximations.  Finally, it
              will be  addressed how to utilize mapping information to localize  positions of
              genes of interest on the chromosomes.    The proposed research is on applying
              information theory to  physical mapping problems arising from the Human Genome
              Project.   An information-theoretic approach is proposed to address certain 
              problems arising from physical mapping in the Human Genome  Project.  The goals
              of a physical map will be clarified and we  will answer questions regarding the
              amount of information we need  for and the amount we learn about the map.  A
              3-clone approach is  expected to extract more information out of mapping data
              than  from 2-clone data, and the possibility of using mapping data to  locate
              genes of biological interest will be better understood.
