Title       : REU SITE: Undergraduate Earth Sciences at the University of New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9322243

Award Number: 9322243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97016              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl E. Karlstrom kek1@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Geissman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9322243  Karlstrom       The goal of this project is to develop a sustainable 
              undergraduate research program at the University of New Mexico  (UNM).  We will
              be making research an integral part of our  undergraduate program with a strong
              emphasis upon recruiting women  and minorities into the sciences.       The
              proposal has two related components.  First, Junior and  Senior geology majors
              will conduct geologic research in conjunction  with a faculty mentor.  Second,
              Hispanic and American Indian  students will be offered jobs by faculty mentors
              in support of  ongoing research; these jobs will lead towards development of
              more  independent undergraduate research projects.  Our experience from  past
              REU projects is that undergraduates are enthusiastic about  solving research
              problems, but they need this type of close  supervision in order to conduct and
              complete high quality research.       The unifying concept is to integrate more
              undergraduate  students into existing interactive departmental research
              programs.   These include structural geology and tectonics, paleomagnetism, 
              basin studies, enviornmental geology, planetary sciences and  volcanology.  New
              Mexico is an ideal site for field-based research  and the Department of Earth
              and Planetary Sciences has excellent  analytical facilities to support
              undergraduate research.  Further,  the University of New Mexico has large
              numbers of Hispanic and  Native American students and has made a major
              commitment to  minority education.  Nevertheless, minorities are still under 
              represented in the sciences.  We feel that an REU site grant can  have a major
              impact in fostering undergraduate research and  education in general, and in
              recruiting minorities into the earth  sciences.
