Title       : Chemical Defense in Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9322776

Award Number: 9322776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Fenical wfenical@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9117,9189,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The focus of this research is a chemically-based program to explore the
              natural products  chemistry and chemical ecology of marine plants and animals. 
              Chemical studies of new,  bioactive natural products from ascidians, gorgonians
              and bryozoans will be carried out,  involving the application of new methods in
              separation science and organic structure  determination.  Also studies to
              comprehend the regioselective reactivities and skeletal  interrelationships of
              selected secondary metabolites will be explored.  Working with marine 
              ecologists studies will be performed to illustrate the possible functions, such
              as chemical defense,  of secondary metabolites in competitive marine habitats. 
              The project emphasizes ecologically  relevant testing of pure substances using
              natural predators in controlled experiments in a natural  marine setting.   
              With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of
              Dr. William H.  Fenical of the Marine Research Division at the University of
              California, San Diego's Scripps  Institution of Oceanography.  Professor
              Fenical will focus his work on exploring the natural  products chemistry and
              chemical ecology of marine plants and animals.  The project will study  the
              sources, types and reactivities of molecules produced by marine organisms and
              will explore  the natural functions of these molecules in the interspecies
              interactions within marine habitats.   By creating a linkage of chemists and
              biologists, the program will allow one to understand how  these organic
              molecules influence the biological composition of tropical marine environments.
