Title       : Strategies for Using Advanced Computer Architectures in Chemical Process
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9322682

Award Number: 9322682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Stadtherr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9322682  Stadtherr       Advanced computer architectures, in particular those
              involving  some form of parallel and/or vector processing, provide the power 
              to greatly enhance the ability of the engineer to realistically  model,
              simulate, design, and optimize complex chemical  manufacturing processes,
              steady- and unsteady-state.  The goal of  this project is to develop techniques
              for solving such problems,  taking full advantage of this enhanced processing. 
              One focus of  this work is the development of techniques for efficiently
              solving  these systems on vector/parallel computers.  The techniques to be 
              considered are based on the frontal and multifrontal direct  methods, and on
              iterative Krylov subspace methods with incomplete  factorization
              preconditioners.  A second focus for this project is  the use of parallelism to
              maintain robustness in process simulation  and optimization computations. 
              Techniques based on interval  analysis will be applied.  Since interval methods
              are amenable to  parallel computing, their use on these problems is now
              feasible.       The application of advanced computer architectures in chemical 
              process engineering is one of great potential.  The rapid  turnaround that can
              be provided by vector/parallel machines  improves engineering productivity,
              meaning more critical deadlines  met, faster times to market, and more timely
              responses to changes  in business, economic, and regulatory conditions.  The
              ability to  use more complex and realistic process models means a better 
              understanding of process fundamentals, thus reducing the need for  overdesign,
              and providing the insights needed to better attain  environmental and quality
              control goals.
