Title       : Functionalization of Inorganic Network Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1996     
File        : a9322265

Award Number: 9322265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Bianconi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Bianconi  The overall goal of this proposal is to optimize the properties of 
              new inorganic polymer network materials and to create others of  specific
              designed properties by new synthetic techniques.  The  approach is to use a
              recently devised process for the  functionalization of polysilyne network
              polymers to introduce new  functional groups which enhance, modify, or create
              new electronic  and physical properties in the polymers.  Specifically,
              fluorinated  and alkoxide side chains will be explored as means of improving 
              these polymers' sensitivities as deep UV photoresists.  Grafted  polymer
              sidechains will also be studied as means of altering the  polymers' solubility
              properties and decreasing their absorptivities  at 193 nm, the target
              wavelength in microlithographic applications.  Attempt will be made to create
              new surface-imaging methods, and  new materials, by applying functionalization
              reaction sequence  to solid-state surfaces.  Finally, syntheses and properties
              will be  optimized for two new network backbone polymer systems, the 
              polystannynes and the polycarbynes.  The tin-based polymers will be  studied as
              soluble photolytic precursors to conductive and  transparent optical glasses,
              and the carbon-based polymers will be  studied as examples of
              previously-unknown carbon-based  macromolecules and as low temperature and
              pressure precursors to  diamond and hard carbon ceramics.   %%%  The overall
              goal of this proposal is to optimize the properties of  new inorganic polymer
              network materials and to create others of  specific designed properties by new
              synthetic techniques.  A  recently devised process will be used to introduce
              new functional  groups which enhance, modify, or create new electronic and
              physical  properties in the polymers.  The development of such new materials 
              would have substantial impact on the development of new fabrication  and
              processing procedures for electronic and photonic devices and  for the
              understanding of the fundamental chemistry and properties  of soluble 
              inorganic network.
