Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Toplogy of Riemann's Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9322042

Award Number: 9322042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Penner rpenner@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9322042  Penner       The investigator will continue his study of the geometry
              and  topology of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces.  Specifically,  he will
              study a natural simplicial completion of Teichmueller  space, where the
              associated compactification of moduli space is  conjectured to be an orbifold;
              this compactification should be a  useful tool for several enumerative problems
              in geometry.   Various arithmetic aspects of moduli space will be studied: 
              polylogarithm identities should be derived from canonical forms  on moduli
              space; there should be a map from moduli space to  Volodin space relating the
              cohomology of moduli space with  algebraic K-theory; number fields associated
              to fatgraphs a  la Grothendieck's dessin d'enfant should be calculated for the 
              investigator's existing database of fatgraphs.  This same  database should be
              used to calculate homology groups of various  moduli spaces on the computer. 
              There are, moreover, many  outstanding analytic and arithmetic questions to be
              studied about  his universal Teichmueller space, which is simply the space of 
              orientation-preserving homeomorphisms of the circle modulo the  Moebius group. 
              Several of the projects above are closely  related to various developments in
              physics.       A basic object in mathematics, called the "moduli space of 
              Riemann surfaces," has been studied for centuries.  Roughly, this  moduli space
              is the collection of all possible geometric shapes  on a fixed two-dimensional
              surface.  In the last decade or so,  our understanding of moduli space has
              increased, both because of  developments in mathematics, as well as new and
              exciting  interfaces with high-energy physics.  Indeed, many idealized but 
              interesting real physics problems amount to questions about the  geometry of
              moduli space itself, and this has provided a  remarkable influx of techniques,
              questions, and ideas, both to  mathematics and to physics.  In this project,
              the investigator  will continue his ongoing mathematical study of moduli space
              and  furt her study certain of these interfaces with high-energy  physics.  ***
