Title       : Beyond the Industrial Revolution in the Middle School: Teacher Enhancement in
               Science, Mathematics and Technology Through Interdisciplinary Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1990  
File        : a9050295

Award Number: 9050295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Pershey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project, entitled Beyond the Industrial Revolution in                     
              the Middle School, will provide a teacher enhancement program                  
              for Middle School teachers. It will be offered for three                       
              summers to 10 "Core Teachers" and 20 regular teachers making                   
              a total of 90 teachers served altogether. The "Core Teachers"                  
              have the additional responsibility for follow-up activities                    
              with their colleagues as well as course development for the                    
              summer program. The program is interdisciplinary and follows                   
              the broad topic: the industrial society as a manufacturing                     
              and distribution system for material goods. The emphasis and                   
              focus will be on several subtopics including production                        
              engineering, transportation,energy and power, industrial                       
              chemistry, mathematical tools and the underlying social                        
              system. The summer program will be three weeks in length.                      
              Follow-up and evaluation activities are included in the                        
              program.  The goals of the project are: to provide Middle                      
              School Teachers with new information outside their own                         
              discipline and to enhance their ability to work across two or                  
              more disciplines so as to spark enthusiasm and interest in                     
              science, technology and mathematics in their students; to                      
              encourage the teaching of science, technology and mathematics                  
                                                                                             
              in the broad context of history and contemporary social                        
                                                                                             
              issues across the disciplines as well as in the separate                       
                                                                                             
              disciplines; and to develop a model for teacher enhancement                    
                                                                                             
              in interdisciplinary studies so that this broad contextual                     
                                                                                             
              approach can be sustained within the Middle School                             
                                                                                             
              curriculum.  The project will be held at the Tsongas                           
                                                                                             
              Industrial History Center and will involve Center staff and                    
                                                                                             
              University of Lowell faculty in science, engineering,                          
                                                                                             
              mathematics and history. The institute will include formal                     
                                                                                             
              classes, hands-on and laboratory experiences and field trips.                  
                                                                                             
              The cost of the project covered by the National Science                        
                                                                                             
              Foundation is $607,219 and is being matched by $230,217 from                   
                                                                                             
              the Tsongas Industrial History Center. This constitutes a                      
                                                                                             
              match of about 38%.
