Title       : Using a Constructivist Approach to Improve the Teaching and Learning of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1990   
File        : a9050322

Award Number: 9050322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $669959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell M. Agne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Strauss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year project, Using a Constructivist Approach to                    
              Improve the Teaching and Learning of Science, was submitted by                 
              the University of Vermont and will create collaborating teams of               
              scientists and learning specialists from the University and                    
              designated teachers from the participating school districts.                   
              These teams will provide three-week summer institutes and                      
              follow-up academic year workshops in the teaching and learning                 
              of science from a constructivist approach.                                     
                                                                                             
              During the three years, forty elementary teachers will be                      
              selected in teams, which include an administrator, from the                    
              participating school districts, Colchester, Franklin NW                        
              (Swanton), Lamoille South (Morrisville/Stowe), Southwest Vt                    
              Supervisory Union (Bennington), Addison Northeast (Bristol),                   
              Rutland NE (Brandon), and Barre Town. The teams are committed to               
              participate in three consecutive summers concentrating on the                  
              integration of the content (chemistry, physics and geology) and                
              current pedagogy (cooperative learning, writing to learn)                      
              necessary to implement a constructivist active learning approach               
              to the teaching of science.  Included in the yearly workshops                  
              will be sessions on adult development to help these teachers                   
              appreciate the requirements for good inservice delivery.  The                  
              three summers plus intervening academic year workshops will                    
              enable these forty teachers to provide their peers with the                    
              intellectual and technical assistance to teach science                         
              effectively.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The documented cost-sharing from the districts and UVM is equal                
              to 20% of the NSF request, with additional in-kind contributions               
              indicated.
