Title       : Habitat Ecology Training Program, A Project to Train Elementary School Teachers
               in the Use of Zoological Collections to Enhance Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9050268

Award Number: 9050268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James D. Ellis                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $593587             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette R. Berkovits   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      185th Street & Southern Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this program enhance the ability of elementary                  
              school teachers to use the collections of zoos as living                       
              laboratories for their students.  Teachers from New York City                  
              as well as teams of teachers from across the United States                     
              will take part in the project. To support such widespread                      
              activity, fifteen additional zoos will participate directly                    
              sending a team of zoo educators and local teachers.  Ecology                   
              will be the overarching theme of the inservice activity and                    
              the participants will learn to use the zoo as an outdoor                       
              classroom for teaching about the earth's biomes and animal                     
              adaptations to habitats.  Specifically, the workshop series                    
              will highlight problems associated with endangered species,                    
              and will target the study of rain forests, deserts, wetlands,                  
              deciduous forests and grasslands.  As a result of the                          
              inservice a teachers' manual will be produced which will                       
              support the participants as they work with others to improve                   
              the teaching of life science at the elementary level.  The                     
              manual will also have many suggestions about inquiry                           
              activities that can be done at zoos or before or after                         
              visits.  It will be a valuable resource to teachers as well                    
              as others who are responsible introducing children to wealth                   
              of ideas, concepts and process that can be learned by                          
              studying animals in the zoo environment.                                       
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing for the project will be thirty percent of                     
              the NSF portion.
