Title       : Modern Infrared Spectrophotometry in the Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9050459

Award Number: 9050459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12617              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin B. Jones mbjones@adams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adams State College
	      
	      Alamosa, CO  81102    303/589-7121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project has provided students with experience in classical and            
              modern techniques of infrared spectroscopy through frequent and                
              varied use of a modern FT-IR spectrophotometer.  The department                
              purchased a Perking Elmer 1650 FT-IR with a disk drive, plotter,               
              diffuse reflectance and variable angle specular reflectance                    
              accessories and a Sadtler IR library.  Students in general chemistry           
              encounter the FT-IR in a demonstration setting.  The instrument                
              receives frequent use in organic chemistry where the students are              
              introduced to instrument operation and spectral comparison.  Several           
              experiments require the capabilities of the FT-IR, rather than a               
              conventional, instrument.  Students in a polymer chemistry laboratory          
              course take advantage of the reflectance accessories.  Use in                  
              analytical chemistry emphasizes small sample size capability, diffuse          
              reflectance and Fourier Transform theory.  Physical chemistry uses             
              the FT-IR to obtain some of the spectra needed to interpret                    
              rotational-vibrational spectra of HCl.  Biochemistry uses the                  
              instrument as an aid in isolation and identification of small                  
              biomolecules.  Undergraduate research utilizes the instrument when             
              it is available and appropriate to the project.  This project allows           
              students significantly more experience with infrared spectroscopy              
              because analysis time is much less and the capabilities are much               
              greater.  Students gain experience in modern infrared spectroscopy             
              techniques such as diffuse and specular reflectance, micro analysis            
              and computer based libraries.  The use of a Fourier transform                  
              instrument enhances understanding of this powerful tool.                       
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to the project in an amount equal to the           
              NSF funds.
