Title       : Project "SEED": Science Education through Experiments and Demonstrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1991     
File        : a9050359

Award Number: 9050359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Silevitch msilevit@lynx.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Cromer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos Zahopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Project SEED is a 33 month program sponsored by Northeastern                   
              University to enhance middle level science teachers' use of                    
              experiments, demonstrations and projects in their classes.                     
              It is based on the well-established notion that an                             
              understanding of the basic concepts requires extensive prior                   
              experience with concrete examples of these projects.  Working                  
              with an advisory group of science supervisors and                              
              coordinators from both urban and suburban Boston-area                          
              schools, a comprehensive program has been developed to train                   
              teachers to incorporate demonstrations and experiments into                    
              their individual teaching styles.  The principal component of                  
              Project SEED is a four-week summer program, held for two                       
              summers, which involve workshop sessions, seminars and field                   
              experiences.  Twelve day-long workshop sessions will focus on                  
              demonstrations and experiments that will give middle-school                    
              students concrete experience with the basic concepts and                       
              physical laws that underlie all of science.  Topics covered                    
              include: length and time; area and volume; mass and density;                   
              pressure and weather; force, work and energy; motion; earth                    
              and the solar system; elements and compounds; optics; heat                     
              and temperature; and electricity and magnetism.  Each                          
              workshop session will involve a variety of activities that                     
              can be adapted to a diversity of teaching situations and                       
              curricula.  Participants will also help build museum-style                     
              exhibits.  These exhibits will be designed to give the students                
              a joyful interaction with science, spark their interest and                    
              curiosity and to provide them with some hands-on experiences                   
              which may not otherwise be available.  Aiding the participants                 
              in the workshop activities and the museum projects will be two                 
              teacher interns who have been selected from previous summer                    
              workshop programs.  Arrangements have been made with public                    
              utilities, private corporations and government laboratories for                
              special seminars and tours aimed at connecting curricular                      
              material to everyday industrial and scientific practice.  There                
              will also be seminars and visits to research laboratories at                   
              Northeastern University. Prior to the summer program, two                      
              seminars and site visits will be held with the participants to                 
              assess their individual needs, interests and strengths, and the                
              facilities available to them.  After the summer program, the                   
              participating teachers will meet individually with members of                  
              the Project staff to develop a set of goals for implementing                   
              workshop ideas in their classes.  Follow-up seminars and site                  
              visits will be conducted to help the teachers meet their                       
              specific goals.     A formative evaluation procedure will be                   
              used to help the teachers assess how much their teaching                       
              benefited from the program.  The NSF share of the project is                   
              $326,169 which is being matched by $206,952 from the                           
              institution.  This constitutes a match of more than 63%.
