Title       : An Early Research Experience for Chemistry Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1990     
File        : a9050588

Award Number: 9050588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart M. Rosenfeld ROSENFELD@SMITH.SMITH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Department of Chemistry has recently completed an extensive                
              review and revision of the curriculum.  A central and novel                    
              feature of the new curriculum is fourth-semester course called                 
              Synthesis that supports a number of new curriculum goals,                      
              including independence, involvement, and early experiences in                  
              research.  To be fully successful, Synthesis should be taught in               
              an environment where there is easy access to the tools required                
              for purification and characterization of compounds and further                 
              structural studies,  The equipment obtained through this project.              
              allows the department to fully realize this goal.  A graphics                  
              package updated the IBM nmr spectrometer, dramatically enhancing               
              accessibility for less experienced operators.  A preparative,                  
              radically accelerated chromatograph affords separations that are               
              rapid enough for routine use.  Finally, computers and software                 
              allow in-lab molecular mechanics modeling routinely during the                 
              course of more traditional lab work.  With these and other                     
              available tools and labs that are designed around chemistry that               
              is conceptually accessible at the second-year -level, student are              
              able to formulate their own questions and propose and execute                  
              experiments to explore those questions.                                        
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
