Title       : The Construction of Elementary Mathematics Project (CEM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9050032

Award Number: 9050032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490961             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Construction of Elementary Mathematics Project (CEM)                       
                                                                                             
              Penn State University will develop, implement, and evaluate a                  
              model program to prepare elementary mathematics teachers                       
              based on a constructivist view of learning.  The program will                  
              consist of a coordinated, four-course sequance, three                          
              mathematics content courses and one course on mathematics                      
              learning and teaching.  The mathematics courses will be based                  
              on the NCTM Standards (1989) and the instruction in these                      
              courses will provide the prospective elementary teachers with                  
              the constructivist model of teaching.  The coordinated course                  
              sequence will make the connection between the development of                   
              subject matter knowledge and the development of pedagogical                    
              knowledge in mathematics.  In addition, CEM will study the                     
              nature of prospective teachers' learning, development, and                     
              attitudes as they participate in the new program.  A new                       
              instrument to assess the subject matter knowledge of                           
              elementary teachers in mathematics will be developed for the                   
              project.  The research component of the project will evaluate                  
              and document the new model and contribute to the knowledge                     
              base for future teacher preparation efforts.  Faculty from                     
              the mathematics department and                                                 
              from the mathematics education department will work jointly in                 
              developing the program.  Consultants who are leaders in                        
              mathematics, mathematics education, and teacher education will                 
              advise the project.  Classroom teachers will participate in                    
              planning courses and in providing classroom expertise to the                   
              preservice teachers during the methods course.  The instructional              
              model developed by the project and the research findings will be               
              disseminated to the statewide network of Commonwealth campuses                 
              and teacher centers in Pennsylvania.  The University's cost                    
              sharing will be 17% of NSF's contribution.
