Title       : Model Mathematics Program for Elementary School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1990      
File        : a9050017

Award Number: 9050017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333872             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Duane Porter adporter@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of Wyoming project is to develop and test a                     
              model for improving the mathematics education of preservice                    
              teachers. The model project will develop a program based upon                  
              the research-documented teaching strategies of the learning                    
              cycle and the use of cooperative groups.  The content                          
              decisions will be guided by the NCTM Curriculum and                            
              Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics.  The intent of                    
              the program is to educate teachers for the elementary schools                  
              that will be able to implement the NCTM Standards into their                   
              elementary school classrooms. This includes attention to the                   
              content to be taught and to the restructuring of the                           
              classroom environment in such a way that students will be                      
              able to construct deeper understanding of the mathematics                      
              studied.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              One of the major goals of the project is that the graduates                    
              understand many connections between the content of                             
              mathematics and science as well as the related pedagogies.                     
              The students will have a content/methods/practicum/student                     
              teaching sequence which will involve experienced teachers                      
              that have been educated to be mentors in mathematics and                       
              science.  The science and mathematics faculty is working with                  
              the education faculty and public school teachers and                           
              principals to develop, test, revise, and institutionalize the                  
              program.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Communication, problem solving, reasoning, searching for                       
              patterns and valuing mathematics will be overall themes for                    
              the mathematics course development.  The content selected                      
              will be organized into activities and problems that will                       
              allow the development of these ways of thinking and reasoning                  
              in mathematics.  New content emphases will be included in the                  
              courses, for example, decision making under uncertainty which                  
              will use many science contexts for investigation.                              
                                                                                             
              The learning cycle model of teaching has been developed in                     
              science education.  However, it is consistent with                             
              constructivist views of learning.  The phases that are                         
              emphasized in the learning cycle are 1) motivating the study                   
              (introduction), 2) exploration, 3) concept development, 4)                     
              application, 5) and problem extension.  The students in this                   
              project will meet the learning cycle in their science courses                  
              as well as their mathematics courses.  This consistency of                     
              language and purpose will help build coherence in the way                      
              these preservice teachers think of teaching both mathematics                   
              and science.  The learning cycle approach will be enhanced by                  
              the use of group work in college mathematics courses.                          
                                                                                             
              The University cost sharing is 78% of the amount contributed                   
              by NSF.
