Title       : Processing and Computer Vision: A New Dimension for Under- graduate Electrical
               and Computer Engineering Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1990       
File        : a9050710

Award Number: 9050710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry J. Farbrother   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Yoder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns a new Computer Vision and Image Processing               
              Laboratory, to support three senior-level courses in Electrical and            
              Computer Engineering.  Traditionally such courses have been                    
              available only to graduate students at major universities where the            
              expense of sophisticated workstations and support equipment can be             
              borne by externally-funded research projects.  The new laboratory              
              will occupy dedicated space in the recently renovated Moench Hall              
              that will be known as the Image Processing and Computer Vision                 
              Laboratory.  An introductory course entitled "Principles of Image              
              Processing" is already offereed, but without the benefit of a                  
              laboratory class students are deprived of essential hands-on                   
              experience.  The equipment will allow students to capture real                 
              images and to learn some of the operations associated with image               
              processing (image capture, sampling and quantization, gradient-                
              based edge detection, image averaging, and statistical image                   
              analysis).  They will also be able to appreciate some of the                   
              difficulties and limitations of computer vision systems at the                 
              present state of development.  The provision of funds to put this              
              advanced laboratory in place will add a new dimension to the                   
              Electrical and Computer Engineering program at Rose-Hulman                     
              Institute of Technology.  The institution is contributing an amount            
              equal to the award.***//
