Title       : Acquisition of Statistical Reasoning in Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1992     
File        : a9050006

Award Number: 9050006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $691792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              National calls for augmenting statistical literacy are increasing, but         
              are not accompanied by basic and applied knowledge about the development       
              of statistical reasoning in children.  The present project is designed         
              to enhance our understanding and serve as a basis for development by           
              both teachers and curriculum designers in this emerging area.  Five            
              major research questions are addressed:  (1) How do children acquire           
              strategies used for data analysis?; (2) What are the effects of domain-        
              speific and everyday knowledge on statistical reasoning?; (3) What are         
              children's beliefs about statistical?; (4) What if any differences in          
              statistical reasoning exist across gender and socio-cultural background?       
              and (5) How well do teachers understand statistical reasoning?                 
                                                                                             
              To address these issues, data will be collected over on 320 children,          
              selected from 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th grades, drawn from middle-class and       
              inner-city schools in Philadelphia.  Data will be collected from               
              children in both individual and group assessments, as well as from             
              school records.  Finally, given that teachers' own knowledge is related        
              to how well children learn in school, a study of 80 elementary school          
              teachers will be conducted.  An innovative video workshop and written          
              manual will be developed for teachers as a way toward improving the            
              provision of knowledge about statistical reasoning in classroom                
              settings.  Findings are expected to be crucial in the sequencing of            
              knowledge provision in school settings, so as to take advantage of             
              children's developing knowledge and strategies in the broad domain of          
              statistical reasoning.  Since the acquisition of statistical reasoning         
              skills also serves as a "gatekeeper" to careers in science, mathematics,       
              and technology, it is hoped that the results will provide useful               
              information to enhancing the opportunities for female and disadvantaged        
              students in entering these areas of study.
