Title       : Extending the National Geographic Kids Network to the Middle Grades
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9050197

Award Number: 9050197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1881062            (Estimated)
Investigator: Candace L. Julyan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year project will develop nine unit (or approximately               
              ninety weeks) of supplementary science material target for grades              
              7-9 and organized around telecommunications-based, collaborative               
              student research.  The project involves coordinated curriculum                 
              and software development, formative and sumative research,                     
              dissemination and teacher training.  The work will be performed                
              by TERC in collaboration with the National Geographic Society.                 
              NGS will match the NSF funding and act as co-developer, producer               
              and publisher.  Additional support for the inclusion of                        
              microcomputer-based lab material will come from IBM.                           
                                                                                             
              Each unit requires students to gather date, share these data over              
              a telecommunications network with students in other school                     
              districts and analyze the collected data.  This allows students                
              to perform like scientists.  Before gathering the data, students               
              study the underlying science content and learn the experimental                
              skills required to perform appropriate measurement.  Following                 
              the data collection, students apply data analysis techniques and               
              reflect on the social significance of the problem addressed in                 
              the study.  Study areas proposed include: Conditions for Growth,               
              Trees, Student Fitness, Acid Deposition, Recycling and                         
              Composting, Radon, Alternative Energy sources, Automobile                      
              Accidents, and Greenhouse Gasses.  Each unit will be carefully                 
              tried and tested in typical classrooms.                                        
                                                                                             
              User software will be developed that will improve upon that                    
              developed for the elementary NGS Kids Network, significantly                   
              extending the analysis possible using some database-like                       
              functions.  Host software will also be developed that simplifies               
              and speeds up the collection of data.
