Title       : Grant for a Conference to Plan Directions for Improving Physical Science
               Instruction in the Elementary Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1990      
File        : a9050009

Award Number: 9050009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlyne M. Sarquis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Improving Physical Science Instruction in the Elementary Classroom is          
              the theme of this conference organized by the Division of Chemical             
              Education of the American Chemical Society, through its committee of           
              Pre-High School science and by the American Association of Physics             
              Teachers.  The conference will take a critical look at the physical            
              science content and activities presently used at the elementary level.         
              The conference's two-part design will allow participants to review the         
              key aspects of learning theory as it applies to the teaching of                
              scientific concepts at the elementary levels, formulate an effective           
              model for obtaining physical science content and activities currently in       
              use, reviewing these materials, and formulating directions for future          
              development.  Participants have been chosen based on their knowledge of        
              physical science education at the elementary level. The conference will        
              consist of a one-day pre-conference meeting, in January, l990; a four-         
              day session in May, l990; and a three-day session in February, l991.  To       
              achieve the specific conference goals and objectives, conference               
              participants will be organized into Task Groups that will work                 
              independently between the conferences.  When these task groups have            
              finished their work and have coordinated their individual reports with         
              the work of the larger group, the conference will issue a conference           
              report which will include: the original goals and objectives,                  
              procedures, findings and recommendations.  At a time when so many school       
              districts are considering changing their elementary science curriculum         
              it is critical for them to have this type of advice from the scientific        
              community.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing for the conference will be three hundred percent of the       
              National Science Foundation portion.
