Title       : Gas Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1990     
File        : a9050404

Award Number: 9050404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37657              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. MacDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairfield University
	      North Benson Road
	      Fairfield, CT  06430    203/255-5411

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project introduced gas chromatography-mass spectrometry into              
              the undergraduate curriculum.  The instrument is used by students              
              in hands-on experiments so they will better see the relationship               
              between theoretical concepts and the data obtained.  The concept               
              of GC-MS Service Laboratory has also been implemented.  To do                  
              this, an autosampler was necessary and was acquired through this               
              project.  Students are trained to accept samples for GC-MS                     
              analysis from students in other courses, to run them and to                    
              return the laboratory results with explanations as needed.  The                
              experiences are practical and valuable whether students go on to               
              graduate education or enter the working force immediately.                     
              Recent advances in column technology, instrument design,                       
              electronics and software have made this application a fesible                  
              project.  The institution acquired the Hewlett-Packard GC-MS with              
              autosampler and the NIST library of mass spectra.  One prominent               
              and important application of the instrument is in environmental                
              analysis so a purge and trap collector was acquired.  Experiments              
              using GC-MS are done in the introductory and advanced organic                  
              laboratory , analytical and instrumental laboratories, physical                
              chemical experiments that emphasize the use of GC to measure                   
              physical properties, and synthesis of volatile inorganics such as              
              chelates and carbonyls.  The instrument is also used by students               
              in their research projects in their senior year and for                        
              demonstrations/video presentations in required courses for non-                
              science students.  The availability of the instrument had an                   
              immediate impact on the undergraduate curriculum.                              
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
