Title       : GC/Mass Spectrometry for Undergraduate Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1990  
File        : a9050528

Award Number: 9050528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68650              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry will purchase a Mass                               
              Spectrometer/Gas Chromatograph (GC/MS) for the undergraduate                   
              laboratory.  This project will significantly improve the                       
              education of undergraduates in chemistry by integrating a mass                 
              spectrometer with gas chromatographic interface into the                       
              undergraduate chemistry laboratory curriculum at the University                
              of Georgia.  Students need hands-on experience with this                       
              increasingly important tool for chemical research.  This                       
              instrument is ideal for teaching and demonstrating many                        
              fundamental chemical principles.  In the honors freshman                       
              program, mass spectra will demonstrate the simple concepts of                  
              isotopes, isomers, ionization potentials, and electron                         
              affinities.  In upper division analytical, organic, and                        
              inorganic labs for chemistry majors, more in-depth studies will                
              probe the increased versatility and sensitivity provided for                   
              separations as well as both qualitative and quanitative                        
              analyses.  Physical chemistry applications will focus on the                   
              energetics and mechanisms of gas phase ion chemistry.  To                      
              insure the widest possible use of this equipment, periodic                     
              short courses on mass spectrometry will be offered as well as                  
              regularly scheduled access to the instrument for nearby college                
              faculty and students.  The experiments developed here will be                  
              disseminated by development of laboratory manuals, presentation                
              at meetings, and publication in journals. Overall, students                    
              will gain practical experience with important equipment and                    
              ideas in a way which should stimulate their interest in the                    
              critically important discipline of chemistry.
