Title       : Laser and Modern Optics Facility for Teaching College Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1990      
File        : a9050622

Award Number: 9050622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. H. Tjossem tjossem@grin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Grinnell College is establishing a laser facility with equipment               
              necessary to integrated the study of lasers and modern optics into             
              the physics curriculum.  The physics department is equipping a                 
              laser facility with simple, reliable laser systems whose                       
              capabilities can be fully used by undergraduates.  The equipment               
              includes multi-color and open-frame helium-neon lasers, optical                
              spectrum analyzers, power meters, optical mounting hardware, and               
              materials for building two general-purpose diode laser controllers             
              and a carbon dioxide laser.  With this equipment the department is             
              developing lecture demonstrations that will interest and motivate              
              introductory (and non-science major) students to learn about basic             
              laws of light, color, and vision; developing laboratory experiments            
              to be carried out by students in intermediate and advanced physics             
              courses to examine lasers and their properties; and providing the              
              opportunity for advanced students to engage in independent study               
              and laser-construction projects that will help to prepare them for             
              graduate study of careers in industry.  The equipment allows three             
              levels of instruction, from observation of demonstrations through              
              use of lasers in the laboratory and study of the laser itself and              
              thus gives beginning students some background in an important area             
              of physics while allowing advanced undergraduates to understand                
              lasers as a basic piece of scientific instrumentation.  The college            
              is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.
