Title       : Astronomy for Texas Elementary and Middle Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9050289

Award Number: 9050289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Kay Hemenway marykay@astro.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will give intensive training over a three-year                    
              period in astronomy and science teaching strategies to 60                      
              teachers of grades five to eight from Central Texas                            
              elementary and middle schools.  The project will be a                          
              cooperative effort involving the College of Natural Science                    
              and the School of Education of the University of Texas at                      
              Austin, McDonald Observatory, and many Central Texas school                    
              districts.  Three members of the Astronomy Department will                     
              conduct the classes.  In addition, a professor from the                        
              Science Education Center and two master school teachers (one                   
              from a rural elementary school and one from an urban middle                    
              school, both Christa McAuliffe Fellows) will help prepare and                  
              present the program.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Each year, for three years, 20 participants will attend the                    
              university for a three-semester Institute in Astronomy. In                     
              the Fall semester they will perform hands-on inquiry-based                     
              activities and field exercises in astronomy in order to                        
              receive three hours of upper division undergraduate Astronomy                  
              credit.  In the Spring semester they will learn strategies                     
              for presenting workshops, prepare a resource manual                            
              ofinexpensive materials and ideas for teaching astronomy to                    
              children, and receive three hours of upper division credit in                  
              Science.  The Fall and Spring meetings will occur on sixteen                   
              Thursday evenings and seven Saturdays.  The evening meetings                   
              are essential to give the participants direct experience of                    
              astronomical phenomena.  In the summer, the participants will                  
              live together for three-weeks as they update their knowledge                   
              about modern astronomy and astronomy instrumentation.  During                  
              the two-week Austin session, they will attend lectures and                     
              learn to use astronomical instruments on the Astronomy                         
              Department's Cassegrain-focus research caliber 16-inch                         
              telescope.  Following their training, the participants will                    
              share in the experiences of a research astronomer through a                    
              three night observing run at the University of Texas McDonald                  
              Observatory in west Texas, 450 miles west of Austin in the                     
              Davis Mountains.  At the observatory, they will live with the                  
              astronomers, tour the facilities and use the 30-inch and/or                    
              36-inch telescope for their own projects.  McDonald                            
              Observatory is providing six nights of telescope time per-                     
              year at no cost to the project.  Three hours of graduate                       
              credit in astronomy is awarded upon completion of this                         
              portion of the program.                                                        
                                                                                             
              In addition, an astronomer will interact with the science                      
              classes taught by each of the participants through visits to                   
              their school.  Although many visits will be made by the                        
              principal investigator (offering a female role model), over                    
              20 other members of the Astronomy Department have volunteered                  
              to visit classrooms.  Non-federal funding is provided for                      
              these visits.                                                                  
              Besides increasing the confidence of the participants in the                   
              teaching of science and improving their own backgrounds,                       
              another aim of the program is train them as science workshop                   
              presenters to teachers of grades two through eight.  All                       
              participants have the support of their own districts which                     
              will provide the facilities and materials for conducting at                    
              least two grade specific workshops.  The districts will also                   
              provide support for the participants to attend two follow-up                   
              meetings of science teachers.                                                  
                                                                                             
              In summary, this program will develop a continuing                             
              collaborative partnership among scientists, science                            
              educators, and local schools as it improves the quality of                     
              astronomy instruction in elementary and middle schools in                      
              central Texas.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing in the amount of $126,914 is equal to 33% of the                  
              NSF award.
