Title       : National Science Outreach Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9053623

Award Number: 9053623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $673895             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Heil   (Principal Investigator current)
              Loren K. Philbrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Mus of Sci & Ind
	      1945 SE Water Ave.
	      Portland, OR  972143354    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7259,9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The National Science Outreach Network will provide school                 
              children, teachers, and the general public with highly                         
              accessible interactive exhibits dealing with popular topics in                 
              science and technology.  The network, initiated as a                           
              partnership between regional science centers and public                        
              libraries, will be modeled after the highly successful                         
              statewide Oregon Library Exhibits Network established in 1987.                 
              Through this smaller network, the Oregon Museum of Science and                 
              Industry, a nationally recognized pioneer in science exhibitry                 
              and outreach programming, circulates small hands-on exhibits to                
              rural population centers through installations in public                       
              libraries, where school groups and families have free and                      
              convenient access.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   This national dissemination project will be initiated in                  
              five regional sites across the country (Colorado, Minnesota,                   
              New York, Tennessee, and Oregon) to further establish the model                
              in rural, inner-urban, economically disadvantaged, and                         
              culturally diverse regions.  With support from both the NSF and                
              the regional networks, The National Science Outreach Network                   
              will design and duplicate six exhibits for circulation to                      
              dozens of local communities in each designated region.  Over                   
              the next seven years, over six million individuals, many of                    
              whom do not currently frequent a local science center, will be                 
              introduced to popular science in a non-threatening, resource-                  
              rich setting.  This will encourage further exploration and                     
              possible future visits to an accessible science center, and                    
              ultimately establish an ever-expanding network of museum and                   
              non-museum partners providing science and technology learning                  
              opportunities to millions of individuals each year.
