Title       : Columbus's Great Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9053778

Award Number: 9053778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Russell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cary I. Sneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer M. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Lawrence Hall of Science proposes to develop a major                  
              public education program, including a traveling exhibition, two                
              planetarium programs, a play, and a kit for schools entitled                   
              "Columbus' Great Experiment."  Emphasizing science and                         
              technology, Columbus' first voyage is portrayed as an                          
              experiment aimed at testing the hypothesis (based on doubtful                  
              evidence) that sailing to the west was a more practical way of                 
              reaching the Indies than by sailing east around the Horn of                    
              Africa.  As with many scientific experiments, the results were                 
              quite different from what the experimenter had in mind: instead                
              of finding a sea route to the Indies, Columbus vastly expanded                 
              knowledge about our planet and spurred developments in science                 
              and technology.  These events occurred within a social and                     
              cultural context that were critical to the development of                      
              modern science, and resulted in far-reaching changes in the                    
              population and ecology of the world which continue today.                      
                                                                                             
                   The National Endowment for the Humanities has recently                    
              awarded a grant for the development of the exhibits.  The                      
              present proposal requests that NSF join with NEH to complete                   
              and expand the project, by funding: a) components of three                     
              additional copies of the exhibition to be constructed by other                 
              museums, thus expanding the public audience to 19 million                      
              visitors; b) two participatory planetarium programs; c) a play                 
              about the scientific aspects of Columbus' voyage; and d) school                
              kits that will enable teachers to present the most important                   
              ideas embodied in the exhibition to students who are unable to                 
              view the exhibition at a science center.  Interest in these                    
              programs will peak around Columbus Day, 1992, we anticipate                    
              that the materials will be sufficiently interesting,                           
              informative, and entertaining to be used for many years to                     
              come.
