Title       : Philadelphia Elementary Science Teacher Leader Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9053568

Award Number: 9053568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma L. Walton                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roree Iris-Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              MOLLY MCLAUGHLIN  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin Inst Sci Museum
	      20th & The Benjamin Franklin Pky
	      Philadelphia, PA  19103    215/448-1121

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal describes the Philadelphia Elementary Science                    
              Teacher Leader Program which will establish 28 teacher-                        
              principal teams of 84 public and parochial educators in grades                 
              1-3 as leaders in the citywide implementation of a new                         
              activity-based program for elementary science study.  Two                      
              teachers and a principal will be selected as a team from each                  
              of twenty-eight schools. The three year project will increase                  
              the teachers' knowledge of elementary science content, promote                 
              peer leadership and support, and establish the teachers as                     
              experienced curriculum writers through a three-year agenda of                  
              Summer Science Institutes and six annual professional                          
              development colloquia. These teachers and principals will                      
              develop permanent roles as leaders of required in-service                      
              workshops on the effective use of elementary science kits for                  
              the city's public and parochial school teachers.                               
                                                                                             
              The three-week summer workshops will cover the content areas                   
              of physical, earth and life sciences.  The teachers will be                    
              provided with practical experiences in running in-service                      
              workshops for their peers. The workshops will also provide a                   
              framework for collegial evaluation in the development of                       
              interdisciplinary activities based on hands-on science                         
              lessons.  In addition, all participants will attend a one-                     
              week Institute during July of 1993 to further evaluate the                     
              impact of the Elementary Science Teacher Leader project and                    
              plan for the permanence and expansion of the Teacher                           
              Leadership roles.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The School Department of Philadelphia and the Office of                        
              Catholic Education are supporting the released time, the                       
              purchase of the elementary science kits in sufficient number                   
              to implement the program in all their elementary schools, the                  
              salaries of school district liaisons, school-based follow-up                   
              workshops and other materials necessary for the project.  The                  
              actual dollar cost-share from the schools and the Franklin                     
              Institute to implement this science kit, activity-based,                       
              leader teacher/principal approach to improve elementary                        
              science education is equivalent to 170% of the NSF request.
