Title       : Developing Appropriate Conceptions of Teaching Science During Preservice Teacher
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1991      
File        : a9053771

Award Number: 9053771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $846605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Hewson pwhewson@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Zeichner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B.Robert Tabachnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The project will integrate two new components into a                           
              preservice elementary and secondary teacher education                          
              program.  The purpose of the integrated program is the                         
              development in preservice teachers of conceptions of                           
              teaching science consistent with recent research in science                    
              education.  One new component is a conceptual change model                     
              for science teacher education; the other is and action                         
              research component to assist students to become teachers who                   
              are reflective about their practice particularly with                          
              respect to the use of conceptual change teaching strategies.                   
              The project will concentrate on students' teaching of                          
              biology.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Twenty students in two cohorts (five elementary and five                       
              secondary in each cohort) will be interviewed and their                        
              teaching observed and, in some instances, video recorded                       
              throughout the program.  This consists of a semester of                        
              methods and a school-based practicum followed by a semester                    
              of student teaching, with an action research seminar through                   
              both semesters.  Science methods classes and action research                   
              seminars will be observed and the professors interviewed.                      
              Case studies of each student will document factors that                        
              influence their progress toward adoption of appropriate                        
              conceptions of science teaching.  Eight students selected                      
              from the two cohorts ( for elementary and four secondary)                      
              will be followed into their first year of teaching to                          
              document what happens to their conceptions of the teaching                     
              of biology when confronted with the reality of schools.  A                     
              further twenty students will, divided as before, will serve                    
              as a comparison group.  They will be interviewed and have                      
              the same methods, practicum, and student teaching                              
              experiences, but not the action research seminar.                              
              Successful implementation of the components of the project                     
              will meet NSF's goals of strengthening science education for                   
              students in elementary and secondary schools by preparing                      
              science teachers who are autonomous, capable and reflective                    
              professionals.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing for this project is 20+% of the NSF costs.
