Title       : The Conditions for Sense-Making in Science Lessons: Studies of Instructional
               Interactions and Seasonal Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9053609

Award Number: 9053609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara Lovitts                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis Newman dnewman@bbn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BBN Laboratories Inc
	      33 Moulton Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021381118    617/873-4277

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will construct a theory of the instructional conditions           
              that foster sense-making by students learning science.  Sense-making in        
              science is the effort to coordinate data or information about some             
              empirical phenomenon with a conceptual or concrete model that explains         
              it.  We believe this is a critical aspect of learning science that is          
              missing in most schools.  We will study instructional interactions in          
              sixth grade classrooms concerned with the causes of seasonal change.           
              The theoretical model to account for the data, in this case, can be            
              expressed quite concretely--with a model earth and sun.  There is              
              preliminary evidence, however, that many students in our classrooms,           
              especially those from non-mainstream cultures, tend to answer "why"            
              questions with evidence rather than with causal mechanisms and thus            
              appear not to have appropriated model-based modes of explanation.  For         
              these students, the apprenticeship into scientific discourse through           
              sense-making discussions may be particularly important, yet present a          
              difficult challenge for the teacher.  Our research, therefore, will            
              address three specific questions:  1.  Under what instructional                
              conditions does sense-making occur?  2.  Does the student's discourse          
              style or mode of "science talk" create barriers to their learning              
              science content through observation of sense-making discourse?  3.             
              Under what instructional conditions can students learn the expected            
              discourse style?  Our hypothesis is that an interactive process in which       
              students' observations, suggestions, or theories are unpackaged,               
              elaborated or reformulated is necessary in order to develop in students        
              an understanding of the scientific task as an activity coordinating data       
              and theory.
