Title       : Comparisons of a Physical Model and Computer Representationsin Reasoning and
               Learning About Linear Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1992     
File        : a9053605

Award Number: 9053605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164702             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Greeno Greeno@csli.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will investigate students' reasoning about               
              quantitative variables and functions in different situations that              
              support understanding:  a physical device in which quantitities are            
              related by linear functions, a computer simulation of the device that          
              includes numerical information, and a computer-based "functions machine"       
              that presents only numerical information.  The research will focus on          
              the different ways that these models and representations present               
              resources for reasoning and learning about functions.  Students will be        
              interviewed in pairs, with parallel series of problems and questions for       
              the three systems.  Students who will be interviewed will include              
              middle-school students who have not studied algebra and high-school            
              students who have studied algebra for one year.  Teachers will be asked        
              to recommend students whose performance in mathematics is about at the         
              average of national norms.  In one study, students will answer questions       
              and solve problems with the systems with whatever additional                   
              representations they choose to use.  In two subsequent studies, students       
              will learn to construct (l) formulas and (2) graphs to represent               
              functional relations among quantitities in the situations.  A fourth           
              study, to be begun in this grant period, will combine learning of              
              formulas and graphs as representations of the systems.  Conclusions            
              about the students' reasoning and learning will be based on their              
              success in solving problems and answering questions, the explanations          
              they give of their solutions and answers, and the linguistic terms that        
              they use to refer to quantitative properties and relations.  Finally,          
              the work will focus on specific aspects of students' reasoning and             
              understanding that are similar and different situations, relating              
              differences to the different kinds of information and activity that the        
              situations provide.
