Title       : CRB: Mechanisms of Persistence in Tallgrass Prairie Forbs: An Experimental
               Approach Coupled with a Retrospective Analysis of Long-term Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9100164

Award Number: 9100164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William S. Armbruster                   
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. Knapp aknapp@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence L. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   Most plant communities are comprised of many different                    
              growth forms with one that usually dominates in biomass.                       
              Ecological studies tend to focus on the dominant growth form and               
              species, primarily because they process most of the energy that                
              flows through the system.  However, when species richness is                   
              considered, it is usually species within the subordinate growth                
              forms that contribute most to diversity.  With the exception of                
              ruderal species, relatively little is known about the mechanisms               
              by which subordinate species, especially long-lived perennials,                
              maintain themselves in communities.  A comprehensive evaluation                
              of the mechanisms of persistence of these less common species is               
              critical to maintaining diversity within natural and restored                  
              communities.                                                                   
                   This study will experimentally examine the mechanisms of                  
              persistence of tallgrass prairies forbs (non-woody, perennial                  
              herbs) at the Konza Prairie Research Natural Area.  This site is               
              characterized primarily by just two growth forms (the dominant                 
              grasses and forbs) and this facilitates comparisons of resource                
              use and responses to fire, grazing, light regime, and nitrogen                 
              between dominant and subordinate growth forms.  The forbs share                
              many life history characteristics and owe their persistence                    
              within the tallgrass matrix to the long residence times of                     
              established individuals/clones.  A combination of descriptive                  
              studies and a full factorial experiment involving water, N and                 
              light manipulations will be used to elucidate the processes by                 
              which long-lived forbs maintain their presence in a "sea of                    
              grass" that varies topographically and in fire history.
