Title       : Atmospheric Frontal Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9100171

Award Number: 9100171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211967             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Blumen blumen@paradox.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1527,
Abstract    :
                   Weather fronts in middle latitudes are represented as                     
              extended lines, seperating air masses with contrasting                         
              properties, on synoptic scale weather maps. A close-up view,                   
              however, shows the typical front as a transition zone, covering                
              tens of kilometers in the cross-front direction, while extending               
              for thousands of kilometers in the along-front direction. On the               
              large scale, broad and converging wind patterns bring streams of               
              contrasting air into collision at the frontal zone, tending to                 
              narrow and intensify it. Observations from instrumented towers                 
              and aircraft reveal a rich microsture within the zone,                         
              characterized by turbulence and large vertical motions. The                    
              small-scale processes act to mix properties, and  to dissipate                 
              and disperse kinetic energy away from the zone, and thus tend to               
              broaden and weaken the front. Blumen proposes to study the                     
              relative roles of these processes, acting on widely differing                  
              scales.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                   Since there is, at present, no accepted conceptual model of               
              the complex circulation within the zone, Blumen's approach is to               
              postulate a simple (mathematically) set of dynamical models,                   
              representing both scales, varying in the values of a few coeffi-               
              cients. Solutions will be sought that match the frontal zone to                
              its ambient large scale flow regime. Such solutions provide                    
              predictions of key features of the zone, viz., energy dissipation              
              rates, how energy is distributed among the smaller scales within               
              the frontal zone, and the width of the zone. These predictions                 
              will be compared with observations collected during the STORM-                 
              FEST field experiment in 1992. The significance of this study is               
              related to improvements in the quality of large-scale weather                  
              forecasting and climate simulation models. Currently available                 
              models do not take account of dissipation within frontal zones                 
              because the small scales are not resolved. The present approach                
              is intended to provide some representation of this important                   
              process that could be used in future models.
