Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Natural History of Hispaniolan Lizard
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1991     
File        : a9100410

Award Number: 9100410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Powell powellr@mail.avila.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Avila College
	      11901 Wornall Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641451007    816/942-8400

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Natural Sciences                
              at Avila College to establish an REU site which will provide 10                
              undergraduates with research experiences in tropical studies.                  
              Participants will learn and develop skills by interacting with                 
              faculty as they work on projects dealing with herpetological                   
              communities on Hispaniola.  To foster student development, a 3-                
              phase program is planned:  orientation, introducing students to                
              research methodology and ecological studies in the West Indies;                
              apprenticeship, to develop skills; and individual research,                    
              resulting in publication-quality reports.  Seminars on research                
              and graduate studies are included to facilitate applications of                
              acquired knowledge and skills to participants' future academic                 
              pursuits.  Presentations will be made by scientists in both the                
              United States and Dominican Republic.  Evaluation will be by                   
              participants, their academic advisors, and two outside faculty.                
                                                                                             
              This program is designed to induce participants to favorably                   
              consider graduate studies and increase the likelihood of them                  
              choosing careers in science.  The faculty will "coach" students,               
              instilling a vision of research by explaining the rules and                    
              delivering a feeling of the "game's" excitement.                               
                                                                                             
              A focus on lizard communities provides opportunities to apply                  
              theories and methods used in ecological research while working                 
              with organisms that are abundant, accessible, and remarkably well              
              and visibly adapted to their environment.  Investigations may                  
              address aspects of niche dimensions, parasite infections, or                   
              competitive exclusion by alien species.  Students may choose                   
              projects within these topics or develop investigations of their                
              own, including, but not limited to, physiological or ethological               
              studies of alien or endemic taxa.
