Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cycle Pairings and the Heat Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1991 
File        : a9100225

Award Number: 9100225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9428               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno Harris bruno-harris@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Given a manifold and a Riemannian metric, the investigator                
              has defined and intends to study a real-valued linking number of               
              a pair of cycles generalizing the ordinary integer topological                 
              linking number.  This pairing is a "lift" to the real numbers of               
              the Abel-Jacobi homomorphism in Algebraic Geometry.  The initial               
              definition is by differential forms with suitable singularities                
              (going back to Gauss in Euclidean 3-space).  The investigator                  
              studies an exactly analogous complex linking number (originally                
              due to Beilinson and Bloch) called the (Archimedean) Height                    
              Pairing.  This pairing enters into their conjectures relating                  
              cycles and values of L-functions, but it has been possible to                  
              calculate it in extremely few cases.  The investigator will                    
              consider an equivalent construction of the pairings based on the               
              kernel of the heat operator.  It turns out that this new approach              
              is well-suited for obtaining concrete formulas in some cases,                  
              e.g., cycles introduced by B. Gross and C. Schoen involving                    
              correspondences on a product of three curves.  The investigator                
              would like to use this approach in many more cases coming from                 
              Algebraic and Riemannian Geometry, and also to find relations                  
              with index theorems and with Quantum Field Theory.                             
                   Basically, the investigator and his student Bin Wang will                 
              attempt to make more accessible a previously defined invariant of              
              Riemannian manifolds.  Their approach will be two-fold.  First,                
              they will explore an alternative to the former abstract                        
              definition, one which is rooted in geometric and physical                      
              concepts and so may provide more insight.  Second, they will use               
              this approach to calculate the invariant explicitly in more                    
              cases, again in the hope of assisting insight into its true                    
              meaning.
