Title       : REU Neuroscience and Behavior Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9100756

Award Number: 9100756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney K. Murphey rmurphey@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Neuroscience and Behavior                     
              Program at the University of Massachusetts to establish a                      
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site.  This program will               
              take advantage of a unique neuroscience community that exists in               
              this regional site.  Neuroscientists at each of five colleges in               
              the Amherst area are members of the University of Massachusetts                
              Neuroscience and Behavior Program (NSB).  This program will bring              
              undergraduates into a laboratory environment  where they will                  
              become members of a research team.  This approach will facilitate              
              the development of mentor-protege relationships, which may have a              
              profound and long-lasting affect on career choices.  The Program               
              will consist of an eight-week research project in one of the                   
              laboratories.  The laboratory work is designed to introduce                    
              students to one of the three specialty areas in neuroscience                   
              represented in the NSB Program; Learning and Behavior                          
              Neuroendocrinology, and Neurodevelopment.  In addition to their                
              laboratory work, students will attend a series of weekly                       
              workshops designed to provide an overview of neuroscience by                   
              introducing the knowledge and technology of laboratories outside               
              the one in which the student works.  In this way REU students                  
              will become familiar with a broad segment of neuroscience and                  
              thus be better prepared to choose careers in the neurosciences.                
              The REU program will be followed up by encouraging work in the                 
              home institutions.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Qualified undergraduates will be recruited from the five local                 
              institutions as well as from the national undergraduate                        
              population.  The program will focus special attention on                       
              recruiting groups that are under-represented in science - women                
              and minorities.  In addition, personal contacts with faculty at a              
              number of institutions with large minority populations have                    
              agreed to help identify qualified minority undergraduates for                  
              the program.  Since the REU faculty is made up of 28% women and                
              minorities, appropriate role models and mentors will be available              
              for all participants.
