Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1992     
File        : a9100731

Award Number: 9100731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Natural Science Division at                   
              Pepperdine to continue an already active program of undergraduate              
              research in biology by teaching students the common elements of                
              the research process and increasing their appreciation for the                 
              diversity of biological subdisciplines.  In addition, the program              
              provides a mechanism whereby students from traditionally under-                
              represented groups in science will have the opportunity to                     
              experience biological research.  The program will begin each                   
              summer with a 6-day research orientation workshop at the                       
              Murchison Science Center during which students will be introduced              
              to the uses and limitations of specific research tools and                     
              techniques and immersed in the research process (literature                    
              review, hypothesis formulation, and hypothesis testing).  After                
              the orientation workshop, students will pursue individual                      
              research projects under the direction of faculty in either                     
              cellular biochemistry, behavioral ecology, plant anatomy or plant              
              physiological ecology.  All research projects will be designed to              
              provide students with insight into how scientists formulate                    
              research questions, design experiments, collect and analyze data,              
              and communicate their results to the scientific community.  Over               
              the course of the summer, visiting scientists will hold special                
              research seminars in each research area, giving students an                    
              opportunity to discuss their own data with other scientists.                   
              Each research group will hold weekly literature seminars to                    
              discuss current journal articles pertaining to their research                  
              interests.  The program will conclude each year with a student                 
              research symposium in early August.
