Title       : Molecular Biology Research Experience for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1994   
File        : a9100863

Award Number: 9100863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122016             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Neel  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Paolini   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Sabbadini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Celia L. Marshak  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to The College of Sciences at San Diego              
              University to direct a Research Experiences for Undergraduates                 
              Site for Summer/Academic Years 1991-92, 1992-93, and 1993-94. The              
              program will provide undergraduate students with research                      
              experience in the laboratories of a strong group of molecular                  
              biologists who are faculty members of the Departments of Biology               
              and Chemistry.  Both plant and animal science areas are                        
              represented among the research interests of nineteen                           
              participating faculty members.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Eight students will participate for two months in the summer and               
              30 weeks in the following academic year.  Students will be                     
              selected from biology and chemistry majors at eight local                      
              community colleges as well as undergraduate colleges and                       
              universities in San Diego County, including San Diego State                    
              University.  Additionally, students will be recruited from                     
              Imperial Valley Community College and San Diego State                          
              University's Imperial Valley Campus (SDSU IVC).  The program                   
              design will permit students who commute from the Imperial Valley               
              to participate in all components of the program during summer and              
              on Tuesdays and Thursdays of the academic year through                         
              transportation by van to the main campus of the University.                    
              Imperial Valley institutions and three of the eight San Diego                  
              County community colleges have diverse ethnic student                          
              populations, especially black and Hispanic.  Consequently, the                 
              institutions selected for participation will assure access of                  
              under-represented minority students to the program.                            
                                                                                             
              Students will participate in laboratory activities for 40 hours                
              per week in the summer and for 10 hours per week in the academic               
              year.  Both summer and academic year programs will include weekly              
              (summer) or bi-weekly (academic year) enrichment colloquia which               
              will introduce students to such topics as ethics in research,                  
              academic advising, and career planning.  Student-suggested                     
              science topics to improve understanding will be presented by                   
              appropriate faculty members, and the students themselves will                  
              report on their research activities to the group several times                 
              during the year.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this project is the encouragement and                 
              preparation of students to enter advanced, especially Ph.D.,                   
              degree programs in the sciences.  The components of the project                
              should make these highly competitive for openings in a variety of              
              advanced degree programs.
