Title       : Industrial Technology Adoption, Functional Restructuring, and Locational
               Adjustment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9100492

Award Number: 9100492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10355              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry M. Moriarty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Manufacturing firms that operate at more than one site can use a            
              variety of strategies to respond to changes in their competitive               
              situations.  Many strategies entail technological adjustments; others          
              are locational in nature.  In the U.S., locational changes have been           
              common mechanisms for reducing operating costs, because factors like           
              connections with other firms and employment costs (including wages and         
              workers compensation payments) vary dramatically from one locale to            
              another.  The degree to which these factors influence decision making in       
              other nations is uncertain, however.  Preliminary research conducted in        
              the U.S., United Kingdom, and Germany indicate that technological              
              adaptations are more common in other nations.  This project will expand        
              research on this topic through analysis of information gathered from           
              executives of U.S.-owned machine tool, computer, and semiconductor             
              manufacturers that operate in Australia.  The data will be analyzed            
              using multivariate statistical procedures.                                     
                 This project will provide new information on locational and                 
              technological adjustments made by high-technology manufacturers in             
              Australia.  Because the data collected during this project parallel            
              those gathered in other nations, they also will establish a sound basis        
              for cross-national comparisons of industrial adjustment.
