Title       : Temperature Modulation Method for In-situ Measurement of Surface Temperature &
               Emissivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1991       
File        : a9100186

Award Number: 9100186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Solomon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
              For materials at high temperature, the emitted spectrum of                     
              electro-magnetic radiation is the most convenient non-                         
              intrusive probe of temperature, if the spectral emittance of                   
              the material is known, and if the emitted radiation can be                     
              distinguished from extraneous radiation which is reflected or                  
              scattered.  The Phase I program demonstrated that many of the                  
              problems of in-situ temperature and emissivity measurement                     
              could be overcome by a technique which modulates the                           
              temperature of the hot surface of interest at the point at                     
              which the emitted spectrum of electromagnetic radiation is                     
              being monitored.  By modulating the temperature, it is                         
              possible to distinguish emitted from reflected radiation.                      
              Routine calculations involving the observed spectrum of                        
              modulated radiation can then be applied to determine both the                  
              temperature and emissivity.  Phase I demonstrated the                          
              measurement of temperatures to within  1 K for surfaces of                    
              known emissivity and temperatures to within  15 K and                         
              emissivity to within 7% for surfaces with unknown                             
              emissivities.  For this Phase II project, we will complete the                 
              research which will allow us to design, build, test, calibrate                 
              and field test a research prototype system based on an FT-IR                   
              spectrometer and a CO2 laser to modulation the frequency.  We                  
              will improve upon the Phase I apparatus by:  1) decreasing the                 
              measurement uncertainty by modulating the temperature in                       
              sequence with the FT-IR spectrometer to eliminate problems of                  
              long term drift;  2) reduce measurement noise by using a more                  
              sensitive detector;  3) extend the high frequency limit to                     
              accommodate higher temperature surfaces; and 4) make the                       
              system user friendly and automated.  The target specifications                 
              for the system will be as follows:  temperature measurements                   
              for surfaces of known emissivity to within  0.25C;                           
              temperature measurements for surfaces of unknown emissivity to                 
              within  5C; and emissivity measurements for surfaces of                      
              unknown emissivity to within  2%.  The system will be field                   
              tested in a coal combustion pilot plant.
