Title       : CRB: Biological Diversity, Economic Risk Aversion, and the Management of
               Commercial Mixed-Species Forest Stands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9100013

Award Number: 9100013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Lilieholm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              82        Economics                               
              88        Geography                               
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                 Increasing concern about the reduction of many plant and animal             
              species in many locales have led to reexamination of the criteria by           
              which many sites are managed.  Forest management practices, for example,       
              are under review in order to determine whether mixed-species stands            
              provide superior habitats.  Much more uncertain, however, are                  
              understandings about the economic implications of mixed-species rather         
              than single-species management practices, and almost not attention has         
              been focused on how to reconcile both economic and ecological                  
              approaches.  This project will consist of an application of modern             
              stock-portfolio theory to problems of mixed-species stand management.          
              Special attention will be given to assessing the degree to which stock-        
              portfolio management practices can integrate financial risk-aversion and       
              biological diversity considerations in commercial forest management            
              practices.  Theoretical developments will be tested using a mathematical       
              programming model of the Blodgett Forest Research Station in the Sierra        
              Nevada of California to evaluate the range of opportunities for economic       
              risk reduction through species diversification.                                
                 This project will provide valuable new insights into procedures for         
              integrating advanced financial analysis procedures and ecological              
              consideration into management of natural resources.  In addition to its        
              focused and theoretical contributions, it will demonstrate the potential       
              for research that seriously addresses major problems using both social         
              scientific and natural scientific perspectives.
