Title       : CRB: Patterns of Recruitment, Early Growth and Survivorshipof two Opportunistic
               Corals, Pocillopora verrucosa and P. eydouxi, on a Disturbed Coral Reef.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1991      
File        : a9100975

Award Number: 9100975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne P. Sousa wpsousa@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   The conditions that favor successful colonization of new                  
              areas by sessile plants and animals must be elucidated before                  
              community dynamics and structure can be fully understood.  This                
              study investigates habitat-specific factors that potentially                   
              affect the demographic patterns of recruitment, early growth, and              
              survivorship of two species of opportunistic corals, Pocillopora               
              verrucosa and P. eydouxi, that are recolonizing a disturbed coral              
              reef environment.  The importance of competition with filamentous              
              and fleshy algae and protection from grazers on the distribution               
              and survivorship of coral spat and young corals will be assessed               
              with field surveys and manipulative experiments.  Habitat-                     
              specific demographic parameters will be determined for three                   
              patch types (areas of high cover of filamentous algae, areas with              
              high density of fleshy algae, and areas of heavy grazing and high              
              cover of crustose algae) in both back-reef and fore-reef                       
              habitats.                                                                      
                   Coral reefs are extremely important habitats in the world's               
              oceans.  This is the first study of recolonization of a disturbed              
              reef to emphasize the role of the mosaic nature of the landscape               
              on establishment and growth of young corals.  Algal cover is an                
              important variable on disturbed or degraded reefs that may affect              
              recovery of the hard coral community.  Understanding this                      
              interaction and the underlying processes in community recovery is              
              essential for management and conservation of coral reef systems.
