Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Dynamics and Pattern Formation in Populations:
               Theoretical Models and Empirical Tests using Two Weedy Annual Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9100999

Award Number: 9100999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis Antonovics   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman L. Christensen, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Population dynamics and pattern formation in plant populations:                
              theoretical models and empirical tests using two weedy annual                  
              species.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The spatial position of plants in a population can have important              
              consequences for both the population dynamics and the types of                 
              patterns produced in plant populations.  The development of a                  
              series of models that explicitly examine the spatial position                  
              effects in plant populations is proposed.  The theoretical models              
              will be calibrated using empirical data from individuals of two                
              species of weedy annuals, Cardamine pennsylvanica and Oxalis                   
              corniculata, grown under controlled environmental conditions.                  
              Each species will be grown with different numbers of neighbors                 
              and with different spatial positions of neighbors to determine                 
              plants response to different local neighborhood conditions.  This              
              information will provide the parameters for the plant population               
              models.  In addition, long term population studies of each                     
              species will be established, using the above two species, under                
              controlled environmental conditions to determine how well the                  
              theoretical models predict the behavior of populations growing                 
              under semi-natural conditions.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This study will help link through modelling the short-term                     
              processes responsible for the behavior of individual plants and                
              the long-term behavior of populations through time.  In addition,              
              this study should also provide a theoretical framework for                     
              determining what sorts of processes produce patterns within                    
              populations.
