Title       : Dissertation Research: The Paleo-Indian Archaeology and Stratigraphy of Offshore
               Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1991      
File        : a9100515

Award Number: 9100515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Faught  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the guidance of Dr. C. Vance Haynes, Mr. Michael K. Faught               
              will collect information for his doctoral dissertation.  In the                
              first stage of the research, Mr. Faught will employ a geopulse                 
              devise to map underwater features and relict river segments along              
              the Aucilla river channel which is located in Florida's Apalachee              
              Bay.  In particular, an attempt will be made to locate underwater              
              sinkholes.  With the data thus acquired, a second phase of the                 
              work will focus on the coring of promising areas.  These cores                 
              will be photographed and examined for pollen, macro botanical                  
              remains, sediment characteristics and radiocarbon samples.  The                
              ultimate objectives of the work are to find bone bed                           
              accumulations which are likely spots for Paleo-Indian remains,                 
              and to construct a sedimentary profile out from the current                    
              Aucilla River mouth onto the continental shelf.  The geological                
              data thus obtained will further aid the discovery of underwater                
              archaeological sites.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Remains of extinct animals and Paleo-indian artifacts are                      
              frequently found in the karst sinkholes of Northwestern Florida                
              along with clear stratigraphic evidence for Holocene                           
              environmental change.  These sinkholes were reliable sources of                
              water for late Pleistocene animals, hunting sites used by                      
              prehistoric people and traps for subsequent sediment                           
              accumulations.  So far, however, all these sinkholes have been                 
              disturbed by amateur diver/collectors before geoarchaeological                 
              scrutiny could take place.  Sinkholes currently located offshore               
              in this region can solve this problem because they most likely                 
              contain extinct faunal remains as well as archaeological                       
              materials.  (At the end of the Pleistocene sea levels were lower               
              than at present.)  Numerous offshore archaeological sites have                 
              been located offshore in this area, but no one has yet probed the              
              inundated relict karst river channels for their protected early                
              archaeology.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will,                      
              hopefully, locate sites which can be excavated in future years by              
              Mr. Faught as well as other archaeologists.  It will increase our              
              understanding of the native American past and assist in the                    
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
