Title       : Enhanced Photochemistry at SERS Active Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9100195

Award Number: 9100195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Birke birke@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Lombardi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The dynamics of photochemical and electrochemical processes for                
              molecules adsorbed on roughened silver and gold electrodes will                
              be examined using surface-enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) to                  
              monitor the kinetics and chemistry of the reactions.   SERS                    
              will be used in a time-resolved mode using pump-probe                          
              techniques to follow concentration-time profiles and structural                
              changes of reactants, intermediates and products in the                        
              nanosecond time domain.   The studies will be directed towards                 
              (1) photochemical and electrochemical bond cleavage reactions                  
              of carbon-halide bonds in various halide-substituted ring                      
              compounds of piperidines, pyridines and quinolines and (2) the                 
              mechanisms of photoglavanic (solar energy conversion) processes                
              for flavin molecules and other dye sensitizers adsorbed on                     
              roughened electrodes.  The study promises to detect the excited                
              state redox species near the electrode surface.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              The research, in the general area of Analytical and Surface                    
              Chemistry, focuses on the use of surface-enhanced Raman                        
              Scattering to examine molecules on gold and silver electrode                   
              surfaces.  The work promises to lead to a better understanding                 
              of the kinetics and chemistry of reactions that occur on these                 
              electrode surfaces, including processes that are important in                  
              solar energy conversion.
