Title       : RUI: The Subperiodic Subgroups of the Crystallographic SpaceGroups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1991      
File        : a9100418

Award Number: 9100418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Litvin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This RUI grant will be used to determine the group theoretical and             
              crystallographic relationships among the subperiodic subgroups of              
              the crystallographic space groups and between the subperiodic                  
              subgroups and the crystallographic space groups to provide a                   
              systematic, unified theory of these groups.  A standard                        
              representative group which emphasizes these relationships will be              
              chosen from each class of subperiodic groups.  A process called                
              scanning will be developed and used to determine the orientation               
              and origin of the subperiodic symmetry group of all planes and                 
              lines in crystals.  Atom arrangements invariant under subperiodic              
              groups will be tabulated in the format of the International Tables             
              for Crystallography.  Lattices of normal subgroups of the                      
              subperiodic groups, which provide a basis for the derivation of the            
              images of the irreducible representations of the subperiodic                   
              groups, will be determined and the irreducible representations of              
              the subperiodic groups derived.  The subperiodic groups will also              
              be related to the irreducible representations of the three-                    
              dimensional crystallographic space groups.  The results of this                
              research will be published by the International Union of                       
              Crystallography.  Parts of the research are being conducted in                 
              collaboration with Dr. V. Kopsky of  the Institute of Physics of               
              the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Group theory is important in representing mathematically the                   
              symmetry inherent in perfect crystals.  Much can be learned about              
              the physical properties of crystals by understanding their                     
              intrinsic underlying symmetries. The various types of symmetry                 
              allowed for three-dimensional crystals is tabulated mathematically             
              in tables which are of importance to crystallographers and other               
              scientists interested in the properties of crystals.  In the                   
              present research the comparable properties of the subperiodic                  
              subgroups of the crystallographic space groups will be studied and             
              tabulated.  These subgroups are of interest to scientists                      
              interested in one-and two-dimensional properties of crystals such              
              as surfaces or planes and chains.  The results of this research                
              will be published as tables by the International Union of                      
              Crystallography for use by all researchers.
