Title       : Dissertation Research: Speciation Processes in Serpentine Endemics: A Molecular
               Systematic Study of the Streptanthus glanduloses Complex (Cruciferae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9100679

Award Number: 9100679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela S. Soltis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Rare and endemic species provide unique opportunities to study                 
              the principles and processes of speciation.  The Streptanthus                  
              glandulosus complex (Cruciferae) is a group of serpentine                      
              endemics, most of which are rare or threatened.  This complex                  
              represents a particularly striking example of the role of                      
              substrate in the divergence of populations and taxa.  These                    
              annual plants occur on serpentine soils in disjunct populations                
              in the Coast Ranges of California from Tehama County to San Luis               
              Obispo County, isolated by intervening regions of unsuitable,                  
              non-serpentine habitat.  this isolation, accompanied by                        
              inbreeding, may have resulted in the many different phenotypes                 
              identifiable among populations within each species.  The                       
              phylogeny of the group is unknown and taxonomic delimitations are              
              disputed: from three varieties of one species to 13 distinct                   
              species have been recognized.  Thus, the S. glandulosus complex                
              not only requires systematic study but it also offers an                       
              excellent forum in which to study speciation processes in                      
              serpentine endemics.  Based on interpopulational crossing                      
              experiments, Kruckeberg (1957) showed a negative correlation                   
              between interfertility of populations of the complex and the                   
              distance by which they were separated.  We propose to build on                 
              Kruckeberg's classic studies of isolation by distance using a                  
              combination of enzyme electrophoresis and restriction site                     
              analysis of chloroplast DNA to examine genetic divergence,                     
              systematic relationships, and evolutionary processes.  The                     
              specific objectives are : (1) assess allozymic and cpDNA                       
              divergence among populations and correlate genetic divergence                  
              with geographic patterns; (2) construct a phylogeny of the                     
              complex using cpDNA restriction site data and use the phylogeny                
              to evaluate putative examples of paleoendemism and neoendemism,                
              recent derivation of restricted taxa from more widespread ones,                
              and recurrent adaptation of serpentine tolerance; (3) estimate                 
              levels of interpopulational gene flow using allozymic data; and                
              (4) compare levels of allozyme variability in restricted and                   
              widespread taxa.  The integration of interfertility, allozymic,                
              and restriction site analyses of the S. glandulosus complex                    
              offers an almost unparalleled venus from which to study                        
              speciation processes, and will provide the information necessary               
              for sound management of the complex.
