Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of a History of EnvironmentalHeterogeneity on
               Rates of Adaptation to a Novel Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9100851

Award Number: 9100851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3595               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara E. Via   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Environmental heterogeneity may influence the amount of additive               
              genetic variance in traits relevant to performance in a novel                  
              environment.  This can affect the potential of a population with               
              a given history to track environmental change and to adapt to a                
              new environment.  The proposed experiments will measure the                    
              effect of environmental heterogeneity on traits under selection                
              by the feature of the environment that is being varied.                        
                                                                                             
              Liriomyza trifolii, a dipteran leafminer, will be used as a model              
              system in this three phase program.  In phase 1, a genetically                 
              variable base population of L. trifolii will be established.  In               
              phase 2, replicate subpopulations of the base population will be               
              subjected to either uniform or heterogeneous host plant                        
              conditions for 20 generations.  Then the genetic variances and                 
              covariances in each replicate subpopulation for characters                     
              related to fitness on a novel plant will be measured.  In phase                
              3, replicate selection lines from each treatment subpopulation                 
              will be initiated on the novel plant.  Responses to selection on               
              the novel plant will be measured for all lines and compared among              
              the environmental heterogeneity treatments in order to test the                
              effects of population history on evolutionary dynamics.  After 10              
              generations of natural selection on the novel plant, genetic                   
              variances and covariances in fitness components will be re-                    
              measured.  Net selection imposed by the novel plant on these                   
              populations during the selection period will be calculated.                    
              Qualitative predictions about the evolutionary dynamics of                     
              populations with different histories of environmental                          
              heterogeneity when faced with a new environment will be tested.
