Title       : REU Site Program in Biopsychology and Cognitive Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9100656

Award Number: 9100656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152126             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Pomeranz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the State University of New York,                 
              Stony Brook to continue a summer program designed to immerse a                 
              small group of undergraduate students in an active research                    
              environment spanning the areas of behavioral and cognitive                     
              neuroscience, psychophysiology and the experimental study of                   
              decision, choice and self-control.  The goal underlying this                   
              initiative is to introduce students who are not currently                      
              involved in a laboratory research program to state-of-the-art                  
              psychological research in some of the most interesting and                     
              important areas of experimental psychology.  This program is                   
              intended to foster interest in, and an appreciation of,                        
              scientific research, especially for those students who might not               
              otherwise have an opportunity to participate in this type of                   
              activity.  Students will participate in an intense eight-week                  
              "hands-on" research experience where, in addition to learning                  
              specific laboratory skills, they will be exposed to all phases of              
              the research process.  They will also receive academic counseling              
              and have access to a variety of support services.  Undergraduates              
              will conduct independent research projects in one of eleven                    
              active research laboratories in the Department of Psychology.                  
              They will be closely supervised by faculty but will be encouraged              
              to take as much responsibility as possible for these projects.                 
              To supplement the laboratory experience, a variety of group                    
              activities are planned such as visits to other research                        
              laboratories, laboratory meetings, "brown bag" lunches, seminars               
              and a mini-symposium, that will broaden students knowledge of                  
              contemporary psychology.  These activities are designed to                     
              facilitate student interactions with the faculty mentors, as well              
              as provide opportunities to share experiences with one another.
