Title       : Carbonyl Coupling Reactions Probe Oxide Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9100404

Award Number: 9100404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Barteau barteau@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research examines the active site requirements for                        
              carbonyl coupling reactions on titania surfaces.  The goals                    
              are to identify the active sites for ketonization of                           
              carboxylic acids, aldol condensation, and carbonyl metathesis,                 
              and to develop these reactions as probes of the chemical and                   
              physical properties of metal oxides.  The influence of surface                 
              structure on reactivity is examined on both stable and                         
              metastable oxide surfaces.  New oligomerization reactions that                 
              can be carried out even under ultrahigh vacuum are explored,                   
              thereby demonstrating the application of surface-science                       
              approaches, including electron and ion spectroscopies, to                      
              oligomerization, polymerization, and metathesis catalysts.                     
              Site requirements for intramolecular coupling reactions                        
              analogous to observed intermolecular reactions are probed                      
              using difunctional carboxylic acids, alcohols, and aldehydes.                  
              Structures of reactive surfaces and associated adsorbates are                  
              imaged by scanning tunneling microscopy.                                       
                                                                                             
              Although this effort addresses fundamental questions, it                       
              should improve understanding of many important industrial                      
              processes, ranging from Ziegler-Natta polymerization (used to                  
              make polyethylene and polypropylene) to the synthesis of                       
              complex biomolecules.  The results could also have a major                     
              impact on the design of sensor and separation devices.
