Title       : Cooperative Research in Transmetalation Mechanisms (U.S.-Middle East Cooperative
               Science; Science in DevelopingCountries).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1991     
File        : a9100117

Award Number: 9100117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Davies gdavies@lynx.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This proposal supports the collaboration of                      
              Dr. Geoffrey Davies, Northeastern University, and Professor                    
              Adnan Ali, Abu-Dis College of Science and Technology,                          
              Jerusalem, West Bank.  This collaborative effort relates to                    
              the metal exchange of polynuclear materials.  The proposed                     
              new work will build on the past efforts of both                                
              investigators including the creation of larger and more                        
              diverse multi-metal molecules at lower cost, and the use of                    
              these molecules as sources of new metal alloys and chemical                    
              catalysts to be used in still newer systems.  Development of                   
              the transmetalation phenomenon will lead to the                                
              establishment of new areas of study in organic and                             
              organometallic chemistry.  The purpose of the Science in                       
              Developing Countries Program is to advance the exchange of                     
              international scientific knowledge and to contribute to the                    
              scientific infrastructure of developing countries.  This                       
              proposal meets those criteria.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Scope:  These international collaborators are in the process                   
              of developing new approaches to handling metals that can                       
              very possibly lead to new and unexpected products of unique                    
              character for use in both the laboratory and the public                        
              sector.  An additional benefit of this research is the                         
              provision of a wealth of learning opportunities for students                   
              pursuing degrees in organic chemistry.  Another value of                       
              this research is in the advancement of the scientific and                      
              technical knowledge of the research teams and their impact                     
              within their respective institutions.
