Title       : FAW: Relations Between Language and Thought in Young Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9100348

Award Number: 9100348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Gelman gelman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1180,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With a Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers, Dr.                   
              Susan A. Gelman will be able to continue to study the relations                
              between language and thought in young children, uncovering                     
              principles that children use to structure knowledge and                        
              experience.  She has already discovered that children make use of              
              sophisticated strategies to organize knowledge at an earlier age               
              than traditional theories of development predict.  She discovered              
              this by developing new experimental techniques for use with                    
              preschool children (until recently a relatively neglected age                  
              group) and novel linguistic analyses of language and concepts.                 
              One representative finding from her laboratory is that children                
              as young as two-year olds expect category members to share                     
              important, nonobvious similarities, such as internal parts.  They              
              infer that members of the same category (e.g., blackbird and                   
              flamingo) share underlying properties despite salient perceptual               
              dissimilarities between the category members.  In a sense, very                
              young children act as if members of a category share an                        
              underlying "essence."  This previously unsuspected ability                     
              contradicts a widely accepted view that children's concepts are                
              limited to concrete, perceptual, and obvious qualities.  Gelman                
              has proposed that children have an early capacity to look beyond               
              salient perceptual properties, that this capacity predates                     
              training in science, and that it serves as a mechanism for                     
              further cognitive development.  In addition to the developmental               
              implications, these results suggest a new way of thinking about                
              categorization.  Traditional accounts in psychology define                     
              categories as static clusters of primarily superficial and                     
              obvious features.  In contrast, these findings indicate that                   
              hidden, nonobvious properties are psychologically important.                   
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons.  It will provide                   
              basic information about the usual course of preschool conceptual               
              development, knowledge of which should provide educators with                  
              better ways to present information so that it can be grasped by                
              children when they enter formal schooling.  The information can                
              also be useful in giving early warning of developmental                        
              disabilities that manifest themselves only in very subtle ways in              
              preschoolers, so that intervention programs can be undertaken                  
              before the children become stigmatized as "slow learners" or some              
              such in school.  It will also assist in the professional                       
              development of a young scientist with the potential to become one              
              of the superstars of her field.
