Title       : Copper Dioxygen Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1991      
File        : a9100280

Award Number: 9100280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas N. Sorrell sorrell@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The chemistry of copper complexes with dioxygen will be                        
              explored, as it may relate to that in biological systems.                      
              Specific pursuits will include: 1) the synthesis of new ligands                
              that are able to bind one, two, or three copper ions ligated by                
              nitrogen atoms, preferably from the heterocycles pyridine or                   
              imidazole; 2) the incorporation of groups into such ligands                    
              that will influence the local copper ion environment by                        
              positioning a proton, an additional metal ion, a "substrate-                   
              binding cavity" or a non-polar hydrophobic moiety near the                     
              copper-binding site; 3) a study of the dioxygen, carbon                        
              monoxide, and anion-binding properties of such complexes; and                  
              4) conducting oxidation reactions of organic molecules that                    
              associate with those ligands having a cavity by treating such                  
              complexes with dioxygen in the presence of substrate. In order                 
              to achieve these goals, use will be made of rigid organic                      
              molecules as ligand "anchors" that have the requisite                          
              stereochemical properties to bring the chosen groups into                      
              proximity, and the known dioxygen chemistry of pyridine- and                   
              imidazole-ligated copper complexes will be utilized as well.                   
              The organic frameworks comprise known and derivative                           
              triptindane and cavitand molecules that can be made in gram                    
              quantities from relatively simple starting materials.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organo-                    
              metallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Thomas N.                      
              Sorrell of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will                
              explore the chemistry of copper complexes with dioxygen.  The                  
              goal of these studies of model systems is to increase our                      
              knowledge of how copper-containing enzymes are able to catalyze                
              metabolic and biosynthetic reactions.
