Title       : Theory of Electromigration Failure in Polycrystalline Metal Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9100257

Award Number: 9100257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Bradley bradley@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Electromigration failure of polycrystalline aluminum interconnects             
              is one of the primary failure mechanisms limiting the reliability              
              of integrated circuits.  In this research, Monte Carlo simulations             
              and analytical studies will be made of a model of electromigration             
              failure in polycrystalline metal thin films based on percolation               
              theory.  The dependence of the average film lifetime and the                   
              distributions of lifetimes on the temperature and degree of                    
              structural disorder will be investigated.  An empirical                        
              distribution for the film lifetime which is commonly employed in               
              engineering applications will be compared to the Monte Carlo                   
              results, providing a test of this distribution for much lower                  
              failure rates than is possible experimentally.  A theory of the                
              failure kinetics will be constructed which is based on recent                  
              advances in the theory of irreversible processes in random media.              
              As time permits, these ideas will be applied to the related problem            
              of fatigue-induced fracture in inhomogeneous brittle materials.                
              %%%                                                                            
              As integrated circuits become smaller and smaller, the problem of              
              how to connect elements within these circuits, and the circuits                
              themselves to the outside world, becomes more critical.  As these              
              connections, or interconnects, become smaller, the probability that            
              circuit failure may occur in the interconnect increases.  Thus, an             
              understanding of the underlying mechanisms and of the probability              
              for interconnect failure are important for predicting lifetimes of             
              devices.  This grant is using an unconventional approach to look at            
              this difficult problem.  Percolation theory looks at conducting                
              systems such as interconnects from a general point of view.  It is             
              not as concerned about the underlying physical details as with the             
              more global aspects of the problem.  The research proposed here                
              will use percolation theory for the first time to try to make                  
              predictions of interconnect lifetimes and determine general                    
              parameters which affect interconnect failure.
