Title       : REU Site: Origin and History of Glacial Deposits in West-Central Minnesota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1991      
File        : a9100630

Award Number: 9100630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F P. Cotter cotterjf@mrs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota Morris
	      235 Community Services
	      Morris, MN  562672114    612/589-2211

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9277,
Abstract    :
                   Eight women will be involved in field and laboratory                      
              research to determine the origin of glacial and postglacial                    
              deposits in west-central Minnesota.  This includes the                         
              continuation of three closely related projects which have in                   
              common the utilization of till provenance analysis to determine                
              the origin and glacial history of three problematic deposits.                  
              These deposits are, 1) the Alexandria Moraine Complex, 2) Tunnel               
              Valley Eskers, and 3) the striated and faceted Boulder Pavement                
              of the Minnesota River Valley.  Additionally, paleoenvironmental               
              studies of late- and postglacial deposits will be expanded and                 
              will include micropaleontological, palynological and geochemical               
              investigations of lake and bog sediments.  The 1991 program will               
              include analysis of a postglacial lake/bog deposit which contains              
              the remains of at least four Bison spp. and other lake and bog                 
              sediments in the area.                                                         
                   U.M.M., an undergraduate institution, offers excellent                    
              facilities and close faculty contact.  R.E.U. women will have the              
              opportunity to develop collegial ties with other undergraduates                
              doing geologic research and to serve as mentors, instructors and               
              role models to underrepresented high school students                           
              participating in college level research.  The research                         
              experience and the unique opportunity to interact with a                       
              scientific community where underrepresented individuals are in                 
              the majority will both break down a number of traditional                      
              barriers and aid in the maturation of these students as                        
              scientists.  The culmination to the program, the "Friends of UMM               
              REU" conference, will provide these women with the opportunity to              
              present results and discuss ideas with experts in the field.                   
              Additionally a field present results and discuss ideas with                    
              experts in the field. Additionally a field trip to the Canadian                
              Rockies will show participants active glacial processes and                    
              glacial environments. The REU program will contribute to the                   
              personal growth of these women and the research to be                          
              accomplished will contribute to the understanding of the glacial               
              history of Minnesota.
