Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduate Students in Sensor Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9100547

Award Number: 9100547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44857              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Van Der Spiegel jan@ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This program at the University of Pennsylvania provides nine                   
              undergraduate students with research opportunities in the broad                
              area of Sensor Technologies.  The goal of the effort is to generate            
              scientific knowledge and to apply this knowledge to sensor                     
              development.  The REU Site is part of the Summer Undergraduate                 
              Fellowship in Sensor Technologies (SUNFEST) program of the                     
              University's Center for Sensor Technologies.  The Center provides              
              the infrastructure for faculty and students to collaborate,                    
              exchange ideas, co-supervise students, and share resources.                    
              Students are selected by a faculty committee based on their                    
              academic potential, interest in pursuing a research career,                    
              attitude towards graduate studies, advisors, recommendations,                  
              membership in under-represented groups, and research opportunities             
              in the mother institution.  It is anticipated that about half of               
              the students will come from outside University of Pennsylvania.                
              The undergraduate students participate actively in a research                  
              project of one or more participating faculty.  Special emphasis is             
              placed on the broader interaction of these SUNFEST fellows with the            
              graduate students and faculty members associated with the Center.              
              The projects suggested to the students are chosen for their                    
              educational value, scientific merit, and the prospects for                     
              continued involvement after the summer.  Project topics include:               
              chemical, optical, mechanical, and neural network based sensors;               
              microdynamical systems, phenomena and micromachining; and sensor               
              interfacing.  The Center provides an additional $1000 per student              
              as matching funds towards the student stipend.  The school also                
              contributes $500 per student to be used for computing facilities,              
              in addition to making facilities and laboratory personnel                      
              available.
