Title       : Networking Infrastructure for Education Testbed Within the Context of Statewide
               Systemic Reform in Mathematics, Scienceand Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9454719

Award Number: 9454719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2933399            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Friedman friedman@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald A. Goldin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Moeller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren S. Gifford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julia A. Stapleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9217,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454719  Friedman    The establishment and assessment of the networking
              infrastructure  for education (NIE) testbed described in this document is an 
              integral component of New Jersey's Statewide Systemic Initiative  (NJ SSI) to
              achieve excellence in mathematics, science, and  technology education
              throughout the state.  Furthermore, the  activities described herein are guided
              by, and central to, efforts  toward the full implementation of New Jersey's
              State Educational  Technology Action Plan.    The critical importance of NIE in
              achieving statewide systemic  educational reform is reflected in the rate at
              which new materials  are compiled, new instructional tools are applied and new 
              instructional methods are adopted.  The curriculum alignment cycle  has been
              dramatically shortened.  If we are to keep pace, NIE must  be used to provide
              opportunity for teachers who will create  astounding instructional projects
              that must be captured  electronically and shared with colleagues at other
              schools to  support instructional reform throughout the state.    Our goal is
              to learn more about effective networking strategies and  to develop a
              significant component of a networking infrastructure  which: 1) enhances
              student learning; 2) empowers teachers, and; 3)  supports statewide systemic
              school reform.    Our objectives are: 1) to design and implement the
              technological  infrastructure; 2) to design and implement strategies for
              helping  teachers to develop the knowledge, skills, and ability to use the 
              technological infrastructure to access information and to use such  information
              resources effectively in their classrooms; 3) to  develop broader public
              understanding of the educational benefits  that result from the effective use
              of the technological  infrastructure and to consider public policies which
              promote such  use; 4) to assure that the benefits to be derived from the use of
               the evolving technological infrastructure are available to students 
              regardless of gender, ethnicity, disability, and poverty level ,  and; 5) to
              document strategies and results so that others may learn  from our experience.
