Title       : Advanced Technological Education in Biotechnology: A Community College--Industry
               Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  1997    
File        : a9454657

Award Number: 9454657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Des Rochers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jamie Deneris  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Peralta Cmty Col Dist Off
	      333 East Eighth Street
	      Oakland, CA  946062844    415/466-7200

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Vista College proposes to develop an integrated and vocationally  enriched
              program for bioscience technicians. This proposal responds  to a national need
              for broad improvement in technical education as  well as local industry needs
              for bioscience technicians who have  A.S. degrees or vocational certificates.
              This project will develop  a curriculum in biotechnology that provides students
              with a strong  scientific background and practical skills acquisition necessary
               for success in the work place. Students will gain an in-depth  understanding
              of basic scientific principles and techniques, the  ability to use
              sophisticated scientific equipment and computers,  and the ability to think
              critically. In addition, this project will  respond to the needs of a rapidly
              changing work force by reducing  embedded institutional barriers to women and
              other underrepresented  groups seeking to enter science and mathematics based
              occupations,  incorporating new instructional methods which address the diverse
               learning styles of students, providing cooperative learning  environments
              which are more supportive for diverse learners, and  developing an integrated
              curriculum which provides students with  practical skills acquisition and
              hands-on application of knowledge.  The Vista program is based upon a committed
              industry-education-city  partnership for the design and evaluation of the
              curriculum and in  support of student training through mentorships with
              industry  employees and internships in the work place. The program is based 
              upon a set of skill and knowledge requirements designed by industry  scientists
              and the program and curriculum development process has  incorporated several
              review sessions by an industry advisory  committee culminating in general
              endorsement of the program.
