Title       : Establishing and Transporting Science, Computer, and Electronics Technology
               Curricula to Rural Minority Students through Simulated Labs and Telecourses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9454647

Award Number: 9454647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary L. Long                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499938             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Robert Converse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean A. Pezzoli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth W. d'Argy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Maui Community College purpose of this distance education  project is to
              establish and transport science, computer, and  electronics technology
              curricula to rural minority students through  interactive teleclass lectures
              and simulated multi-media laboratory  experiences. The first stage of the
              project encompasses the  development of multimedia instructional materials for
              a model  Certificate and Associate in Science Degree curriculum in  Electronics
              and Computer Engineering Technology (ECET). The program  is cooperatively
              designed to provide for technical certification  and/or transfer opportunities
              to baccalaureate degree programs at  the University of Hawai'i-Manoa or
              distance education offerings at  the Maui Research and Technology Center from
              the University of New  Mexico. The second stage focuses on developing
              multi-media  laboratory exercises for the ECET curriculum in a format 
              transportable to outreach by reducing dependence on costly  laboratory
              equipment and faculty travel. This innovative format  utilizes simulated lab
              experiments by developing, purchasing, and  integrating multi-media software
              for CAI workstations. The ECET  program is to be field-tested on the main
              campus and then extended  to the college outreach centers, and will formally
              recruit students  from MCC's densely-populated Pacific Island and Asian
              community.  The third stage is the extension of the simulated methodology to 
              other science and mathematics courses at the college. The final  stage involves
              teacher and faculty enhancement. Effectiveness of  this approach is to be
              demonstrated through scheduled workshops for  other college instructors
              state-wide and to secondary school  teachers; and the project results
              disseminated on a national level.
