Title       : Expressway to Quality Mathematics and Science Education for Low-Income Minority
               Communities - A Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9454754

Award Number: 9454754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley M. McBay smmcbay@qem.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura-Lee A. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : QUALITY ED FOR MIN NET
	      1818 N ST NW
	      WASHINGTON, DC  200362406    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454754  McBay    Most students from low-income public housing do not have
              access to quality schools, certified  mathematics and science teachers, or
              realistic opportunities to enter and succeed in mathematics,  science and
              engineering fields.  Advanced computer technologies represent the best hope of 
              leveling the educational playing field for these students.  The use of various
              forms of  telecommunications and of computers at the local level can help bring
              information, counseling,  and the best educational and training resources into
              these highly disadvantaged communities.    Statement of Objectives - This
              project will formulate a plan for using technology to (1) enhance  the ability
              of seven existing Community Service Centers (CSC) on the campuses of 
              predominantly minority institutions to address the mathematics and science
              education needs of  students and families residing in neighboring low-income
              public housing; and (2) create an  electronic mentoring network that will
              provide these students with easy access to mentors who  will include MSE
              professionals from the respective communities and states as well as across the 
              country.  The Centers, located in Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, New
              York (2), and  Virginia, are prototypes for a planned network of CSCs on the
              campuses of at least 25  predominantly minority institutions near low-income
              public housing.    Methods to be Employed - Under the leadership of existing
              local steering committees for each  of the seven CSCs, the knowledge of,
              attitude towards, and interest in the electronic delivery  of educational
              services, including electronic mentoring, by residents and participating campus
               faculty and students will be formally assessed.  Different instruments will be
              developed to assist  in this assessment as well as to determine the
              technological resources and capabilities of the  participating colleges,
              universities, and communities that can be utilized for the short- and long- 
              term purposes of this project.  This process will prov ide important
              information on existing  electronic capabilities as well as on the degree of
              awareness and acceptance by higher education  institutions and residential
              communities of the potential of technology to deliver quality  mathematics and
              science education, particularly to communities that do not now, and will not 
              in the near future, have such access.    A Project Steering Committee that
              includes representatives from each of the local steering  committees, with the
              assistance of a telecommunications consultant and the Project Staff, will 
              develop a plan to achieve the stated objectives above.  Participating
              communities and other  interested individuals and groups will be kept informed
              throughout the planning year through a  quarterly newsletter, an electronic
              bulletin board, conferences, and QEM affiliates.    Significance of the
              Proposed Activity to the Advancement of Knowledge or Education -   Developing a
              plan for the proposed telecommunications network is consistent with the
              national  goal of universal access to the "information superhighway," the
              mathematics and science goal  of Goals 2000, and NSF's respective goal of
              supporting work that assists in the solution of  societal problems and of
              broadening the Nation's education and human resource base.  When  implemented,
              the network will open a wide new world of communications in mathematics and 
              science education to communities that have historically been underserved. 
              These technological  advancements will enable college-bound and
              non-college-bound students from low-income  families to be successful in a work
              place transformed by science and technology.  The electronic  media and
              electronic mentoring network will help to increase the number of minority
              students  along the educational pipeline who are well-prepared to enter and
              succeed in MSE fields.
