Title       : Keystone Community Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1994 
File        : a9454748

Award Number: 9454748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Yoho jyoho@oak.lhup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Conly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen P. O'Hara-Mays  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keystone Central Schl Dist
	      95 West Fourth Street
	      Lock Haven, PA  177451124    717/893-4900

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454748  Yoho    The main objective of the Keystone Community Network planning
              grant is to bring together the  ideas and resources from individuals in a
              widespread, diverse community to construct a network  infrastructure accessible
              by everyone.  The planning process will involve visits to test sites, 
              presentations and consultation by experts, and structured release time for
              educators and  community members to put together the network infrastructure
              plan.    While the technology should be transparent in our network, its
              benefits will be seen everywhere.  It will provide for the following:        
              (1) equal opportunity educational services to our large geographic area
              community of       schools.  Schools in remote areas will have access to the
              full scope of the KCSD       curricula offerings via network
              telecommunications.  Educators in the district will be able       to
              collaborate on discipline-specific as well as interdisciplinary projects.  And
              building       walls will disappear as students learn to access information as
              needed from global       libraries, data bases, and experts on-line.        
              (2) It will be used to link pre-service and in-service activities between KCSD
              and LHU       to better prepare tomorrow's educators, as well as updating
              present staff.  Preview of       lesson plans and materials for student
              teachers and in-school participating University       students by the same
              University faculty who were responsible for their early preparation       will
              enhance continuity between theory and practice.  Already in place is a science 
                   program which provides for pre-service training with in-service teachers
              who have been       trained in specific elementary science benchmark lessons. 
              Other elementary teachers in       the district can be participate in the
              lessons via interactive TV classroom to classroom.         (3) It will link
              members of the community, both business and residential, to each other,      
              to worldwide networks, and to information resources in new and crea tive ways.
              From       health care to small business, accessing the network will bring
              connectivity urgently       needed in this rural community.    There are so
              many positive possibilities.  By making it a community effort, and integrating
              it  into the school curricula, collaborative problem-solving will provide the
              ways for this community  to best utilize its network.
