Title       : Enabling Widespread Telecollaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9454704

Award Number: 9454704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2835229            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Feldman Alan_Feldman@TERC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Tinker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454704  Feldman    Our understanding of excellence in science learning has
              changed  dramatically in the past decades.  We now know that the concepts, 
              skills, and excitement of science are most effectively learned  through
              students' direct experience in real science activities-  collaborating to plan
              an experiment, collecting data, organizing  and representing the data, and
              interpreting the data.  Students  learn complex problem-solving skills by
              working with peers and  mentors to plan and carry out an investigation of a
              real science  problem.  Rather than textbooks and lab exercises, this approach 
              emphasizes authentic contexts for learning, that is, doing science.    To
              implement this approach, students need access to resources  outside their
              classroom-access to data beyond what they can collect  themselves, and access
              to scientists or other experts as they try  to make sense of their data. 
              Teachers need access to experts,  other teachers, and additional resources as
              they grapple with a new  way of teaching science.  The use of computers
              connected through  wide-area networks provides an effective way to access these
               resources for teachers and students, and enables students and  teachers to
              work closely with others who are geographically remote.    TERC proposes to
              create a paradigm for education, which we call  telecollaboration, that will
              build on the model of Network Science  created in Alice/Collaborative Inquiry
              Testbed.  Telecollaboration  reflects a major change in our use of computers
              and  telecommunications in education, and enables teachers and students  to
              engage actively in high quality teaching and learning.  We will  create a
              Testbed through which we'll identify and encourage a range  of
              telecollaborative projects that will meet the needs of  educators,  support
              educational reform, and create new, scalable classes of  network collaboration.
               While the paradigm we are developing is  applicable across the curriculum, the
              Testbed will focus on  telecollaboratives with an emphasis  on science and
              mathematics.
