Title       : Development of a Rural Networking Infrastructure in Support of Systemic Change
               in Mathematics and Science Education: The Network Montana Project One Year
               Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1994 
File        : a9454691

Award Number: 9454691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105807             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn D. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454691  Thomas    Network Montana is a collaborative, systemic research and
              development project constituting  Montana's response to NSF's Networking
              Infrastructure for Education (NIE) RFP #94-5.  The  goal of the NSF/NIE program
              is to build synergy between technology and educational  researchers,
              developers, and implementers in the use of network and telecommunications 
              technologies in education, with a particular focus on the development of
              flexible, sustainable  approaches to network infrastructure.  This proposal
              seeks funding for a one-year planning grant  aimed at developing a systemic
              approach to K-16 networking in Montana.  The partners in this  enterprise will
              include teachers, administrators, and researchers from the state's educational 
              system, leaders in state government, and individuals from a variety of
              community, professional,  and private sector organizations.  Commitments of
              talent and resources from all partners will  be focused on the development of a
              lasting infrastructure capable of supporting the development  of a variety of
              educational telecommunications services. Specifically, at the end of the
              planning  period, the Network Montana Project will:         1. Define a
              state-wide coalition of partners from academia, government, and the private    
                sector responsible for directing a wide variety of K-16 educational
              networking activities       during the period of NSF/NIE funding and in
              subsequent projects;          2. Make use of Montana Information Services
              Division (ISD) leased lines and Big Sky       Telegraph capabilities to pilot
              Internet access for select K-12 schools and their local       libraries;       
                3. Encourage and facilitate long-term partnerships with computer equipment
              and software       manufacturers, aerospace industries, and other private
              sector organizations interested in       educational reform;         4.
              Facilitate cooperative partnerships with NASA, NOAA, the U.S. Geological Survey
                    and other national and international scientific organizatio ns;         
              5. Cooperate with and support a number of nationally significant mathematics
              and science       education projects already underway in Montana;          6.
              Focus on the development of educational and informational resources deliverable
              over       the Internet and of interest to Montanans of all ages, and;         
              7. Develop a position paper on the networking implications for mathematics and
              science       education reform.    The foundation of the Network Montana
              Project is cooperation and collaboration.  All major  organizations and
              institutions involved with mathematics education, science education, 
              telecommunications, or networking across Montana are participants in this
              planning grant.   Industry support from TCI, Digital Equipment Corporation,
              Microsoft, Square One TV and  others also plays a significant role.
