Title       : A Community Learns On-Line: Planning Activities to Explore the Use of
               Interactive Cable for Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1994 
File        : a9454758

Award Number: 9454758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur W. St. George                    
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Kozma rkozma@unix.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454758  Zozma                                                               SRI
              International's proposal is for a 1-year planning grant, during  which time SRI
              will work collaboratively with its partners -  Viacom, the Castro Valley
              Unified School District, and the Castro  Valley, community - to (1) identify
              needs that can be matched to  educational products and services that can be
              delivered through  Viacom's experimental interactive cable system, and (2) to
              specify  product development, dissemination, and evaluation activities to be 
              undertaken by the team in subsequent years. The study's planning  focus will be
              on the use of Viacom's Castro Valley experimental  cable system as a test bed
              for developing models for using  interactive cable to support education reform,
              for developing  products and tools, for evaluating the long-term impact of the 
              system on home and classroom learning, and for assessing the  sustainability of
              providing educational products and services  through interactive cable. SRI
              proposes:         To determine the current and future educational and learning 
                   needs of three sets of consumers in Castro Valley: students;       school
              district teachers, principals, and administrators; and       parents and other
              community users.         To identify prospective matches between technological 
              advances       offered by the Viacom system and those educational and  learning
                    needs.         Through systematic analyses, to specify educational
              products       and services that (1) match the needs of the consumers, (2)  are
                    in accord with Viacom's overall mission to the community, and       (3)
              are sustainable.         To develop strategies for effective implementation of 
                   educational products and services over time, including       preliminary
              recommendations on rate structure issues.    These outcomes will be achieved
              through a series of activities  including  a needs assessment, a review of
              relevant literature, and a 2-day  Innovation Search Workshop. During the w
              orkshop approximately 20  participants - including persons from Castro Valley
              schools, the  community, and Viacom - will, through a series of workshop 
              exercises,  focus on the needs indicated by the needs assessment, and freely 
              generate  ideas.  The set of ideas will then be converted by the group into  a 
              smaller set of usable and structured ideas and concepts and finally  reduced to
              a small number of concrete ideas for viable, useful  educational products and
              services.    Products from the project will include the results of the 
              literature  search, the Innovation Search Workbook, the innovation search 
              results, a  summary report of project activities, and a detailed plan for the 
              work to  be undertaken in Phase 2 of the project. The plan will include a 
              description on how SRI proposes to explore the role of the network  in  support
              of educational reform and innovation and to assess its  impacts on  classroom,
              home, and community learning patterns.
