Title       : Differentiated Staffing in Global Village Learning Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9454779

Award Number: 9454779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49728              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. V. Bunderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Merrill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454779  Bunderson    This is a research project to delineate a set of new roles
              in a  flexibly reproducible, differentiated staffing pattern for  elementary
              schools.  Role delineation (or job analysis) is an  essential specification
              step in producing designs, plans and  materials for technology transfer.  The
              subject matter to be  transferred is the masterful use of technology in
              teaching,  individual study and project-centered education.  Technologies of 
              interest include digital multimedia and networking technologies,  for use in
              both teacher-centered group environments and  learner-centered labs.  Expertise
              in the set-up, masterful use,  maintenance and trouble-shooting of computers
              and  telecommunications software and links does not exist in schools as 
              presently organized.  It is probably not possible for busy,  multiply-tasked
              school personnel in current roles to add new  technical tasks, even with
              limitless training.  Instead, people  with different specialized technical,
              teaching, and administrative  roles must be trained and recruited along with
              magnifying the  capabilities of current teachers in order to gain the
              remarkable  benefits possible through the effective use of technology.    The
              fundamental research problem is that conventional job-analysis  methodologies
              apply to established jobs not to new jobs/roles that may  exist by analogy in
              science, engineering and business settings, but not  in schools.  Thus a
              revised methodology emphasizing synthesis for  communication and specification,
              not just analysis, which in any case  must assume jobs that are constant enough
              to be analyzed, is introduced  in this study.    Objectives and Their
              Significance:    1. To delineate through an experimental methodology for job 
              analysis/synthesis the inter-related roles of teachers. administrators. 
              supporting professional specialists, and technical support personnel as  they
              may be established in technology-intensive leaning environments.    2. To
              develop publications, presentations, and instruc tional systems  using multiple
              forms of media, especially visual media, as a means of  communicating these new
              roles and functions in relation to several  prototypical technology
              configurations.  These visual materials and  supporting detail will serve in
              technology transfer plans. They will also  include research-based design
              specifications for future project teams who  wish to develop integrated,
              networked learning and assessment systems for  preservice and in service
              training of technology-using teachers.    3. To develop one such integrated
              system of instruction and assessment  and implement it in a preservice course
              on technology for elementary  school teaching candidates.  This course will
              both teach and model  prototypical technology configurations and their use
              within a  differentiated staffing model to deliver innovative science,
              mathematics,  and other learning content.    4. To publish descriptions of the
              new role delineation methodology used  in this project that iterates between
              analysis and synthesis of models of  the work in each role.  These publications
              can use as examples the data  and visual materials produced in this project.   
              The products of this research can influence the building of the human 
              infrastructure of educators needed to use new technologies in a  productive
              way.  It will define the technology configurations that  structure the roles --
              configurations that can evolve over time and need  not be installed all at
              once.  It will suggest a coherent and thoughtful  set of roles for
              differentiated staffing and will contrast these roles to  extant job analysis
              of conventional teacher roles.  It will contribute to  methodology for role
              delineation of rapidly changing,  technology-intensive jobs.
