Title       : The Co Vis Testbed: A National Science Education Collaboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9454729

Award Number: 9454729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3539105            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Gomez l-gomez@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy D. Pea  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9217,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454729  Pea    The work in this proposal builds on the Learning Through 
              Collaborative Visualization (CoVis) Project, an NSF-AAT testbed.   CoVis has
              focused on three areas - project-enhanced science  learning, collaboration, and
              scientific visualization - as a means  for transforming science education.  Its
              goal has been to use next-  generation technologies to support the formation
              and work  activities of learning communities with media-rich communication  and
              scientific visualization tools in a highly interactive  networked collaborative
              context.  The NIE testbed will transform  the small-scale working CoVis model
              with three hundred participants  at the high school level into a large-scale
              Collaboratory, for  thousands of users in diverse settings.    In exploring
              networking infrastructures for education, it is  essential to recognize that
              "infrastructure" consists of more than  network connections and transport
              protocols.  To be effective,  support for networked learning communities
              requires three  interdependent components: technology infrastructure,
              educational  content infrastructure, and teacher support and development 
              infrastructure.  In order to characterize costs and outcomes, a  testbed also
              requires an evaluation and dissemination  infrastructure.    The technology
              infrastructure will provide students and teachers  with an environment to
              support collaborative learning that includes  video teleconferencing,
              collaboration software, a video server,  Internet tools, and software
              environments for open-ended science  investigations.    The educational
              resources infrastructure will take advantage of the  technology infrastructure
              to allow students and teachers to look up  and exchange a broad range of
              interactive multimedia learning  materials and scientific datasets.  These
              resources will be  developed by teachers, students, atmospheric scientists at
              UIUC,  specialists in hands-on learning at the Exploratorium Science  Museum,
              and other collaborators.    The teacher development and supp ort infrastructure
              will take the  form of workshops for teachers conducted by project staff, 
              materials to support project-oriented pedagogy, and an emerging  networked
              community of teachers sharing their experiences as they  transform their
              teaching practices.    The testbed evaluation and dissemination infrastructure
              will  consist of a substantial research framework combining cognitive  science,
              survey methods, and case studies to help expose the  challenges for deploying
              high-bandwidth networking infrastructures  for education and clarify the ways
              in which these infrastructures  can improve the effectiveness of science
              education.  The results of  this research will be disseminated through a
              variety of traditional  and network-based mechanisms to reach an audience of
              school  administrators, policy makers, corporations, and researchers.
