Title       : An Integrating Research and Teaching Doctoral Program in Environmentally
               Conscious Chemical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9454136

Award Number: 9454136
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Donohue mdd@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Barbari  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kathleen J. Stebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Paulaitis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Betenbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. McHugh  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The creation and dissemination of new knowledge are primary  missions of the
              research university.  However, in engineering  education, the knowledge created
              in graduate student laboratories  often seems far removed from engineering
              design courses.  We  propose an innovative graduate research traineeship (GRT)
              program  that integrates fundamental graduate research activity with 
              undergraduate design projects.  The uniqueness of this  program  stems from the
              formulation of design problems by graduate students  using their own
              fundamental research as the basis.  By serving as  consultants, the graduate
              trainees will gain invaluable experience  in advising and monitoring other
              engineers.  Ideally, the  conclusions from the design projects will help to
              guide the  trainees' research.    The focus area of environmentally conscious
              manufacturing provides  an ideal framework for this program.  Alternative
              chemistries or  processes for pollution prevention eventually must be compared
              to  existing technologies to assess process feasibility.  Specifically,  the
              research projects will be motivated by the issue of waste  minimization through
              solvent replacement.  By producing doctoral  engineers with the ability to
              communicate with design and  manufacturing functions, the program will foster
              the critical area  of international competitiveness in addition to
              environmentally-  benign chemical processing.
