Title       : Graduate Research Traineeship - Biological Sciences - Environmental Biology
               Limnology and the Integration of Lake and Stream Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9454162

Award Number: 9454162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Magnuson jmagnuson@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Universities of Washington and Wisconsin-Madison propose a  collaborative,
              integrated graduate training program in the study of  freshwater ecosystems. 
              The program will emphasize important issues  identified by an NSF-sponsored
              workshop (The Freshwater  Imperative).  Revelations from this workshop point
              out that  freshwater ecology has become fragmented into separated programs, 
              e.g., lakes, wetlands, groundwater, or streams.  This has reduced  synthetic
              skills needed to deal with the complex issues that face  freshwater science.   
              Our goal is to created scientists who can work across environmental  gradients
              and intellectual barriers between studies in lakes and  those in streams or
              rivers.  Those now occupy the ends of the  epistemological gradient.  We
              combined  resources of two excellent  programs.  That emphasizing lakes is
              based in the Center for  Limnology, Univ. Wisconsin, while that for streams is
              based in  Center for Streamside Studies, Univ. Washington.  Each student will 
              train at each University; half will receive their degree from each.   Each
              University is contributing Advanced Opportunity Fellowships  and other elements
              to increase the number of trainees from 5 to 7.   Trainees will join active
              research communities of faculty, post  doctoral researchers and graduate
              students.  Both centers are fully  operational with a continuing history of
              research support from  state, national and private sources.  Facilities and
              infrastructure  are fully developed in support of student research that will 
              integrate stream and lake ecology.
