Title       : Leadership Program in Discrete Mathematics -- Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9454406

Award Number: 9454406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3471381            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Rosenstein joer@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454406  Rosenstein    LEADERSHIP PROGRAM IN DISCRETE MATHEMATICS -- PHASE III  
               Rutgers University, in cooperation with school district partners, develops a
              leadership cadre of teachers who are knowledgeable about concepts of discrete
              mathematics, who incorporate discrete mathematics into their classrooms and
              curricula, and who share their expertise and experiences with colleagues.  The
              five-year, principally regional (CT, DC, DE, MA, MD, NJ, NY, PA, RI, VA)
              project builds on a solid base of earlier NSF-supported projects and targets
              directly 660 teachers of mathematics in grades K-8.  Each participant attends a
              two-week summer institute, four follow-up sessions during the subsequent school
              year, and a one-week institute during the following summer.  Institutes are in
              both residential and commuter formats.      Participants at all grade levels in
              the program are introduced to the same topics in discrete mathematics and learn
              how these topics can be utilized at all grade levels.  In addition to their
              participation in all sessions of the summer institutes and academic-year
              follow-up sessions, program participants are expected to use institute
              materials and activities in their classrooms, provide workshops on these
              materials and activities for their colleagues, and work to change their
              school's and district's curriculum to include the materials and activities.   
              Project evaluation includes assessment of progress in achieving project goals,
              objectives, strategies, and timelines; evidence of continued refinement of
              curricular/instructional materials for teachers and of curricular sequencing
              for students; and evidence of effective integration of discrete mathematics
              topics into actual classroom use by teachers in all grade levels of K-8. 
              Cost-sharing from DIMACS/Rutgers University and from partner school districts
              represents 39% of the NSF award amount.
