Title       : Advanced Technical Education (ATE) Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9454655

Award Number: 9454655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499850            (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond C. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Angus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daw Alwerfalli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roy C. Shelton  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Consort for Adv Manuf Intl
	      1250 E Copeland Road
	      Arlington, TX  760114909    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is project will a pilot effort to develop, deliver, and  evaluate national
              curricula to educate the technicians who will be  employable in the 21st
              century manufacturing enterprise.   Instrutional delivery will be assisted by
              distance learning  technology and the National Information Infrastructure. 
              Added  funding will come from local, state, and other federal sources.   CAM-I
              will lead the Advanced Technical Education (ATE) Alliance,  including as
              members Lawrence Technological University, C.S. Mott  Community College, and
              the Goodrich, MI, area schools, and as  affiliates other school districts in
              the Flint, MI, area, clusters  of community colleges, school districts, and
              CAM-I company members  in Oak Ridge, TN, Kansas City, MO and KN, Los Angeles,
              CA, and the  Mescalero Apache Reservation NM, and Lehigh University and
              National  Technological University.  The knowledge and skill needs for a new 
              breed of agile technicians, able to respond knowledgeably,  effectively, and
              quickly in highly competitive, rapidly changing  global manufacturing, are
              described.  The ATE Alliance will meet  these needs by combining existing best
              practices modules, already  developed by its members and affiliates, with newly
              developed  modules in an integrated, flexible, grades 11 14 program in math, 
              science, communications, computing, and manufacturing enterprise  technologies
              in a pilot program centered on C.S. Mott Community  College and Goodrich MI
              area schools.  The Alliance will share the  modules using nationally scalable
              distance learning techniques.   The curricula will be reinforced with teacher
              training, jobsite  education for teachers and students, and public information 
              programs.  The ATE Alliance will establish a virtual school,  combining a
              national network of educational resources to provide  locally and temporally
              optimized education for employability.  The  pilot curriculum modules will be
              disseminated via distance learning  techniques to the members and the
              affiliated Associate degree  grant ing institutions and school districts. The
              curricula will be  evaluated through performance based assessment.  Successful
              modules  will be further disseminated throughout the United States by CAM-I  in
              publications, public fora, and through CAM-I's national network  of industrial
              members.  The ATE Alliance will provide 21st-century  education in clusters
              with large, diverse minority populations,  preparing students for employment in
              challenging and rewarding  careers.
