Title       : A Graduate Research Traineeship in Democratization at the University of Iowa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9454045

Award Number: 9454045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Miller arthur-miller@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jae-on Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki Hesli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gi-Wook Shin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Reisinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                       The concept of democracy is dynamic and multifaceted. 
              Because  democracy had been examined form a variety of intellectual 
              perspectives, any graduate training program in the study of  democratization
              must necessarily be interdisciplinary if it is to  adequately prepare the
              students for conducting research or teaching  on the topic of democratization. 
                The proposed traineeship program at Iowa would meet this  interdisciplinary
              goal by recruiting students onto both the  Political Science (three students)
              and the Sociology (two students)  Departments and then providing a training
              program that draws upon  substantive courses in these departments, as  well as
              the Colleges  of Law and Business Administration.  The formal course work will
              be  anchored by two core seminar; one that present a broad theoretical  and
              methodological overview of studies of democratization and a  Coordination
              Seminar that acts to integrate the students into  ongoing research projects
              focused on the process of democratization  in a number of Asian, East European,
              former Soviet and latin  American countries.    The elective seminars that add
              to the interdisciplinary quality of  the proposed training program are
              organized into four substantive  topic areas:  those focused on Institutions,
              Economics and Markets,  Socia-Political Culture and Elite Strategies.  These
              different  areas reflect the major research traditions in the study of 
              democratization.  Students would take at least one course from each  of these
              substantive areas.    A research apprenticeship would be a required part of the
              training  program.  This apprenticeship would directly involve the student in 
              research opportunities in countries currently experiencing a new  wave of
              democratization.  In most cases, this research involvement  would form the
              basis for the students' dissertation research.    The Political Science and
              Sociology Departments of the University  of Iowa are both highly rated graduate
              departments that have small  number s of graduate students relative to the size
              of their faculty.   Because these departments have traditionally provided the
              graduate  students with a good deal of individual attention and mentoring, 
              they have had very high rates of PhD completion.  Enrollments in  graduate
              courses in these departments is relatively low, therefore,  adding three to
              five more students in these classes will not affect  the quality of these
              courses in any way.  The University of Iowa  faculty that would participate in
              this program are all currently  involved in ongoing teaching and research on
              democratization; they  stand ready to welcome a new set of graduate students
              interested in  obtaining training in this relevant and exciting area of study.
