Title       : Middle Grades Teacher Enhancement: Model Program Development and Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9454371

Award Number: 9454371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1904888            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Post POSTXOO1@UMN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Lesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Cramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454371  Post, Cramer, Lesh    abstract    Middle Grades Teacher Enhancement:
              Model Program Development and Evaluation    This three-year project consists of
               three primary activities:  (1) initial development of the teacher enhancement
              program to support the development of integrated mathematical, psychological,
              and pedagogical content knowledge for a series of mathematical topics
              appropriate to the middle grades, (2) trial and refinement of the teacher
              enhancement program with several groups of teachers using teachine experiment
              methodology.  This will develop an exportable teacher enhancement program that
              will implement National Science Foundation-sponsored middle grades mathematics
              curriculum projects.   A guiding principle for this project is the belief that
              what teachers know, directly influences their ability to effectively implement
              any new program of  instruction.  This teaching enhancement project will focus
              on enhancing the participants' mathematical content background, their knowledge
              of how children learn, and an in-depth review of  new NSF mathematics
              curricula.  An important element of this project  is its effort to study the
              teacher enhancement process in order to articulate the dimensions of a  model
              program for effective teacher enhancement.   This three site project
              (Minneapolis, MN, and Princeton, NJ), involving a minimum of 285 middle grades
              teachers, will develop and implement teacher enhancement programs of one and
              two year duration that reflect the importance of teachers using integrated
              mathematical, psychological and pedagogical knowledge in effective teaching. It
              will also design and conduct an evaluation program that closely considers the
              teachers understanding a knowledge base in the effective implementation of new
              curricula and new approaches to instruction. A revised version of these
              programs will be made available, in exportable modules, to others with similar
              teacher enhancement needs.   After initial implementation of specific NSF
              curriculum programs, the teams  of teachers involved in this project will
              assume leadership roles in their respective schools and help with the
              implementation of the new curricula on a  larger scale and at other school
              sites.
