Title       : Common Knowledge: Pittsburgh, Creating an Urban Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9454715

Award Number: 9454715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3294498            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernie H. Manning   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Z. Roskies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Carlitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet W. Schofield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Wertheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : School Dist of Pittsburgh
	      431 S Bellefield Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152132620    412/622-3992

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454715  Manning    The school networking project "Common Knowledge: Pittsburgh"
              has  begun to create a networked educational environment in the  Pittsburgh
              Public Schools.  The project has highlighted a number of  research questions
              involving the issues of student usage, community  access, teacher enhancement,
              institutionalization, dissemination  and content.  It is proposed to extend
              "Common Knowledge:  Pittsburgh" with the formation of a new Urban Research
              Laboratory  in which these questions can be thoroughly addressed.    The Urban
              Research Laboratory involves "Common Knowledge:  Pittsburgh," the Pittsburgh
              Public Schools, and a set of affiliated  institutions which include vendors,
              universities and other school  districts.  Each of the participants in the
              Laboratory's activities  helps to address one or more of the research questions
              mentioned  above.    Project activities within the Urban Research Laboratory
              are  identified through a competitive process in the school district and  are
              carried out in classrooms of the Pittsburgh Public Schools.   Typical projects
              use the wide area network connectivity provided by  "Common Knowledge:
              Pittsburgh" to access remote resources or  facilitate collaborations with
              groups outside the school classroom.    The same connectivity provides the
              thread which binds the three  groups which contribute to the activities of the
              Urban Research  Laboratory.    "Common Knowledge: Pittsburgh" is itself a
              collaborative effort,  with technical support provided through the Pittsburgh 
              Supercomputing Center, assessment support and project management  through the
              University of Pittsburgh, and educational support from  the Pittsburgh Public
              Schools.
