Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Civil Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9454123

Award Number: 9454123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Weyers rweyers.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Primarily because of extensive use by an increasing population and  a
              significant building boom following World War II, our nation's  infrastructure
              is degrading at an alarming rate.  It is clear that  there will not be
              sufficient funds in the foreseeable future to  address all the needed
              infrastructure replacements simultaneously.   It is therefore necessary to
              prioritize the needed repair,  rehabilitation, and replacement strategies.  To
              prioritize the  custodians of the infrastructure must have knowledge of
              assessment  technologies, deterioration science, structural evaluation and 
              analysis, construction methodologies, and new high performance  materials. 
              This proposal is for the establishment of a five year,  Masters through Ph.D.,
              interdisciplinary graduate research  traineeship program which will provide the
              future custodians and  educators of the custodians the engineering knowledge to
               effectively manage our infrastructure.    The program will be a fully
              integrated interdisciplinary curriculum  of material science, non-destructive
              testing, structural mechanics,  construction engineering and management, and
              sensor and control  activator technologies.  Integration will be achieved
              through  summer research programs and a fourth year research capstone  course. 
              A core course curriculum will be developed from existing,  developing, and to
              be developed courses in statistical data  analysis, electromagnetic sensors and
              waves, signal processing,  non-destructive evaluation of materials,
              infrastructure condition  assessment, structural evaluation and analysis,
              deterioration  science, fiber-polymer composites, health monitoring sensors and
               damage control, and construction.  The core curriculum will provide  the
              breath for the student to understand the problems encountered  in maintaining
              our infrastructure.  Specialization in one of the  areas will provide the depth
              to crate solutions.    Research training will be accomplished through industry
              and  university cost-sharing summer research durin g the first three  years and
              during the fourth year.  Fourth year research will be  team solutions to
              industry problems and the fifth year will be  devoted to dissertation research.
                 A unique faculty-industry mentor program will be established to aid  in the
              retention of students.  The program will be laden with the  development of
              communication skills to insure student success.   Student recruitment will be
              on a personal basis by participating  faculty and graduate students and unique
              international educational  opportunities will be established.  Program student
              accommodations  will be under the umbrella of the Center for Infrastructure 
              Assessment and Management with newly constructed dedicated office  and research
              facilities.
