Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships: Computer Science Human Interface Design for
               Access to Computers and NetworkedInformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a9454185

Award Number: 9454185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jarek Rossignac jarek@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Foley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Albert N. Badre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory M. Corso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thiruvenkatasa Govindaraj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The interdisciplinary Graphics, Visualization & Usability (GVU)  Center
              engages in teaching and research programs focusing on making  computers
              accessible and usable by everyone.  This focus is vital  to the continuing
              growth of the computing industry and hence our  national competitiveness, is an
              essential requirement for success  in several Grand Challenges, an can enhance
              the productivity of  workers.  The Center draws on faculty from the College of 
              Computing, Psychology, Industrial and Systems, engineering, and  several other
              academic units.  Among these three enumerated units,  we offer seventeen
              courses in the filed of human interface design.   Of the 34 faculty associated
              with interface design, collaborative  work, interactive tutoring systems,
              multimedia, user interface  software, information presentation, design of
              complex user-computer  interfaces, virtual environments and algorithm
              animation.  We  believe our Center is the largest such interdisciplinary group
              in  an academic setting in the HCI area.  Trainees will be enrolled in  any of
              the Ph.D. programs of the College of computing, ISyE or  Psychology, depending
              on their background and interest.  They will  be supported to work with any of
              the HCI faculty in the  interdisciplinary environment provided by the GVU
              Center.
