Title       : Computational Aspects of Cognitive Science Focus Area: Human Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9454149

Award Number: 9454149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire Cardie cardie@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Henzinger  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ramin Zabih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Lust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We propose to create a novel predoctoral training program at the  interface of
              Computer Science and Cognitive Science at Cornell  University.  While this
              interface has been crowded lately with  "fuzzy-engineering" approaches
              typically identified as Artificial  Intelligence (common-sense reasoning,
              neural nets, etc.), we plan  to focus, instead, on "formal-scientific" aspects,
              including the  formal modeling of computational and inference processes,
              computer-  human interface and computer science education studies, vision and 
              robotics, learning theory, and intelligent information retrieval.   We argue
              that         1.  both disciplines, Computer Science and Cognitive Science,     
                    will benefit from such a program,              and         2.  Cornell is
              uniquely suited to accommodate such a program.    Indeed, we hope that the
              proposed program would serve as a model of  how and engineering field and a
              liberal-arts field can leverage  each other and ultimately lead to both (1)
              engineering artifices  that pay more  attention to the human user and (2) a
              better formal  understanding of human thought process    The proposal is
              organized in four parts.  First, we present several  con=crete and promising
              research directions.  Each module is  concrete in that at least one current
              doctoral student or faculty  member is interested in pursuing the topic; each
              module is  promising in that progress will depend on and advance both 
              participating disciplines.  Second, we briefly portray the current 
              infrastructure at Cornell and we present the structure of the  proposed
              program.  Third, we present a plan for recruiting and,  fourth, we justify the
              need for funding.
