Title       : Enhancing Learning through Electronic Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9454706

Award Number: 9454706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur W. St. George                    
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Small dsmall@inspire.ospi.wednet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Office Sprntndt Pub Instrt
	      Old Capitol Building
	      Olympia, WA  985047200    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454706  Lemke    Every night citizens across the nation read newspaper articles
              and view news telecasts about  youth, education and communities in crisis, be
              it the need for metal detectors in schools due to  violence, Microsoft
              conducting job searches out of the USA due to lack of qualified candidates  in
              the country, or the issues surrounding children in poverty.  There is an
              emerging recognition  that a critical part of the answer to these issues will
              be thoughtful, community-based solutions  which take full advantage of emerging
              telecommunications avenues.      In this age of global communications,
              accelerating change and information explosion, children,  youth and community
              members must learn to use the information highways to gather data, access 
              experts and communicate with peers as well as fellow community members.  To do
              so will  require new models of education, community connections and public
              policy development - all  of which must incorporate universal access to
              information through telecommunications and  technology.      Through this
              project five communities will plan and deploy (or enhance) a local 
              telecommunications infrastructure, establish an on-line culture of learning
              around community  issues, and gain a strong sense of civic stewardship and
              problem-solving action which will  ultimately lead to more relevant learning
              opportunities and healthier communities.  Collectively  the five communities
              will represent diverse geographic, social, economic and demographic 
              populations enabling the investigators to document five different
              prototypes/models.      A strong state support system will provide each
              community with: a framework for community--  based telecommunications systems;
              guidance in strategic planning; education and training on  technology, new
              instructional strategies, and on-line communication norms/processes; a turnkey 
              host system connected to the state education backbone; software conducive to
              group  participation/conferencing; on-line coaching and moderating; access  to
              rich resources and  information; access to experts in on-line communication,
              and; assessment of learning outcomes.      This model leverages existing
              telecommunications infrastructures, technology support systems  and current
              education reform efforts while creating new coalitions, programs, community 
              resources and access points for learners.  The result will be five new
              community-based  telecommunications prototypes/models with new insights into
              learning outcomes for students;  civic and economic benefits for communities,
              and; contributions to the knowledge base of the  "necessary ingredients" for a
              community to "grow" both a telecommunications infrastructure and  culture which
              is sustainable, economical and of significant value to the majority of
              community  members.
