Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Hydrology: Role of the Hydrologic Cycle in the
               Coupled Earth System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9454098

Award Number: 9454098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Famiglietti jsf@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay L. Banner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip C. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The hydrological cycle is the most fundamental of all earth system  cycles,
              linking together the solid earth, the oceans, and the  atmosphere.  The endless
              cycling of water through these earth  system components yields interactions
              over the full spectrum of  spatial-temporal scales.  Only recently has the
              picture emerged  that the two-way nature of these interactions has profound
              impacts  on climate, weather, biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem dynamics.  
              The view that hydrological processes simultaneously affect and are  affected by
              physical, chemical, and biological processes, in all  compartments of the earth
              system, provides the framework for a  multi-disciplinary GRT program in
              hydrological sciences at UT  Austin.  With this educational and research theme,
              we hope to  impart to our students the scientific underpinnings which are 
              currently absent from traditional hydrology programs, while  cultivating a pool
              of scientific talent to provide long-term  leadership in the field of
              hydrology.  Given the recent addition of  new hydrology faculty in the
              Department of Geological Sciences,  including state-of-the-art analytical and
              computer modeling  facilities, combined with existing hydrological strength in
              the  department-affiliated Bureau of Economic Geology, the Institute for 
              Geophysics, and the Center for Space Research, as well as in the  Department of
              Civil Engineering, a critical mass now exists so that  truly unique,
              interdisciplinary research and education initiatives  can be launched under the
              unifying theme of a GRT program in  hydrology-earth system interactions.  Our
              GRT program includes a  number of structural innovations, including
              collaborative  arrangements with federal research organizations, progressive
              new  course offerings, teaching effectiveness seminars for fellows,  teaching
              opportunities for fellows involving advanced technology  applications in the
              classroom, and opportunities for fellows to  mentor undergraduates in a local
              "partnership" institution.   Recruitment pl ans include a consortial
              arrangement with the local  partnership institution, a department-sponsored
              seminar forum and  endowed lectureships, and an outreach program to regional
              Texas  colleges with large Hispanic or African-American enrollments.
