Title       : The Virtual Community: A Telecommunication Model for the Inner City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1994 
File        : a9454817

Award Number: 9454817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93136              (Estimated)
Investigator: Josef Stagg jstagg@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454817  Stagg    Most anomalies occurring in the inner city today, including
              low levels of educational attainment,  unemployment, the destruction of family
              units, both youthful and adult homicides, robberies and  thefts, and gang
              activities, can be traced to the breakdown of the American community. Our  once
              nourishing communities have now become an encumbrance for those who need them
              most,  particularly African-Americans, Hispanics, and other underrepresented
              minorities of the inner  city. The consequence is that the entire country is
              suffering.    The quest for community today is a quest to return to a community
              that meets the needs of all  its members: one that keeps them safe, and ensures
              its growth as well as the growth of all its  residents. There is a clear need
              to reverse this trend and resurrect the community.    It is also clear that in
              order to resurrect the community, the community must undergo a complete 
              restructuring process. Community re-structuring is best done through master
              planning. Such  master planning, however, can no longer be expert-driven. It
              must shift to being community  resident-driven.  This form of master planning
              must go beyond simple participation to the point  of control of the planning
              process by the community residents.  In order to take control of the  community
              planning process, it is necessary for community residents to gain the knowledge
               necessary to do the planning.  The best way to gain planning knowledge is
              through distance  education.  Multimedia-telecommunication technology - a
              technology that makes use of the  computer, expert systems, 2-way interactive
              audio/visuals, related databases, and networking,  to name a few - is the best
              means of dispensing distance education.    The overall goal of this proposed
              research is to explore ways in which  multimedia-telecommunication can assist
              in bringing back the community to the inner city. To  this end, three major
              objectives are proposed: 1) To use community master planning as the  vehicle
              for bringing ba ck the community; 2) To use distance education as a tool for
              teaching  community residents how to take control of the planning process, and;
              3) To use  multimedia-telecommunication technology tools for dispensing the
              distance education and for  doing the master planning.  A significant
              difference between this project, and those like the new  one at the University
              of Wisconsin-Madison, is that it is task-oriented.  This prevents the endless 
              wandering associated with such large amounts of information, teaches the
              participants how to  best use the technology, and then lets them go so that
              they can more efficiently apply it to their  problems.    To achieve the
              objectives the following tasks will be performed: 1) develop a participation
              pool  among the residents of the community; 2) develop an Advisory Committee of
              community and  technology experts to help evaluate both the methods and the
              results of the research; 3) develop  the multimedia-telecommunication system;
              4) develop, pre-test, test, and evaluate three distance  education modules: one
              teaching master planning, one teaching middle school students how to  develop
              ideal relationships between their schools and their community, and one that
              teaches  families how to develop ideal service relationships within their
              community. (All of the research  will take place within the Harambee
              neighborhood of Milwaukee.  This community is one of the  largest in the city
              and it also has some of the most negative statistics, like unemployment - 25% 
              for African-American males, and so on.); 5) evaluate the research results; 6)
              disseminate the  research to as many communities and conferences as possible,
              and; 7) develop an on-going  mechanism that builds on the test model.    The
              expected results are both short-term and long-term. The research becomes a
              vehicle for the  Pl and other academic faculty, staff, and departments to serve
              their surrounding communities  in housing, health and other services,
              economics, etc.  This will help improve an otherwise weak  r elationship
              between the two.  If the research proves successful, there should be measurable
               improvement in the overall conditions of the community, the school and the
              family.  The  interrelationships between the public schools, the family, and
              the community should improve  dramatically.    As a long-term expectation, the
              research should determine if distance education and multimedia- 
              telecommunication can help restructure and revive the communities of the inner
              city.  The  overall aim is to make sure that the benefits of this relatively
              new technology, once again, does  not bypass the inner city.  The traditionally
              forgotten - African-Americans, Hispanics and other  underrepresented minorities
              the majority of Harambee community residents (about 95%) will get  tools that
              will help in solving most of the problems of their neighborhoods.  Finally,
              this  research should, in its revival of the community, help make the city,
              state, and the country a  stronger and better place to live.
