Title       : Developing Oregon's Technical, Human, and Organizational Networking
               Infrastructure for Science and Mathematics Education: A Planning Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9454794

Award Number: 9454794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven A. Sanchez                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99924              (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Lamb blamb@admin.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454794  Lamb    Oregon is an acknowledged leader in educational reform
              legislation. The climate created by  innovative leaders in public, private, and
              parochial education, private non-profits, business and  industry, coupled with
              effective political leadership has stimulated numerous initiatives in Oregon 
              implementing computerized telecommunications (CT) for teaching science and
              mathematics.   With so many fine institutions and organizations initiating
              promising practices and ideas, the  need for planning, sharing resources, and
              working cooperatively is vital, for even as these  innovations are being
              implemented, the majority of Oregon's students are not served by CT for 
              science and mathematics education, or for other purposes either.      This
              project will effect the following short-term goals:              Establish an
              effective coalition of public and private entities for implementing CT         
                as a tool for teaching science and mathematics in Oregon, K-14.             
              Inform coalition members and others of existing infrastructure and ongoing     
                    activities related to using CT as a tool for teaching science and
              mathematics,            K-14, to encourage coordination and cooperation.       
                    Identify barriers to using CT in Oregon.              Identify potential
              resources and generate solutions to overcome those barriers.             
              Create a practical long-range plan to implement those solutions that includes,
              but            is not limited to, a "Testbed/Infrastructure" proposal to be
              submitted to NSF in            1995.    The method will encompass the following
              elements:    (1) Build a coalition: Invite project participation by selected
              public, private and parochial schools  and districts, colleges and
              universities, private business and industry, state agencies, and private 
              non-profit organizations interested in applying CT to science and mathematics
              education.  Representatives of this coalition will serve as both a policy and
              executive board in implementing  the proj ect.    (2) Research key issues:
              Commission and fund a series of Benchmark Reports to establish the  state of
              the art, area practitioners, potential sources of help for and barriers to
              implementation  of CT to science and mathematics education    (3) Prioritize
              goals: Implement a Planning Conference in which coalition members and teachers,
               administrators and others who are pro, neutral and con to CT interact with
              each other and the  Benchmark Reports in Focus Groups to identify perceived
              barriers, outline potential solutions,  and generate prioritized goals for the
              application of CT.    (4) Develop a comprehensive plan: Implement a Strategic
              Planning Workshop including coalition  members, political leaders, and local
              and regional private funding agencies to generate practical,  fundable
              proposals for accomplishing the prioritized goals for application of CT to
              science and  math education.  One of these proposals will be for an NSF
              "Testbed/Infrastructure" project.    The effectiveness of the project will be
              evaluated in four ways: (1) the usefulness of the  Benchmark Reports as
              information sources, tools for developing both technical and human 
              connectivity, and tools for implementing theory into practice; (2) the ability
              of the Planning  Conference format to encourage participants to generate
              concrete positive suggestions and to  identify real barriers, rather than to
              engage in essentially product-free discussions of generalities  and
              philosophies; (3) the extent to which coalition members and conference
              attendees begin to  work together in implementing CT; and (4) the number,
              quality, and implementation of  proposals that arise from the process.    The
              proposed project will generate knowledge about barriers to implementing
              educational  innovations, in particular CT as applied to science and
              mathematics education, and about the  ways of bringing together organizations
              into effective coalition prepared to address the problems.
