Title       : Discovering Community Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9454782

Award Number: 9454782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Clark tclark@ssi.edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Q. Eberle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maine Math & Sci Alliance
	      P. O. Box 5359
	      Augusta, ME  043325359    207/287-5885

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9454782  Clark    How can communities plan for and manage self-sustaining
              telecommunication networks and other  technologies?  The Maine Mathematics and
              Science Alliance, (MMSA), a nonprofit 501 (c) 3  organization, the
              administrator of Maine's Statewide Systemic Initiative (SSI), is proposing an 
              eight-month planning project, Discovering Community Networks, where three
              diverse  communities, York, Houlton, Mt. Desert Island, will develop strategies
              for building synergy for  inter and intracommunity communication with
              electronic networks to work toward systemic  changes in mathematics, science
              and technology education.  Discovering Community Networks,  through planning
              forums aimed at sustainability of a network and educational reform, will build 
              partnerships within and across communities.    The objectives are:          1.
              To develop community technology plans focused on using telecommunications to   
                 improve science and Mathematics education.          2. To develop plans for
              intra and intercommunity communication.          3. To plan community links for
              appropriate use of electronic technology.          4. To document the process
              of community technology planning for a transferable model.          5. To
              research how mathematics and science reform is enhanced by telecommunication.  
               The co-principal investigators and a project director will work in concert
              with the communities'  coordinators, technology teams and a cross-site team. 
              Membership on the technology teams will  represent all community populations
              including teachers, parents, students, industry, research  laboratories, higher
              education institutions, municipal government, cable television companies, 
              retired people, and civic groups using and providing network services. Three
              one-half time site  coordinators will simplify the planning and work with the
              project director and existing  governance structures.    In response to our
              earlier question, the evaluation of the project will reflect the answers we 
              discover.  Discovering Commun ity Networks will formatively assess in the
              planning portion and  a summative evaluation will conclude the project with
              what we've learned about intra and inter  community collaboration and the
              products produced.  This will be available to interested  communities, the
              Maine State Library as they work toward providing networking services for 
              Maine, the Maine Department of Education's State Educational Technology Task
              Force, and be  incorporated into funding requests to carry out the plans.
