Title       : Project Smart: A Systemic Model for Advancing Restructuring with
               Telecommunications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9454703

Award Number: 9454703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $703252             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Fiske BFISKE@IDS.NET  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dexter Merry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore M. Kellogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R I Dept of Ele & Sec Edu
	      22 Hayes St
	      Providence, RI  029085025    401/277-2031

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9454703  Fiske    Project SMART provides a testbed for the role of electronic 
              networks in support of educational reform.  In an environment  created by the
              cooperation of business, higher education, state  agencies, K-12 education
              institutions, students and educators, this  project tests the benefits of open
              access to:         *    INTERNET and other telecommunications resources.      
              *    Quality mathematics and science instructional lessons            congruent
              with national and emerging state standards       *    On-going assistance
              through school-based support staff,       *    Electronic access to community
              resources, proximal and            distal to individual schools.    Project
              SMART tests technical support strategies and the scaling up  of training to the
              vast numbers of students and teachers who share  the need to "do" science and
              mathematics and contribute to the  creation of new curricula.  It provides
              answers to questions about  how a telecommunications infrastructure connecting
              all our public  institutions can foster out-of-school programs, establish
              life-long  learning programs, and inform the community.  Gender and equity 
              issues in telecommunications are the main thrust of this proposal.   Project
              SMART explores ways to promote equity among schools,  teachers and students in
              gaining access to and effectively using  technology.    Agreements with NYNEX
              Corp. provide free phone lines to public  schools throughout Rhode Island for
              access to a complete array of  Internet services.  Regional modem pools have
              eliminated toll  charges, removing a major obstacle to employing
              telecommunications  in the classroom. Therefore, because many of the
              difficulties  associated with the costs of telecommunications are being
              resolved,  this proposal focuses on the individuals and groups who will be 
              connected, as well as purposes for their connections.    Project SMART
              demonstrates how infrastructure changes underlying  almost three years of SSI
              activities in mathematics and science can  activel y support technology
              infusion into schools.  Project SMART  increases the capacity of training
              organizations to provide  training, ultimately, to every K-12 school teacher in
              Rhode Island.   Building based support staff will link each school to a state 
              network of educators developing effective applications of  telecommunications
              in science and mathematics.  In addition the  Rhode Island Office of Higher
              Education will introduce RINet to  several colleges and universities where is
              it not being used to  expand the infrastructure of the network.  Project SMART
              addresses  the need to change learning and teaching by using:         *   
              Expertise in educational and telecommunications methods            within Rhode
              Islands' colleges and universities;       *    Consultants able to support the
              needs of specific       *         populations of users;       *    Content area
              specialists;       *    Successful teacher pioneers.    The project supports
              successful applicant teams from every district  and teams of higher education
              faculty from teacher preparation  institutions.  Specific efforts address
              concerns noted in the  literature pertaining to gender and equity differences
              among  computer users by providing technical support to traditionally  under
              represented populations in team selection and project  involvement.   
              Instructional units created by participants will include embedded  assessment
              items and rubrics supported by a manual for educators to  access related
              telecommunication resources.  All participants  receive the full support
              necessary to:         *    Develop model instructional units;        *   
              Create, develop, modify or extend educational activities            using
              network;       *    Use electronic networks (Internet) for improved K-12       
                  instruction in science and mathematics;       *    Maintain dialogue via
              Rhode Island Network (RINet).  ***
