Title       : Network-Level and Content-Based Approaches to Diversity and Interference
               Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9979363

Award Number: 9979363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Wornell gww@allegro.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The overall scientific objective of this study is to develop theory and
              methodology for optimum utilization of distributed physical-layer resources to
              provide overall efficiency in high-throughput, mixed traffic, mobile,
              multimedia, wireless communication networks. These resources include power,
              bandwidth, space, quality of service (rate, fidelity, delay), and complexity.
              Existing methodologies for the design and management of wireless network
              resources are grossly inadequate for dealing with the demands projected for
              future networks that will need to deliver high-quality voice and multimedia
              services to large numbers of mobile subscribers. Thus, in providing a basis for
              significant improvement in network throughput and flexibility, the theory and
              methods developed under this study provide crucial elements for the development
              future generations of commercial communication networks.

This research is
              focused on the development of algorithms for dynamic, network-level, and
              content-specific management (i.e., allocation, control and mitigation) of the
              various forms of interference that ultimately and severely limit wireless
              network performance. These include time-varying multipath, inter-user
              interference, and extra-network interference. Spatial diversity is among the
              most important mechanisms within wireless networks for effective interference
              management, and this investigation stresses use of this form of diversity in a
              globally efficient manner. Several specific and interrelated research themes
              are under study. These include the design and exploitation of "virtual arrays"
              that combine physical resources across cellular boundaries to enhance overall
              network performance, the management (i.e., the control and allocation) of
              interference, and the creation and exploitation of content-specific
              characteristics in multimedia traffic (primarily through space-time coding) for
              the enhancement of overall network throughput. Collectively, these diverse
              issues present a wealth of important research challenges and represent
              extraordinary opportunities to dramatically enhance the overall performance of
              next-generation wireless networks. The protocols implied by this research
              transcend individual layers in the traditional OSI communication hierarchy and
              involve strong interaction among these layers.

Co-Principal
              Investigators:

H. Vincent Poor, Princeton University 
M. D. Trott,
              Arraycomm, Inc. 
G. W. Wornell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
A.
              Zakhor, University of California, Berkeley

