Title       : KDI: Economic, Legal, and Technical Dimensions of Rights Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9979852

Award Number: 9979852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $940000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal R. Varian hal@sims.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Doug Tygar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Samuelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1346,8877,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A variety of long-standing and remarkably stable legal and business institutions
              have supported and sustained the creation and dissemination of knowledge. 
              Recent advances in digital technology have created the potential for much
              broader and deeper access to knowledge but, at the same time, raised
              significant challenges for these long-standing institutions.  So far, efforts
              to apply the law of copyright and traditional business practices to the
              emerging digital environment have not been particularly successful, and there
              have been many proposals for alternative approaches.  One such approach is
              rights management technology.  While rights management technologies have so far
              mainly been deployed in entertainment products, the same sorts of technology
              may be used to manage the dissemination of scientific research or educational
              materials.  This project investigates some of the intellectual property,
              privacy and security issues raised by rights management technologies.   It
              conducts case studies of current and previous attempts to manage rights.
              Examples are copy protected software in the 1980s, copy management in Digital
              Audio Tape, and various current systems used in the entertainment industry. 
              The project studies the limits imposed by technology and existing law, which
              inherently involves economic analysis about how owners and consumers of content
              will respond to the new possibilities offered by the rights management
              technology.  On the technical side, the project investigates the theory of
              distributed rights management systems in order to understand what is possible
              and not possible for such systems.  The project determines the terms and
              conditions that profit-seeking owners will choose to specify. Specifying
              liberal terms and conditions will make the content more valuable to users, but
              also will reduce sales, and the tradeoff between these two effects is subject
              to analysis.
The fundamental problem in intellectual property law is to
              provide appropriate incentives to produce and disseminate valuable content.
              Intellectual property law that is too liberal risks the problem of inadequate
              incentives to create content; law that is too conservative risks the problem of
              inadequate dissemination of content. An optimal policy balances out these two
              effects. There has been substantial economic analysis of incentive effects in
              patent law, but very little of such work in copyright law.   The project builds
              a numeric model of the tradeoff between the incentives to create and to
              distribute content that is suitable for benefit-cost analysis. This model
              incorporates several effects previously noted in the literature and will be
              useful for evaluation of proposals for new forms of intellectual
              property.
Liability problems that arise in computer security are examined. 
              One of the basic principles of tort law is that the party best able to reduce
              risk of an accident should bear most of the liability should the accident
              occur; this same principle can be applied to computer security. However, the
              nature of security accidents is different from standard torts, and several new
              effects arise.

