Title       : Stochastic Control Problems in Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9979250

Award Number: 9979250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Kushner hjk@dam.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Dupuis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9979250
Kushner

The proposal concerns the application of the analytical
              and numerical methods of modern stochastic control theory to problems in
              wireless communications. Two broad clases of problems are considered. The first
              concerns data communications under random connectivity, where the mobile
              sources are not always available to the transceiver. Little is known about the
              asociated polling problem. Periods of unavailability of major sources create
              jumps in the backed up workload, and this jump depends on the polling policy.
              We are concerned with efficient diffusion approximations that reduce the
              problem dimension and allow the use of optimal control methods, and ultimately
              efficient numerical methods. Arbitrary cost functions, general statistical
              structures and either finite or infinite buffers are of interest, as well as
              noisy channels, and the use of smart antennas and simultaneous adaptive
              polling. The main techniques are those of heavy traffic analysis and diffusion
              approximation, which should shed considerable insight by allowing an
              approximation of the control problem by a much simpler one of lower dimension
              for which numerical method are either available or will be developed.
The
              second class of problems concerns the loss of calls due to lack of available
              frequencies on handover. This is formulated as a control problem, where what
              one controls are the new entries into the system, somwhat analogous to what is
              done in the trunk line access/routing problem. Since the loss of calls should
              be relatively rare and are costly, the theory of large deviations is an
              appropriate tool. The problems of control within a large deviations context are
              nonclassical. A new approach to the theory greatly facilitates such analysis to
              problems such as those arising in wirless, and also provides a basis for
              numerical methods, an essential component of any "engineering" theory.

Key
              words:
Wireless communications, random connectivity, heavy traffic
              approxima-tions, polling, large deviations, handover losses.

