Title       : Smart Active Antenna Arrays with Optical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9979355

Award Number: 9979355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoya B. Popovic zoya@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana Z. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979355
Popovic

The development of smart active antenna array front ends
              with optical/digital processing back ends is proposed. The objective is to
              demonstrate that:
Smart (adaptive) antennas improve adverse interference
              effects in wireless
communication systems;
Active smart antenna arrays
              increase radiated power with reduced cost and power consumption, increase
              dynamic range, increase reliability and reduce cost, with built-in angle-of
              arrival detection;
Nonlinear optical components provide a simpler, potentially
              low-cost alternative to
digital signal processing and can be easily integrated
              with active microwave and
millimeter-wave arrays.

Interfering signals can
              be both spatially and temporally varying, causing interference to  depend on
              time as well as on the physical location of the users and surrounding area. To
              mitigate interference problems, smart antennas create a spatial division
              multiple access network. Currently, there are not many commercially used smart
              antenna wireless systems, but several companies have used smart antennas to
              steer nulls and reduce interference, with increase range and capacity for the
              same transmitted power, with additional reduced maintenance cost. Smart
              antennas are also attractive to providers because they provide flexibility as
              systems grow. The approach taken in this proposal involves a new type of
              adaptivity for antenna arrays, through a new front end architecture, aided by
              unique capabilities of nonlinear optical processing. Specific arguments are
              that: (1) introducing adaptation at the analog front end eases the burden on
              the signal processing and adaptation becomes faster and more energy efficient
              with no cost increase (and possible decrease); and (2) nonlinear holographic
              optical processing can be efficiently used to perform part of the signal
              processing, with reduction in power consumption, size and cost..

This
              proposal focuses on systems with: (1) a transmit/receive active lens antenna
              array front end; (2) resonant electro-optic conversion; and (3) nonlinear
              active optical interconnects. In order to validate the goals of cost, size and
              power consumption reductions, a benchmark DSP adaptive processor (4) is
              proposed.

Interdisciplinary expertise in microwave/millimeter wave active
              antenna arrays, and nonlinear optics is needed, along with knowledge of the
              interference properties in a wireless channel and an understanding of the most
              practical adaptive algorithms. Students involved in this work will gain a broad
              knowledge base while working on challenging fundamental research problems. This
              is a collaborative effort with Qualcomm (a world leader in wireless
              communications), the French Thomson CSF (one of the leaders in optically
              controlled antenna beam-forming), and the Netherlands Foundation for
              RadioAstronomy (a scientific institution with strong interests in adaptive
              arrays).
***
