Title       : GK-12 Access Science: Tomorrow's Scientists Assisting In-Service and Pre-Service
               Teachers and their Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a9979635

Award Number: 9979635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1497902            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. DeTurck deturck@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is bringing together research scientists and dedicated teachers to
              assist Graduate Teaching Fellows to improve mathematics, science and technology
              education for K-12 students in the urban Philadelphia School District.  While
              significant efforts by the Urban Systemic Initiative and other programs have
              begun to establish a solid foundation for science education, most of the
              District's elementary and middle grades teachers and many secondary teachers
              have limited knowledge of science content and little experience with
              inquiry-based instruction. As a result, science education is often
              textbook-based and superficial. 
The Teaching Fellows are working with
              teachers under the guidance of disciplinary faculty, and faculty in
              the-Graduate School of Education, to incorporate current scientific knowledge
              and an inquiry-based approach into all levels of the school district
              curriculum.  Pre-service and in-service teachers, Fellows, and mentors are
              working as a team to take existing "hands on" science demonstrations and
              experiments, and incorporate them into the curriculum in a scientifically
              sound, pedagogically useful, safe, and cost effective manner.  
The project's
              curriculum support is in alignment with the School District of Philadelphia's
              standards, which are closely aligned with NCTM and Project 2061. These
              activities are serving to amplify and extend the current activities of Penn's
              Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics and Physics Departments, and the Penn Merck and
              PennLincs programs of the Graduate School of Education and Penn's Institute for
              Research in Cognitive Science. The project has established collaborative
              arrangements with other institutions, including the Franklin Institute Science
              Museum (Philadelphia's science museum) and the University City Science Center
              (Philadelphia's technology small business incubator), to support both
              curriculum and teacher development activities. 

