Title       : Petroleum Exploitation and Economic, Political, and Social Transformation in
               Delta Amacuro, Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9979284

Award Number: 9979284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Briggs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary Revised
In the face of an acute economic crisis, Venezuela
              recently reversed its nationalization of the oil industry and offered leases in
              Delta Amacuro State to BP-Amoco and other transnational corporations. As
              capital- and technology-intensive facilities are constructed in the midst of
              impoverished communities, the government and NGO's are using corporate funding
              in producing sudden infusions of capital, bringing health care, schools, and
              small development projects into selected areas. Funding is requested for a
              two-year investigation that will produce systematic quantitative and
              qualitative data on the way that petroleum investment and associated changes
              affect the way that individuals in this region construct social identities.
              Open-ended interviews and focus groups will explore the concepts of race,
              class, place (including notions of local, regional, national, and transnational
              spaces), and citizenship that people use in characterizing themselves and their
              life experiences and the relative importance of each of these factors. The
              survey will focus specifically on the latter question, the differential weight
              that is accorded to each of these factors. The PI and a consultant will work in
              three delta communities that are classified as "indigenous," while two
              undergraduates from the Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV) in Caracas will
              conduct fieldwork in two towns that are classified as being primarily
              "non-indigenous." The sites have been selected to include areas in which oil
              exploitation is currently taking place, in which exploration alone has taken
              place, and where no oil activity is evident. A UCV faculty member who teaches
              in the School of Anthropology and is currently a student in the Ethnic Studies
              doctoral program at UCSD will interview oil company representatives and
              officials in NGOs and similar organizations working in the delta.  She will
              investigate how they view and are attempting to shape the attitudes and actions
              of residents in addition to documenting the nature and extent of their
              activities in the delta.


