Title       : Collaborative Research: Improvement of Microphysical Parameterization Through
               Observational Verification Experiment (IMPROVE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9979494

Award Number: 9979494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford F. Mass cliff@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter V. Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Locatelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Stoelinga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Improvements in quantitative precipitation forecasting (QPF) have been listed as
              one of the top priorities of the U.S. Weather Research Program.  The need for
              accurate QPF is especially acute along the mountainous coastal zone of western
              North America, where heavy precipitation and flooding are among the most
              significant weather hazards.  Even with steady improvements in operational
              model resolution, quantitative precipitation forecasting has been slow to
              improve.  This fact suggests that, in addition to increased grid resolution,
              other components of mesoscale models must be improved.  One clearly problematic
              area is the bulk parameterization of grid-resolved cloud microphysics and
              precipitation.  

Under this collaborative project, two researchers from the
              University of Washington will execute a field program, associated data analysis
              and numerical modeling work, to improve quantitative precipitation forecasting
              in mesoscale models.  The project will undertake comprehensive observational
              verifications and improvements of model-parameterized cloud and precipitation
              microphysics.  The Principal Investigators will carry out two observational
              campaigns in the Pacific Northwest: a frontal precipitation study over the
              northeast Pacific Ocean offshore of Washington state in the winter of
              2000/2001, and an orographic precipitation study in the Cascade Mountains of
              central Oregon in the winter of 2001/2002.

Current bulk cloud microphysical
              parameterizations are based on relatively few observational studies; few
              dedicated efforts have been made to comprehensively evaluate the underlying
              assumptions and predicted hydrometeor distributions of these schemes, and to
              use such tests to improve the parameterizations.  The only way to perform such
              verification in a manner that yields definitive and unambiguous results is to
              observe all aspects of the simulated precipitation system, from
              three-dimensional temperature and wind distributions to microphysical
              parameters such as mixing ratios and particle size distributions.  This
              requires concurrent use of in situ cloud and precipitation microphysical
              observations from a well-instrumented aircraft and remotely sensed (radar)
              observations of the three-dimensional wind field.  Recently, advances in
              numerical modeling, airborne microphysical measurement, and radar technology
              have converged to make such a study highly opportune.  Furthermore, with a
              unique combination of scientific expertise, field project experience,
              observational facilities, and computing power, as well as a geographic location
              that experiences a high frequency of frontal and orographic winter
              precipitation systems, the University of Washington is ideally positioned to
              carry out the proposed research.










(i)

