Title       : KDI: Knowledge Networking in the Public Sector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a9979839

Award Number: 9979839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon S. Dawes sdawes@ctg.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa A. Pardo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fiona Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Bloniarz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony M. Cresswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1346,8877,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study examines the formation and operation of Knowledge Networks (KNs) in
              the public sector.  The study describes, evaluates, and compares several
              empirical cases involving groups of agencies in New York State engaged in
              programmatic or administrative innovations that depend on the sharing of
              knowledge and information across multiple organizations.  The investigators
              identify the dimensions of success and evaluate how organizational,
              technological, and political factors influence results.  The study produces and
              enhanced model of KN formation and operation in the public sector as well as
              recommendations to practitioners about planning and implementing knowledge
              networks.

The three-year study addresses the following research
              questions:
-  what are the defining characteristics of successful knowledge
              networks in the public sector?
-  what activities comprise the processes of
              planning and implementing these networks?  How does the order or combination of
              activities affect results?
-  what organizational, technological, and
              political factors influence public sector knowledge networks and how can they
              be measured?  What is their relative importance at each stage of the planning
              and implementing process?  How sensitive are they to different environmental
              conditions?

The review of existing research on these questions establishes
              that previous researchers have applied a number of disciplinary lenses and
              identified an abundance of characteristics, activities, factors, and conditions
              as relevant to effective KNs.  The complexity of the environment in which KNs
              develop is mirrored in the complexity of the research insights, yielding an
              understanding of this phenomenon that is both confusing and incomplete.  This
              complexity is especially unsatisfying for practitioners, who have little
              guidance from the research literature that would help them maximize their
              chances for developing successful knowledge networks.

The study addresses
              these questions through an in-vivo examination of actual public sector
              initiatives as they are being developed, together with a study of one
              successful benchmark initiative.  Each of the seven initiatives is studied as a
              distinct case, using a comparative case study design.  Because of the Center
              for Technology in Government's (CTG's) unique project based collaboration with
              New York State government agencies, the researchers in this study have
              exceptional access to these organizations, their staffs, their partners, and
              their customers.  

For the purpose of this investigation the researchers
              define a knowledge network as a combination of inter-organizational
              relationships, policies, information content, work processes and technology
              tools and architectures brought together to achieve collectively defined
              purposes.  This definition is reflected in a preliminary framework that guides
              the data collection and analysis.  A subsequent revised framework forms the
              basis for further research and serves as guidance for building and operating
              future KNs in the public sector.


