Title       : Xenon as a Probe of Internal Space in Fluids and Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a9979259

Award Number: 9979259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $551200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Jameson cjj@sigma.chem.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1960,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Cynthia Jameson of the University of Illinois at Chicago is supported
              in the Experimental Physical Chemistry program to perform Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance (NMR) studies utilizing Xenon atoms to probe environments difficult
              to study such as the interior of zeolites, polymers and biomolecules.  Her goal
              is to use these experiments together with ab initio predictions of chemical
              shift parameters and more standard Monte Carlo statistical models to develop
              Xenon NMR as an exact quantitative method. Xenon NMR is widely used to study
              solid samples, but it has not yet been exploited to its full potential. For
              example, her group will develop the method for accurate determination of
              competitive adsorption of molecules in zeolite cavities, a key parameter in
              understanding the catalytic power of zeolites.   The effect of counterions in
              cation-exchanged zeolites will be studied, as well as some kinetics and
              dynamical studies on these systems.  The experiments will provide testing
              grounds for new theory - improving the potential surfaces between Xenon and
              coadsorbates (or the zeolite wall) as well as the statistical models for
              adsorption in zeolites.  The experience with zeolites will then be applied to
              the problem of structure of liquids, polymers, and biological systems. 
              Professor Jameson will conduct mainly theoretical studies analyzing Xenon NMR
              signals in cyclodextrin, polymers, polymer blends and in globular proteins such
              as myoglobin, with the goal of understanding the structures of these
              microheterogeneous chemical environments.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              is a chemical version of the more well-known medical method Magnetic Resonance
              Imaging (MRI).  The use of NMR for understanding basic structural features of
              solids, liquids, and gases is increasing with the development of new techniques
              such as Xenon NMR, which has been used to study solid-state structures.  The
              research is timely also due to the recent use of hyperpolarized Xenon for
              imaging (including clinical applications).  In addition to interesting the
              catalysis community studying zeolites, the work will ultimately be of use in
              other applications of microporous solids such as separations.   Professor
              Jameson is well known as an outstanding mentor of women and minorities in her
              laboratories.  


