Title       : Millimeter-Wave Systems for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9979296

Award Number: 9979296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. DeLisio delisio@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne A. Shiroma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vinod Malhotra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jung-Chih Chiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979296
Delisio

Our society has experienced unprecedented growth in the
              exchange of information over wireless communication networks. This decade alone
              has witnessed an explosion in the use of electronic mail, the World Wide Web,
              cellular telephony, mobile computing, electronic pagers, and video
              conferencing. These services will undoubtedly become even more popular as we
              enter the 21St century, but today's wireless communication networks will soon
              be unable to handle the inflated bandwidth requirements for these and future
              interactive, broadband, multimedia services.

The millimeter-wave band (30 -
              300 GHz) clearly offers the spectrum to accommodate broadband, high-speed
              services. Achievable transmission rates are on the order of 5 Gbps -- more than
              100 times the T3 (45 Mbps) transmission rate. In fact, this rate is competitive
              with that of optical fiber, which is currently the technology of choice to
              transmit large amounts of information. Millimeter-wave networks not only
              provide the necessary bandwidth for high bit rates and wide-band modulation
              schemes, but the associated short wavelengths also imply smaller antenna and
              circuit size, resulting in more compact modules for mobile communications. The
              increased atmospheric attenuation in this part of the spectrum is useful for
              secure satellite cross-links and high-capacity wireless local-area
              networks.

In some nations the development of these systems is already well
              underway. For example, Japan has developed 60-GHz, 155-Mbps wireless local area
              networks for multimedia distribution. If the United States is to preserve its
              role as the world's leader in high-speed communications, it must act quickly.
              The Federal Communications Commission has considered frequency allocations as
              high as 150 GHz.

Realizing communication components at millimeter
              wavelengths, however, presents a number of technical challenges in devices,
              circuits, coding, signal processing, and networks. At the University of Hawaii,
              faculty members of the College of Engineering have formed a strong team to
              focus on wireless technology in each of these areas. This proposal describes
              the device, circuit, and subsystem issues. A companion proposal describes the
              signal processing and networking issues.

This research could enable an
              entirely new generation of millimeter-wave components for wireless
              communication. Improved passivation techniques promise electronic devices with
              low noise, high reliability, and high breakdown voltages. Revolutionary MEMS
              devices allow greater functionality and superior performance. The quasi-optical
              reflection amplifiers could be used in powerful solid-state transmitters.
              Quasi-optical diode and active mixers would be integral components in sensitive
              mixers with the dynamic range necessary for high-performance applications.
              Quasi-optical subsystems incorporating MEMS reconfigurable antennas and
              photonic crystals hold great promise. Possible communication applications
              include high-speed mobile personal communication systems, wireless local area
              networks, and emergency relief communications transceivers. Fueled by the
              demand for faster and faster data rates, these communication applications will
              continue to evolve toward millimeter-wave frequencies.
***

