Title       : PEG/SEP: Design Engineering Teams: Influence of Gender Composition on Decision
               Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9979444

Award Number: 9979444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Knecht rknecht@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Danelle T. Cheney  (Principal Investigator former)
              Debra K. Lasich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara M. Moskal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The fields of engineering and science increasingly demand the use of team
              decision making in order to meet the needs of a rapidly developing
              technological society.  Historically, women have been excluded from
              participating in the decision-making processes within these fields.  Today
              women are increasingly breaking through stereotypical beliefs and barriers that
              have discouraged many in the past from entering and advancing in these fields. 
              Because of such advances, current team decision-making research shows the need
              to examine the interactions and mixed gender team decision making.  
     The
              objective of this study is to investigate how the gender composition influences
              the decision-making process of engineering design teams in the quality of  the
              developed solution, the roles of team members, and the quality of experiences
              of  team members.  The proposed study will explore the mixed gender
              decision-making processes of student teams enrolled in the first and second
              year of the Engineering Practices Introductory Course Sequence (EPICS) at the
              Colorado School of Mines (CSM).  Experts in the field of team decision making
              have recognized the importance of this proposed research agenda.
     The time
              required to complete this study is 12 months, with the first phase of the study
              spent collecting literature and development instruments.  In the second phase,
              an experimental observation will be conducted of approximately 70 mixed-gender
              teams composed of four engineering design students enrolled in the first and
              second year of EPICS at CSM.  The students are assigned an "ill-structured"
              design program where neither the solution process nor the goal is well
              defined.
     This study will lead to future studies concerning the influence
              that gender has upon the engineering team decision-making process.  Results
              from this study could have profound implications for the effectiveness and
              economic viability of mixed gender team decision making.  Plans to collaborate
              with other institutions are already in progress; these institutions have been
              contacted and are supportive of this research.  This research will be shared
              with CSM faculty and students, and the gender equity research community.  The
              investigators propose that the results from this study will contribute to
              current gender equity research and models designed to facilitate the interest,
              motivation, and achievement of women in the fields of science and
              engineering.

