Title       : Novel Giga Sampling Analog-to-Digital Conversion for Direct Digital Receiver
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9979341

Award Number: 9979341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton Feng mfeng@hsic.micro.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory E. Stillman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


ECS-9979341
Feng


A series convergence of voice with data at device
              and network levels, and wireless with wireline network, and network
              architectures converging on packet switching have direct implications for the
              rapid need of large market at 60 GHz picocelltechnology. The goal of NSF 99-68
              is to address this need and to develop fourth generation (4G) high information
              capacity wireless mobile communication systems which are characterized by high
              throughput, mixed traffic, high data rates and wide bandwidth up to 60 GHz. We
              propose to study the direct conversion digital receiver as shown in Fig. 1
              where the 60 GHz signal will be mixed down to I to 2 GHz IF signal via HBT VCO
              technology. The digital receivers can be used to receive any type of modulation
              standard including analog (AM, FM) or digital (QPSK, QAM, FSK, GMSK, etc.).
              Furthermore, the same receiver can be used for both analog and digitally
              modulated signals. Tuning is performed using a digital down converter (DDQ and
              filter chip called a channelizer. Since the direct conversion digital receiver
              performs analog to digital conversion directly from the modulated bandpass
              signal to maximize the modulated signal bandwidth, the user can eliminate most
              of the front-end RF components and perform the same function using more
              reliable digital components. The high speed data stream thus created is then
              presented to a digital demodulator which separates the individual channels and
              extracts the modulated information. The efforts in the design of integrated
              circuits for wireless communication receivers have focused on developing
              suitable ADC architectures and efficient circuit implementation techniques as
              well as associated device technologies. However, results reported so far have
              been insufficient to meet the required specification for 4G wireless mobile
              communication application due to their speed and resolution limitations.

4G
              wireless mobile communication systems require high-data rates as well as wide
              bandwidth. To meet 4G requirement, the input bandwidth of the ADC should be
              sufficiently flat to prevent distortions and non-linearities in the resulting
              digital representation. Thus a high-resolution, high-speed analog to digital
              converter (ADC) becomes the most important hardware element in successfully
              developing this communication system. Therefore, we propose a new Giga-sampling
              analog to digital converter with the following specifications: 2.5 W power
              consumption, 15 bit resolution, 90 dB SFDR, 84 dB SINAD (Signal to Noise and
              Distortion Ratio), and 14 ENOB at 1.5 GHz using a novel ADC architecture, the
              folding and interpolation based 15 bit subranging A/D converter. This ADC
              requires the development of 200 GHz fT InGaP/GaAs or InGaAs/InP HBT process. By
              achieving these specifications, we may reach data rates equivalent to 22.5 Giga
              bits/sec. No existing ADC product is currently available which is compatible
              with the proposed target.


