Title       : NEW HIGH-FREQUENCY AC DISTRIBUTED POWER SYSTEMS STRUCTURE WITH UNITY POWER
               FACTOR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a9979797

Award Number: 9979797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Issa E. Batarseh batarseh@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, DC distributed power systems (DPS) have been used extensively
              in mainframe computer systems, communication systems, aircraft, fighting jets,
              warships, phased-radar arrays and space vehicles, and lately been used in the
              construction of the international space station.  In many of today's
              applications, theoretical issues and design philosophies of power conversion
              systems are finding their way into practice.  These issues include not only
              improving efficiency, but ways to reduce cost and complexity of the over all
              system used to satisfy the electronic system's total performance requirements. 
              

The objectives of the proposed research are of three folds: 1) To develop a
              simplified power supply system, namely, high-frequency AC distributed power
              system to solve main problems of traditional DC-DPS. 2) To research new power
              conversion techniques that substantially simplfy the design of power factor
              front-end converters in new AC_DPS, and 3) To develop new modeling techniques
              for complex distributed power system.

The main perceived technical
              limitations of the proposed AC-DPS are possible high EMI problem and analysis
              and post-regulator difficulities.  This project will focus on investigation and
              resolving these issues and others.  Also a comparative research between DC-DPS
              and AC-DPS will be conducted through simulation an experimental approaches,
              illustrating the merits and limitations of both approaches.  Another main task
              on this study is to develop single switch PFC inverters employing similar idea
              as single switch PFC AC/DC converters.

Expected research outcomes include
              *Development of modeling techniques for AC-DPS structure,* reduced power system
              size and lighter weight; lower cost; higher efficiency; and higher reliability
              due to simplification.  In additional, the study on single switch PFC inverters
              will be brought into other applications such as stable cost-effective PFC-AC
              power supply and UPS etc.
