Title       : Rate of Atomization Experiment for Gas-Liquid Annular Flow with High Viscosity
               Liquid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1999  
File        : a9979242

Award Number: 9979242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Lopez de Bertodano bertodan@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: 	     Rate of Atomization Experiment for
              Gas-liquid Annular Flow with High Viscosity Liquid
Proposal
              Number:		CTS-9979242
Principal Investigator:	Martin Lopez de
              Bertodano
Institution:		Purdue University

The objective of this project is
              to obtain data on entrainment rates in annular two-phase flow with high
              viscosity liquids.  This work will contribute to an understanding of the drop
              formation mechanism in these flows by obtaining new data that can be used to
              test theoretical models.  The PI will perform an analysis of the data through a
              linear stability analysis.  The mechanism of the rate of entrainment from the
              liquid film plays a central role in the prediction of gas-liquid annular flow. 
              Currently, empirical correlations are used for these purposes.  Available data
              are limited primarily to air-water experiments.  In this project the PI will
              make a systematic experimental study of the effects of liquid viscosity on
              entrainment rate.  The data will be used to extend existing semi-empirical
              correlations; a theoretical study will also be carried out to improve the
              current understanding of entrainment rate.  The liquid phase will be a
              glycerin-water mixture so that viscosity values ranging from 1 cp to 100 cp can
              be obtained.  Entrainment measurements will be made with extraction and tracer
              techniques.  A linear stability model will be used to develop an entrainment
              rate expression, useful for correlating the data. This work has important
              practical implications for transport in two-phase flow, especially in the
              petrochemical industry.     

