Title       : WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY: Coordinated Fast Adaptation in Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9979438

Award Number: 9979438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $635967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Schlichting rick@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matti A. Hiltunen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1596,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The technological improvements will dramatically change the nature of wireless
              systems over the next ten years.  Not only will more devices of increasingly
              diverse types compete for wireless media, but new applications based on
              wireless technology will also make more intensive use of this scarce resource,
              with strict requirements for Quality of Service (QoS) attributes such as
              throughput, security, and reliability.  Despite technological advances,
              however, certain key features of wireless systems are expected to remain
              unchanged.  For instance, wireless systems will continue to operate in an
              exceptionally dynamic execution environment in which bandwidth and other
              resources can vary significantly over time.  The diversity of available
              resources (e.g., power, CPU speed, memory, transmission power and bandwidth) at
              the wireless devices and the wired base stations will also undoubtedly persist.
               This project proposes a wireless architecture that uses fine-grain
              configurability and fast coordinated adaptation as fundamental cornerstones for
              providing QoS for applications in such a diverse and dynamically changing
              environment.  Fine-grain configurability allows the software on each device to
              be customized to the characteristics of that device, the executing application,
              and the current execution environment, while fast coordinated adaptation allows
              the configuration to be changed dynamically at runtime.  Unlike current
              efforts, the focus on adaptability is on coordination across multiple layers
              and among multiple devices to support more global optimizations and the need
              for dramatic changes in the networking software.  The latter could be used, for
              example, in a natural disaster to alter the network routing protocols used by
              affected wireless systems to compensate for the loss of fixed base
              stations.

The starting point for this work is Cactus, a system for
              constructing highly-configurable network protocols and other services from
              fine-grain software modules that interact using an event-driven execution
              paradigm.  Cactus will provide the implementation framework for the various
              components on different system layers, ranging from device drivers to
              applications, as well as the basis for realizing the adaptive behavior within
              each component.  The proposed wireless architecture also adds new system
              components that coordinate adaptations across different system layers and
              different devices in a wireless network.  The overall architecture offers a
              platform where a system is constructed of highly adaptive system layers and the
              adaptations of different layers are optimized locally for the specific
              requirements of each application and globally to meet broader system
              requirements.  Thus, it has the potential to serve as a good platform for new
              wireless applications with strict QoS requirements. The goals of the proposed
              research include the design of the overall system architecture, development of
              adaptation mechanisms, construction of example adaptive protocols,
              investigation of adaptation and coordination policies, and experimental
              validation.  Two different prototyping environments will be used. The first is
              an existing cluster of 64 Pentium PCs, where wireless communication is
              simulated over a wired 100 Mb Ethernet.  This platform makes it easy to
              experiment with issues such as failures of base stations, location-aware
              protocols, and vertical handoffs between different wireless networking
              solutions. The second testbed is a collection of portable PCs with a selection
              of different wireless networking hardware and GPS receivers for location-aware
              computing.

