Title       : GK-12: Teaching Fellows in Chemistry, Physics and Biology in the Kansas City
               Metropolitan Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a9979553

Award Number: 9979553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1091823            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Bond Robinson jrobinson@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis D. Lane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Orley R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Heppert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Baringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this three-year project, twenty six Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry,
              Engineering, and Biology graduate students and twelve advanced undergraduates
              from the University of Kansas (KU) are participating in a Teaching Fellows
              program focusing on the Kansas City Kansas (KCK) Public School District. The
              Fellows provide in-service and in-class support for middle and high school
              science and mathematics teachers on three levels: 1) technology training and
              knowledge transfer for a new generation of teachers implementing inquiry- and
              problem-based curricula, 2) assistance for teachers  and student teams who are
              implementing standards-based curricula, and 3) curriculum enhancement and
              knowledge transfer in support of research- and problem-based curriculum units
              for mathematics, life science, and physical science classes. Fellows work
              directly with teachers in planning and training sessions to prepare content
              support and increase technology expertise for KCK District teachers. Each
              Fellow attends a one-week pre-assignment training workshop and a
              university-level course covering best practices in K-12 teaching, multicultural
              education, and cognitive skill development. This project is helping the KCK
              Schools implement a new advanced science graduation requirement and accomplish
              a long-term District goal, instituted under an NSF-funded TEAMs project, to
              improve mathematics and science instruction. This project is assisting KU by
              building collaborations with teachers in the KCK public schools and by
              establishing a mechanism for attracting students from underrepresented and
              disadvantaged groups into mathematics, science, and engineering majors.
              Teaching Fellows will graduate from KU with an unusually deep understanding of
              science and mathematics pedagogy, K-12 teaching, and multicultural education.

