Title       : Radionuclides as Tracers for the Source and Fate of Arctic Sea Ice Sediments.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9979684

Award Number: 9979684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kirk Cochran kcochran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1560,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Sea ice throughout the Arctic Ocean is frequently characterized by the
              inclusion of fine-grained sediments. Transport of sea ice across the Arctic
              provides a mechanism for the transport of particle-reactive contaminants
              associated with sea-ice sediment. The Principal Investigators will use natural
              and anthropogenic radionuclides as tracers for determining the:
 sources of
              particles transported in sea ice;
 importance of atmospheric supply in
              modifying contaminant burdens of sea ice from during transit
  fate of sea-ice
              sediments (and associated radionuclides) after they are released  through
              melted ice.

This project will be a unique opportunity to collect samples of
              sea ice, the water column, and bottom sediments in areas of ice melting in the
              Fram Strait and Barents Sea.  The Principal Investigators will collaborate with
              German researchers on the Polarstern, on a  three-year German research effort. 
              They will measure two natural radionuclides (2lOPb and 7Be) and the
              anthropogenic plutonium (Pu) isotopes in sea-ice sediments.  Both 2lOPb
              (half-life = 22.3 years) and 7Be (half-life is 53 days) enter  the surface
              ocean from the atmosphere. Lead-210 is also added to seawater from decay of
              dissolved 226Ra.  Plutonium has multiple sources to the Arctic, including
              fallout from atmospheric testing of atomic weapons, inputs from reprocessing of
              spent nuclear fuel, weapons production, and disposal of nuclear waste. The
              latter inputs are focused in the Kara and Laptev Seas which are areas of
              sea-ice formation and particle incorporation. The isotopic composition of Pu is
              a sensitive indicator that allows local sources of Pu to be separated from
              global fallout.  The Principal Investigators will use Pu isotope ratios (24OPu,
              241Pu, 242Pu. 239Pu) in sea-ice sediments as a source tracer for sediments from
              the Kara and Laptev Seas. Analyses will also be made of sediment composition
              and mineralogy to compare with the Pu data.

The well-characterized sources
              of 210Pu and 7Be to the ocean make these radionuclides useful for tracing
              processes related to the transport of sediments by sea ice.  Given the long
              transit times of ice relative to the half-life of 7Be, the association of 7Be
              with sea-ice sediments should arise through atmospheric supply during transit. 
               Analyses of 7Be in ice and sediment samples from sea ice collected near the
              end of its transit across the Arctic will permit assessment of the importance
              of the atmospheric pathway in adding this radionuclide to sea ice and other
              atmospherically transported contaminants such as lead.

Lead-210 may be added
              to sea ice from the atmosphere or associated with the sediments when they were
              incorporated into the ice. This radionuclide provides a means of determining
              the importance of sea ice in importing particles and associated
              particle-reactive chemical species to ice ablation areas.  Prior studies of
              2lOPb (half-life = 22.3 y) in the Northeast Water Polynya suggest that sea ice
              might be important in importing this radionuclide to the polynia. The 
              Principal Investigators will measure 2lOPb in sea-ice sediments, the water
              column and bottom sediment samples in the Fram Strait and around Spitzbergen to
              determine if the import of particles with sea ice can affect the mass balance
              of 2lOPb in areas of ice ablation. This will provide an initial step toward
              evaluating whether such a process also can augment contaminant burdens in these
              areas.

