Title       : U.S.-Japan Seminar: New Initiatives in Lepton Flavor Violation Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9979794

Award Number: 9979794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 1,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Molzon wmolzon@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979794
Molzon

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on New Initiatives in Lepton Flavor Violation Studies,
              to be held in Hawaii from October 30 to November 3, 2000.  The co-organizers
              are Professors William Molzon at the University of California, Irvine and
              Professor Yoshitaka Kuno at the High Energy Accelerator Research Organization
              (KEK) in Tsukuba, Japan.  A fundamental question in particle physics is why
              there are three families of quarks and leptons.  Central to this question is
              whether muon and electron numbers are conserved.  Theoretical and experimental
              research in this field is extremely active mainly in the U.S., Europe and
              Japan.  Theoretical studies of supersymmetric grand unified models indicate
              that muon number violation could well be discovered with these new experiments.
               The meeting will bring together the leading experimental, theoretical and
              accelerator physicists from this field.  They will study both the power of
              different searches for muon number violation in a theoretical framework and the
              technical feasibility of experiments and will be considering near term efforts
              in the U.S. and longer-term prospects in Japan.

Improved cooperative
              interactions between experimental and theoretical physicists are likely to
              evolve from the meeting.  The meetings should excite the interest of theorists,
              who will get a better idea of the potential for and difficulties with improved
              experimental sensitivity.  The Experimentalists should obtain a better
              appreciation for the theoretical impact of different possible experimental
              searches.  The Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve younger
              researchers as both participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data
              with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance
              their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. 
              Dissemination of information from the meeting will be via the WWW.  An
              appropriate address will be set up on http:/meco.ps.uci.edu.  Published
              proceedings may also be available on CDROM from APS or the World University
              Pre

