Title       : KDI: An Astrophysics Simulation Collaboratory: Enabling Large Scale Simulations
               in Relativistic Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9979985

Award Number: 9979985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wai-Mo Suen wms@wugrav.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward H. Seidel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manish Parashar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1348,8877,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Astrophysical and computer science research will be carried out to bring the
              numerical treatment of the Einstein theory of general relativity to the
              astrophysics community at large.  The project will produce a new community tool
              for research on problems involving strong-gravity astrophysical systems, such
              as neutron stars and black holes.  It will also develop new computing
              technologies that allow simulation computer codes on massively parallel
              machines to be simultaneously developed and used by a large, multidisciplinary,
              and distributed community of researchers.  To deal with the complexity and
              richness of the Einstein theory when applied to realistic astrophysical
              phenomena, simultaneous advances in computation, visualization, and numerical
              algorithms will be developed.  To deal with the complexity of the resulting
              simulation code and the range of problems to which it can be applied, a
              simulation-centered "collaboratory" will be developed that can support a large
              user and developer community and that will reduce the barriers to
              experimentation and exploration.  The development of this simulation
              collaboratory will be driven by the astrophysically significant problem of the
              collapse of a neutron star to a black hole induced by accretion of mass from
              its surroundings.  The problem will be studied in the Einstein theory of
              general relativity with relativistic hydrodynamics and nuclear astrophysics
              also incorporated, and making use of all major components in the
              collaboratory.

The impact of the project will be in the new frontiers of
              gravitational-wave astronomy and high energy (gamma-ray and X-ray) astronomies.
               The inclusion of the full Einstein theory in the study of realistic
              astrophysical processes, when coupled with observational data from new
              high-energy satellites and imminent gravitational-wave observatories (such as
              the US Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) project) will
              lead to far-reaching scientific discoveries capable of attracting the attention
              of a large scientific community and the general public.  The successful
              establishment of a new model for the collaborative development and the use of
              simulation computer codes, exploiting high-speed connectivity not only between
              computers but also between researchers, will have a significant impact on other
              research communities.

