Title       : HBCU: Florida A&M University Undergraduate Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a9979944

Award Number: 9979944
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald J. Perry perry@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick S. Humphries  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ralph W. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dhyana Ziegler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roselyn Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              FAMU

The main goal of the HBCU Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) at Florida
              Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) is to significantly increase the
              number of African-American science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
              (SMET) students who will qualify for admission to graduate degree programs
              (particularly the doctoral degree) in SMET fields. The program also is designed
              to measurable increase the overall number of baccalaureate degrees awarded to
              SMET students by the University. The program will primarily focus on students
              majoring in biology, chemistry, computer and information sciences, electrical
              engineering, mathematics and physics. However, when fully implemented it will
              significantly impact all SMET undergraduate students at the
              University.

Project goals will be achieved through a systematic adoption by
              the SMET university community of advances in research-based SMET teaching and
              learning methods, enhancements to the faculty development and reward systems
              and the wide-spread infusion of world-wide web (WWW) based technologies into
              the SMET curricula.

Several individual project objectives have been defined
              to enable the overall goals to be met. These objectives are presented as
              follows:

1) introduction of new teaching and learning techniques that
              encompass an inquiry-based pedagogy into the SMET curricula;

2) introduction
              of a freshman level SMET honors section for entry-level courses in the
              departments of biology, chemistry, mathematics and physics;

3) providing
              laboratory research experiences for sophomore level honor students;

4)
              support faculty development of world-wide web (i.e. web) based courseware for
              entry-level "gatekeeper" courses within the departments of biology, chemistry,
              computer and information sciences, mathematics and electrical
              engineering;

5) implementation of an Academic Learning Center that includes
              workshops, tutorials, peer mentoring, and career counseling for all SMET
              students;

6) increasing the number of student teaching assistants assigned
              to support faculty teaching critical entry level SMET courses;

7) upgrading
              of computing resources available to SMET faculty so that an faculty within the
              primary focus departments have adequate Internet connectivity.

Additional
              project objectives will include the:

1) introduction of web based materials
              in other key SMET courses;

2) implementation of a SMET Instruction/Teaching
              Technology Center to assist faculty with incorporating technology into their
              courses;

3) development of a novel faculty reward system that recognizes
              student mentorship.

The project will widely employ both formative and
              summative evaluation to measure progress toward meeting overall project
              goals.

