Title       : Explicit Explanation of Genre Within Authentic Literacy Activities in Science:
               Does It Facilitate Development and Achievement?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9979904

Award Number: 9979904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $839785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria Purcell-Gates vpgates@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,2816,5101,5201,7180,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This descriptive and experimental study has two purposes: (1) To describe the
              development of knowledge of five written science genres among second and third
              grade students in two types of instructional contexts: (a) instruction which
              incorporates authentic science literacy activities but without explicit
              teaching of the linguistic features of these genres; and (b) instruction which
              incorporates authentic science literacy activities with the addition of
              explicit teaching of the linguistic features of these genres;  (2) To compare
              the affects of instruction of types (a) and (b) on students' science reading
              and writing achievement. The five written genres chosen for focus in this study
              are all authentic to the discipline of science and will be involved in
              students' regular science instruction. As such, the study addresses important
              but under-researched questions about effective uses of text in primary grade
              science education. In addition, the study addresses key questions in the field
              of language and literacy regarding the efficacy of explicit teaching of
              discourses of power for learners from nonmainstream, low-social economic status
              (SES) communities.

The study will involve twelve classes drawn in equal
              numbers from low- and middle- SES school districts employing platoon-style
              science instruction (in which science for all classes within a school is taught
              by a single teacher). Each class will be followed as a cohort through second
              and third grade as they experience science instruction led by a science teacher
              trained in one of the two instructional interventions described above. The
              teachers' instruction and students' responses to it will be carefully monitored
              and documented over time. In addition, quantitative data about each student's
              ability to comprehend and communicate science content through specific genres
              will be collected at six points during the two years. Data analysis will allow
              comparison of the two instructional interventions and also test the effect, if
              any, of student SES.

