Title       : PGE/SEP: User-Friendly Science and Math Software for Early Adolescent Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9979265

Award Number: 9979265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary D. Flanagan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9979265

Adolescent Girls" is to create online, user-friendly software for
              girls ages 9-11 [27, 29].  The Adventures of Josie True will be web-based
              software for girls designed to encourage exploration and promote confidence in
              math and the sciences in multicultural, educational software.  Using an
              adventure game as the premise, lead character Josie True and her friends become
              involved in intrigue across time and space as they rescue their
              inventor-turned-teacher Ms. Trombone.  During their travels, girls will meet
              innovative women from history who will serve as multicultural role models.  In
              addition to exploring rewarding activities based on science and math curricular
              topics, girls will be able to learn about women's history through technologies
              that allow girls to "interview" women like Bessie Coleman, the first female
              African-American aviator.  
     Throughout this software development project,
              we will offer girls a healthy and entertaining set of educational alternatives;
              the project will develop an online community, provide a sense of adventure,
              invite participation, and offer positive, real-life role models while using
              technology to encourage experimentation with science and math.  Players will
              explore the software with their "host" Josie True, an 11-year-old
              Asian-American girl, though time and space as they search for the great African
              American Pilot, Bessie Coleman.  The characters travel in time to 1922 Chicago
              to save their missing science teacher and become embroiled in adventure.  This
              narrative provides the context for science and math based learning
              activities.
     Josie True will provide all girls, especially girls who have
              had fewer opportunities, a chance to interact in science activities and "meet"
              role models.  We pay special attention to female innovators and scientists to
              provide positive, "technological" female role models to help encourage girls to
              explore the sciences while advancing creative thinking, problem solving, and
              originality.
     We hope this project will increase time girls spend with the
              computer, increase their comfort level with technology, improve their learning
              by contextualizing concepts and problem solving, and provide characters engaged
              in science, math, and technology in order to promote scientific concepts and
              the associated disciplines.
     Josie will be promoted with textbook
              publishers, national school boards, and international education organizations. 
              In addition, as an internet-based activity, Josie True will be accessible
              wherever the Internet is, such as public libraries and some schools.


