Title       : GK-12 Graduate Teaching Fellows: Collaboration for the Advancement of Teaching
               Technology and Science in Schools (CATTS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9979670

Award Number: 9979670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1370631            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hall-Wallace hall@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Y. Velez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Supapan Seraphin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This GK-12 program, in partnership with seven local school districts, is
              developing a sustainable program for the integration of SMET research and
              education. The program is strengthening the already successful, and on-going,
              partnerships between the school districts and the UA's current outreach
              programs by incorporating strong partnerships between University of Arizona
              fellows and K-12 educators for bi-directional knowledge transfer. Fellows and
              their faculty mentors are gaining experience with inquiry-based teaching and
              diverse learners while sharing their research expertise with K-12 educators.
              K-12 educators are gaining experience in scientific inquiry, and are sharing
              their knowledge of teaching and learning with the fellows and faculty mentors.
              The long-term impact will result in more effective teaching within the college
              professorate and K-12 educators.
The unique feature of this program is that
              districts are able to identify a particular outreach need, and work in
              collaboration with CATTS to create customized programs to address the need. The
              program has four components: (1) an organizational and governing structure that
              includes input from K-12 educators, faculty mentors, and outreach directors;
              (2) a preparation stage in which fellows, faculty mentors and K-12 educators
              are laying the groundwork for the partnerships and preparing the fellows for
              the K-12 learning environment; (3) an implementation stage in which the
              partners are working together in the local schools; and (4) an assessment
              program that measures the programs success in integrating science, mathematics,
              and engineering research with education at all levels. Recruitment and
              selection processes are ensuring the participation of diverse groups,
              especially Hispanic minorities, which comprise about half the student
              population in Tucson. The program is receiving strong support from teachers,
              school districts, and The University of Arizona, including matching financial
              support for graduate fellows and a University of Arizona pledge to maintain the
              program at least 3 years beyond NSF funding. 
