Title       : WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY: Supporting Quality of Service in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9979439

Award Number: 9979439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $537761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Campbell campbell@comet.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mischa Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1596,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A key challenge to the development of next-generation mobile ad hoc networks is
              to enable mobile users
to access, manipulate and distribute voice, video, data
              and images with suitable quality of service (QOS).
Mobile ad hoc networks are
              multi-hop in nature, bandwidth limited and are currently designed to
              support
only best effort voice and data communications.  Nodes that constitute
              the wireless network infrastructure
are free to move randomly and organize
              themselves in arbitrary fashions.  Thus, the network's wireless
topology may
              be relatively static over periods of time or, more likely, change rapidly in
              unpredictable
ways.  Such a network may operate in a standalone fashion, or
              may be interconnected to intranets or the
global Internet via gateway routers.
               Providing quality of service support to mobile ad hoc networks is the
subject
              of this proposal.

There is a critical need to propose, investigate and
              evaluate quality of service support in mobile ad hoc networks and to study
              their interconnection to the global Internet.  The  approach will be to
              investigate quality of service in mobile ad hoc networks assumed to be
              interconnected to the global Internet through broadband cellular networks.  One
              of the primary objectives of this proposal is to determine the level of quality
              of service assurances that can be given to mobile hosts and routers in such an
              environment.   Quality of service support needs to be highly adaptive and
              responsive to changes in the available resources along the path between two
              communicating mobile hosts and to network topology changes due to host and
              router mobility.

The researcher propose a research agenda that comprises the
              following project phases.  First,  study and define a comprehensive QOS
              architecture and associated algorithms for maintaining adaptive real-time
              services in mobile ad hoc networks that can be interconnected to the global
              Internet through broadband cellular access points.  Second, investigate,
              define, simulate and deploy wireless flow management based on in-band signaling
              and the notion of mobile soft-state management capable of establishing,
              maintaining and terminating adaptive real-time flows in mobile ah hoc networks.
               Third,  study, define and analyze new admission control algorithms that
              allocate bandwidth to adaptive real-time flows based on the notion of
              utility-fair allocation that supports minimum bandwidth assurances.   Next, 
              investigate, design and analyze suitable wireless packet scheduling mechanisms
              that can support the packet level quality of service while responding to
              location dependent channel conditions experienced in ad hoc wireless networks. 
              Finally,  extend our existing broadband cellular testbed to the ad hoc domain
              and demonstrate proof-of-concept of wireless flow management, admission control
              and wireless packet scheduling in an experimental setting.  Throughout the
              course of the project we will validate these algorithms using a combination of
              analytical, simulation and experimental techniques.

