Title       : Wireless Technology: Seamless Multitier Wireless Networks for Multimedia
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9979465

Award Number: 9979465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Behnaam Aazhang aaz@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan S. Wallach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Knightly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Cavallaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Baraniuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1596,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the past decade, the number of subscribers to mobile and wireless
              communication services has grown at an exponential rate.  Concurrently,
              emerging wireless devices have enabled new modes of communication beyond
              traditional cellular voice.  However, to remain continually "connected," users
              face the frustrating task of manually coordinating a vast disarray of services,
              devices, and wireless technologies.

The goal of this project is to develop a
              platform for truly seamless communication throughout environments as
              fundamentally different as high-speed indoor wireless and conventional cellular
              systems. The investigators propose to design, build, and evaluate RENE (Rice
              Everywhere NEtwork), a multi-tier system that provides network- and
              application-level services using a single network interface card.  The key
              innovations of the RENE project are as follows:

1. The design of an mNIC
              (multi-tier Network Interface Card), a novel network interface card that is    
               reprogrammable on-the-fly to different physical- and network-layer standards. 
              The mNIC will support      soft handoffs, both horizontally within a tier and
              vertically among tiers, including transitions from a      prototype 100 Mbps
              indoor wireless LAN protocol to commercial CDMA cellular standards.

2. The
              building of a proxy file system that enables seamless and consistent access to
              a user's home working      environment, independent of the user's location or
              available network resources.  The system will respond      to changes in
              available capacity using transcoders, allow consistent reading and writing of
              files (even when transcoded), and facilitate network-awareness in unmodified
              applications.

3. The investigators will perform an extensive measurement and
              modeling study of proxy traffic using     multi-fractal models.  Using these
              results, policies will be devised which enable the proxy to make    
              intelligent decisions on when and to what extent to transcode or store user
              data to best meet user      performance objectives.

4. The development of a
              new coarse-grained approach to resource reservation and admission control that 
                  enables users to obtain predictable performance in multi-tier environments.
               The key technique is to         abstract system resources into networks of
              virtual bottleneck cells such that by provisioning resources in     the virtual
              cells, quality of service objectives can be satisfied in the actual
              system.

This research will be conducted in collaboration with Nokia and
              Texas Instruments in order to build a complete prototype implementation of the
              RENE system and demonstrate its capabilities.

