Title       : Smart Antennas for Future Reconfigurable Wireless Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9979403

Award Number: 9979403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantine A. Balanis balanis@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. T. Aberle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Capone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Trevor Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samir M. El-Ghazaly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979403
Balanis

The antenna is one of the fundamental distinctions between a
              wired and a wireless system. The design of the antenna impacts the development
              of each component - from the circuit design to the receiver structure and
              coding technique, as well as the channel access protocol - employed in future
              wireless communication networks. The most challenging environment for the
              design of each component is where the communication devices are extremely
              small, low power computing and consuming mobile terminals. Furthermore, these
              terminals may be able to move randomly and organize themselves in an ad hoc
              communication structure. Such a network of communication terminals is referred
              to as a mobile ad hoc network (MANET). It is proposed to investigate the use of
              adaptive antennas (i.e., smart antennas) to improve channel quality in a MANET.
              The design of a smart antenna for a MANET will pose many challenges in antenna,
              feed network, signal processing, receiver, and protocol designs.

The antenna
              must be designed to be conformal to the portable device and to adapt to the
              needs of the MANET. Depending on the needs of the MANET, the antenna will be
              designed to have different modes of operation from omni-directional to highly
              directive. A single antenna element will not be able to achieve these
              characteristics and therefore, a collection of elements, referred to as an
              array, will be needed. The array is a versatile antenna system and can perform
              many different functions (including scanning, beam forming, etc.) by primarily
              controlling the excitation amplitude and phase of its elements. The feed
              network devices and circuitry, and the signal processing algorithms which must
              be developed and also integrated into the entire system, will provide the
              desired excitation of the elements for the antenna to meet the needs of the
              MANET. The challenges to achieve these objectives include selection of the
              antenna element and array geometry, and the modeling of the antenna system. The
              physical realization of the selected antenna configuration and the integration
              of the antenna and feed network models as well as the analysis of the effect of
              the antenna on the overall system performance will be investigated. In
              addition, the modeling of the propagation channel (multi-path, fading, etc.)
              will also have fundamental impacts on the overall antenna system design.

The
              antenna feed network, consisting of controlling and matching devices and
              circuits, will require extensive analysis and design tools. To accomplish the
              tasks presented in this proposal, a large number of circuits operating at
              future communication frequencies (20-GHz range), including matching networks,
              low-noise and power amplifiers, oscillators, phase shifters, and mixers must be
              developed. The circuits will be highly compacted and fabricated in several
              layers to fit within the relatively small area available in a communication
              device. This task requires clever selection of the semiconductor material for
              fabrication, optimized semiconductor device structures, appropriate
              high-frequency circuit designs, and highly accurate device and circuit analysis
              tools. Moreover, the signal processing algorithms used in driving these
              circuits must be considered in the overall design.

The signal processing
              algorithms, to control and adapt the different modes of operation of the
              antenna, will be developed for analog and digital antenna beam-forming at high
              (20 GHz) frequencies. This work will include the development of algorithms for
              computation of gains and phases for use in analog phase shifters for the
              antenna array. Although phase shifters will be initially realized in the analog
              domain, a DSP algorithm will compute the gain and phase. The challenge here
              lies in the frequent computation of antenna parameters intended for operation
              in a rapidly changing environment such as a MANET. Digital realizations will be
              addressed by developing spatio-temporal signal processing algorithms for
              beam-forming. Channel coding may als0 be employed to provide diversity and to
              suppress residual interference for multi-user communications over fading
              channels. By using channel coding techniques, the same error rates with a lower
              signal-to-noise ratio may be obtained resulting in an improved battery life of
              each mobile terminal.

From a networking point of view, smart antennas may
              improve the performance of current channel access techniques for MANETs and may
              allow for the development of new protocols. By employing an array of antennas,
              it may be possible to develop protocols to control the multiple access
              interference in the spatial dimension, as opposed to time or frequency, to
              further improve the performance delivered to the terminals operating in a
              MANET. The design of such channel access protocols is dependent on the signal
              processing technique used in the smart antenna system.
***
