Title       : Integrated Design of Next-Generation Broadband Mobile Networks: Antennas, Codes,
               and Performance Guarantees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9979310

Award Number: 9979310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450032             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Ryan ryan@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marwan M. Krunz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen L. Virga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Marcellin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The currently envisaged third-generation wireless communication networks will
              provide clear improvements over the current systems, but will fall short of the
              goal of seamless communication for a large variety of services anywhere and
              anytime. Because the goal presents tremendous scientific and technological
              challenges spanning several disciplines, a multi-disciplinary, integrative
              research approach involving several researchers makes eminent sense. As such,
              our research will be conducted by four researchers whose backgrounds are in
              electromagnetics, signal processing and coding, and networking. The research
              will advance the state of the art in each of these "layers," but will also
              explore how each of the layers might benefit the other layers.

Work at the
              RF Layer will involve the design of low-profile, low-power broadband antennas,
              with single and multiple antenna structures.  Also studied for the benefit of
              the Signaling Layer are statistical and temporal models of the propagation
              environment. Research at the Signaling Layer will include the design of serial
              and parallel concatenations will be studied for both frequency selective and
              flat fading channels. Serial and parallel space-time concatenated codes will be
              designed also for systems with transmit diversity. Both textbook channel models
              as well as models developed in the RF Layer work will be adopted. At the
              Network Layer, work will involve performance analysis of quality of service
              metrics, on-line bandwidth allocation mechanisms, and adaptive error control
              under quality of service guarantees. Operation at this layer will be aided by
              data provided by the Signaling Layer. The research is collaborative, including
              the four University of Arizona researchers and members from industry.

