Title       : Faculty/Student Development of the Geographic-Engineering Tool for Wireless:
               Evaluation of Broadband Systems (GETWEBS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9979364

Award Number: 9979364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence W. Carstensen carstens@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Bostian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979364
Carstensen

A multidisciplinary team of Virginia Tech students and
              faculty will develop a suite of software tools (referred to as the GETWEBS,
              Geographic-Engineering Tool for Wireless: Evaluation of Broadband Systems) for
              wireless network system design and layout. This research will be truly unique
              as it brings together students from engineering, business, and the social
              sciences to evaluate implementation strategies for fourth-generation (4G)
              wireless communications. The research and educational efforts within the tool
              development process will involve both undergraduate and graduate students in
              three key components of the future broadband wireless industry:

Evolving
              wireless technology - How well can future broadband and mobile wireless
              technologies
work for a particular application? At what cost will they
              work?

Wireless technology interaction with the environment - What
              environmental obstacles (terrain, buildings, vegetation) are present in the
              implementation region? How do environmental obstacles influence broadband
              channel characteristics? How do they affect the cost and equipment needed to
              implement a commercialization plan?

System integration and deployment - How
              are engineering issues affected by terrain and demographics? How do financial
              issues constrain engineering choices? How does the service viability affect
              technology selections? How do regulation, culture, traditions, and the economic
              situation affect engineering design and system architecture?

Faculty and
              students will work together through both research and course work supported by
              this project.

The actual GETWEBS tool will be object-oriented for ease of
              interfacing among its components, and GIS-based to incorporate actual wireless
              implementation environments. It will feature interactions among propagation,
              environmental, demographic, and financial models (Figure 1, Project
              Description). The tools themselves will be developed by students from Virginia
              Tech through a series of graduate and undergraduate research courses and
              through three formal summer courses taught at the Blacksburg campus of Virginia
              Tech. In these courses, students will be divided into teams. Each team will
              have participants from engineering, business, and geography. In the formal
              classes, students and faculty will learn basic theory and practice of all the
              participating fields through faculty lectures, group interaction, and hands-on
              development of individual tool components. The areas included in GETWEBS are
              electrical and computer engineering (channel characteristics and system
              architecture), geography (Geographic Information Systems), and business
              (finance and marketing issues).

Significant research results from this
              project will include:

Design and construction of a novel broadband channel
              sounder based on ultra-wideband technology
Development of a GIS-based
              field-verified propagation model that predicts the bandwidth that a wireless
              channel can support under a given set of system parameters and quality of
              service requirements
Improved data-base development techniques for GIS
              propagation studies
Improved Line-Of-Sight (LOS) algorithms for GIS
              analysis
Development of Path-Of-Communications (POC) algorithms for GIS
              analysis
Statistical analysis of visibility patterns aggregated to census
              enumeration units
Field verification of LOS algorithms using radio channel
              propagation.

