Title       : WITN: Collaborative Research in Location Dependent Data Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9979458

Award Number: 9979458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret H. Dunham mhd@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project is a collaborative effort of Margaret Dunham, Southern
              Methodist University (IIS-9979458) and Vijay Kumar, University of Missouri at
              Kansas City (IIS-9979453) and is supported under the Wireless Information
              Technology and Networks (WITN) initiative, NSF 99-68. The goal of this research
              is to develop schemes for processing data that are strongly related to
              geographical locations, on a mobile computing platform. Unlike conventional
              data processing systems, in a wireless mobile computing environment the value
              of data may depend on location, and processing of a transaction at one site may
              give different results than that at another. This situation identifies a new
              type of data, which we refer to as Location Dependent Data (LDD). Thus, LDD is
              a class of data whose value is determined by (a) the geographical location of
              data storage and (b) the geographical location of the Mobile Unit (MU) where
              the query originated. For example, when a query from a MU wants to find out
              information about local hotels, it will get a different answer in Dallas than
              in Kansas City. It would even be possible for a traveler driving from Dallas to
              Kansas City to ask the same question en route but specifically request the
              response using Kansas City data rather than data based on the location from
              which he requests the query. Although the query may be stated in exactly the
              same way, it is interpreted in a location-dependent context. The objective of
              this research is to further explore the concept of LDD, its impact on
              transaction processing, and develop efficient schemes for its management. As a
              result of this research, methods will be produced which facilitate the storage
              of location dependent data at Mobile Units and techniques to efficiently
              process transactions which access this type of data. The creation of a testbed
              to is a major objective of the project. It will be used to implement and
              compare the various strategies proposed during the research. 
