Title       : KDI: Building a Future for Software History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9979981

Award Number: 9979981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Yost   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Seidel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Arthur L. Norberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth Kaplan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1346,8877,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As computers have become ubiquitous in society, the history of computing has
              chronicled the development of machines. It has largely overlooked, however, the
              ghost in the machine - the software that creates and restricts its operations.
              While a small group of scholars has emerged over the past two decades in the
              history of computing that has published important works analyzing hardware
              technologies, there has been no comparable scholarship addressing the largely
              invisible evolution of software development.

New software programs build
              upon those from the past, and often are constrained by them in certain ways,
              much as the growth of coral is limited by the coral reef. Historical records of
              these developments still exist, but are dispersed, unorganized, and difficult
              to find. As the software developers and practitioners of the early post-World
              War II era advance in age, the opportunity for collecting, developing, and
              using primary resources to write the history of software technology will
              increasingly diminish.

This grant - awarded to the Charles Babbage Institute
              (CBI) - supports a multi-faceted effort using webbased technologies to collect
              and disseminate information on the history of software to expand understanding
              and facilitate quality scholarship in this field. CBI is accomplishing this
              goal through a series of initiatives to address the history of software from
              its origins in the late-1940s to the present. These include an historical
              dictionary of software technology and terminology, an oral history initiative
              to interview pioneering software developers, and an on-line journal of software
              history. CBI will publish the dictionary, journal, and oral interview
              transcripts on the World Wide Web.

The Charles Babbage Institute will also
              establish a research network and review process to produce the dictionary
              component. This network will integrate technical practitioners, managers,
              historians, and archivists and serve as a model for developing and
              disseminating resources in the history of technology and science.

