Title       : Cognitively-Based, Multimedia Support for a Balanced Approach to the Development
               of Early Reading in School and Home Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9979881

Award Number: 9979881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1617542            (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana L. Sharp diana.sharp@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Bransford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,2816,7180,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project explores how a cognitive-representational approach to early reading
              can lead to new and efficient instruction that will impact learning across the
              curriculum. The research questions addressed are:

Which design principles
              are most important for a balanced approach to literacy instruction that uses
              multimedia environments for integrated, efficient instruction of decoding and
              word recognition skills?

Will design principles suggested by research help
              teachers better understand and integrate decoding skills into their classroom
              literacy environments?

Can a combination of video and print materials linked
              to multimedia environments be effective tools for improving children's home
              environments and parental support for early reading instruction?

The project
              will investigate these questions by developing an understanding of design
              principles for children's word recognition fluency and decoding skills using
              current cognitive theories of mental representations of language. 
              Within-subject designs will be used to see how different variations of
              prototype software affect children's word recognition fluency and decoding
              skills. These initial studies will also include between-subject controls that
              use no software. At-home reading of both decodable text and rich, high-quality
              children's literature will be linked to the content and structure of the
              decoding and word recognition software. This at-home reading will be supported
              by video exemplars. The children with at-home access to these materials and the
              software in school will be compared with those children with just the software
              at school. Additionally, software based on recent cognitive theories will be
              compared to commercially available software designed to aid children in
              developing decoding skills by comparing the reading development of children
              using research software vs. commercially available software. 


