Title       : Troposphere-Stratosphere Coupling Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9979241

Award Number: 9979241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Holton holton@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale R. Durran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Transfer of momentum, energy, and trace constituents between the troposphere
              and the stratosphere is crucial for determining the dynamical and chemical
              climatology of the stratosphere, and is also of significance for the upper
              troposphere.  The momentum balance in the stratosphere is sensitive to momentum
              transfer across the tropopause by vertically propagating gravity waves ranging
              from planetary scale to small-scale.  Chemical processes crucial to the
              stratospheric ozone balance depend on the transfer of trace constituents across
              the tropopause.  Thus, the understanding of the troposphere-stratosphere
              coupling is essential for understanding the global circulation of the
              stratosphere, the chemistry of the ozone layer, and the chemistry and climate
              of the upper troposphere.  Moreover, the influence of the vertically
              propagating gravity waves extends well into the mesosphere where they are a
              major factor in the zonal forcing of the circulation as well as a source for
              the generation of smaller scale secondary waves.

	Convective storms and
              squall lines are significant sources for the generation of vertically
              propagating gravity waves.  In their previous work, the PIs used a
              two-dimensional model to study the momentum transfer.  Under this award, they
              will extend much of that work to three dimensions, both in the stratosphere and
              mesosphere, examining the effects on the large-scale circulations.  In
              addition, the PIs will study tracer transport using their three-dimensional
              cloud model.

	An additional topic that is not an extension of previous work
              is the study of the stratospheric transport circulation and its relation to the
              so-called "Arctic Oscillation".  The PIs will explore the similarity between
              topographically-forced planetary waves and the observed Arctic Oscillation and
              the relationship to the stratospheric circulation. 

