Title       : KDI: Automated Design and Discovery of Novel Pharmaceuticals using
               Semi-Supervised Learning in Large Molecular Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9979860

Award Number: 9979860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Embrechts embrem@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis M. Breneman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin P. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1347,8877,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This interdisciplinary research project is jointly funded in three NSF
              directorates: CISE/IIS, BIO/DBI and ENG/BES. The techniques developed in this
              research result in a new framework for the virtual discovery of new
              pharmaceuticals or materials. The basic idea is to utilize large existing
              pharmaceutical databases as input for a new type of structure/activity
              correlation methodology in order to calculate a large set of new and
              traditional descriptors to create improved Quantitative Structure-Activity
              Relationship (QSAR) models that characterize and predict important biological
              responses. Once the descriptors have been determined and a predictive model has
              been built, thousands of new potential molecules, chemically similar to those
              of the benchmark data set, are scanned from large databases and are evaluated
              for their chemical properties based on the predictive model. The aim is to
              target a few novel molecules with potentially attractive pharmaceutical
              properties that can then be tested further in the traditional way in the
              laboratory.  Computationally intelligent data mining techniques are vital to
              extract the information necessary to select these novel molecules. This
              research applied novel machine learning paradigms such as semi-supervised
              learning with capacity control. These algorithms predict desired biological
              responses and generate QSAR models using both known (labeled) and unknown
              (unlabeled) biological responses. This project involves the development of an
              infrastructure of computationally intelligent computer codes that allow for the
              virtual design of novel pharmaceuticals or the improvement of existing
              pharmaceuticals. The proposed methodology is applicable to most pharmaceuticals
              for which a database of responses is available. The ultimate pay-off of this
              methodology is expected to lead to the rapid invention of new drugs for new or
              known society threatening diseases where a very fast response is warranted. 
