Title       : Dissertation Research: Splitting and Joining Decisions, and Adaptations to
               Temporal Resource Variation in Long-Haired Spider Monkeys (Ateles Belzebuth
               Belzebuth)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1999   
File        : a9979760

Award Number: 9979760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11005              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Janson janson@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This project will investigate the fission-fusion behavior of long-haired spider
              monkeys (Ateles belzebuth belzebuth) in the Yasuni National Park, Ecuador, and
              its relationship to ecological and social factors.  Spider monkeys live in
              social groups in which all of the members of a community are rarely in the same
              place at the same time.  Instead, subsets (subgroups) of the community
              associate temporarily and change associations frequently.   Few studies have
              addressed what causes individuals to split from or join these subgroups.  This
              project will estimate how the expectation of the amount of fruit in feeding
              trees affects subgroup splitting decisions, the competitive or cooperative
              nature of subgroup fusions, and to what extent subgroup changes are influenced
              by non-food-related causes, such as social factors.  To interpret these issues,
              this project will provide evidence of the level at which spider monkeys
              understand where to find feeding trees, and when those trees can be profitably
              visited.
	To accomplish these goals, adult females will be followed for
              two-week periods from dawn to dusk to collect data on subgroup changes and
              resource use.  Additionally, data on the fruiting patterns of important feeding
              trees will be collected to measure fine-scale changes in fruit
              abundance.
	This project will clarify our knowledge of why subgroups form and
              split, providing a clearer understanding of the factors causing the evolution
              of a fission-fusion society, and thereby provide important comparative
              information for the understanding of the evolution of primate social systems. 
              Additionally, it will provide evidence bearing upon the possession of mental
              maps by primates, and will provide some of the first data on primate
              understanding of temporal variation in fruit availability.

