Title       : Early Development of Reading Skills: A Cognitive Neuroscience Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9979968

Award Number: 9979968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3974486            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. Fletcher Jack.Fletcher@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara R. Foorman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Mathes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Papanicolaou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-5847

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 2816,7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research project uses an interdisciplinary approach to large-scale
              educational interventions that provides for the integration of research and
              education around issues involving the cognitive development of beginning
              reading skills. Three projects are centered around a large suburban school
              district in Houston, TX.   The participants are children who receive two types
              of classroom instruction (N=384) and their teachers (N=40). Within each type of
              classroom instruction, children are assigned to one of 4 groups (N=48) as part
              of a 2 (Classroom Instruction) X 4 (Group) design. The 4 groups include a
              no-risk group and 3 groups of children at risk for reading problems. Children
              in these 3 groups  receive only classroom instruction or classroom instruction
              that matches or doesn't match the type of classroom reading instruction. All
              children will receive longitudinal assessments of growth in reading and
              reading-related skills, yearly norm-referenced achievement measures, and
              assessment of behaviour and the home/school environment. The intervention study
              (project 1) involves: a) identification of children at risk for reading
              problems in kindergarten; b) providing a controlled study of the efficacy of a
              first grade educational intervention designed to prevent reading problems in
              multiple high-risk schools; and c) evaluation of the use of information and
              computing technologies (ICT) to provide professional development of teachers on
              the translation of research on reading development into practice. The second
              project explores neural changes representing reading development using
              magnetoencephalography (MEG) to evaluate a) functional neural changes that
              occur as reading develops; and b) changes in the neural representation of
              reading skills as an indicator of response to intervention. The second study
              involves 120 children from the overall sample assigned to 3 groups (N=40 each):
              no risk, at-risk interventions; and at-risk classroom instruction. These
              children receive MEG evaluations before and after grade 1 and after grade 2.
              The final project addresses decodability skills and evaluates: a) how lexical
              and text characteristics of the basal reading programs used in archival
              intervention studies relate to student outcomes;  b) psycholinguistic factors
              that moderate the impact of decodability; and c) the relationships of reading
              instruction in project 1 at classroom and intervention levels to the child's
              ability to read texts with pre-specified lexical and text characteristics. This
              study uses both archival data and will also collect monthly prospective data
              involving preconstructed textual material on the entire sample of 384 children.
