Title       : Modeling and Design for the Lower Layers of 4th Generation Indoor/Outdoor
               Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9979452

Award Number: 9979452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $697636             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold L. Swindlehurst swindle@ee.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Jeffs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While current wireless communications systems offer acceptable performance for
              transmission of voice and simple digital data such as e-mail and paging
              services, they cannot adequately support the higher data rates required for
              example by graphics-rich multimedia applications or video conferencing. This
              throughput limitation must be overcome in order to meet the growing desire for
              instant information accessibility regardless of one's location around the
              world, sometimes referred to as "global seamless roaming". Until recently, it
              was believed that the primary obstacle to higher data rates in wireless systems
              was due to multipath -- the scattering of a signal along many different paths
              due to objects between the transmitter and receiver. However, remarkable new
              research suggests just the opposite; in particular, it has been demonstrated
              that if multiple antennas are used on both ends of a multipath-rich
              communications link, and appropriate digital "space-time" codes are employed,
              then dramatic increases in throughput can be achieved. Intuitively, this is
              because each propagation path offers a separate ``independent'' channel over
              which data can be transmitted. To take advantage of these spatially and
              temporally diverse channels, antenna arrays are required on both the receive
              and transmit ends of the link. This obviously leads to an increase in system
              complexity, and raises questions concerning what type of communication
              protocols must be used when multiple Tx and Rx (MTRx) antennas are employed.
              These are issues addressed by this research project.

The investigators are
              conducting a thorough assessment of the design, implementation, testing, and
              performance analysis of MTRx wireless communications systems. Specific tasks
              include the following:

(1)Experimental space-time channel characterization
              and modeling for indoor and outdoor wireless channels -- Design and
              implementation of a flexible, low-cost MIMO data acquisition system capable of
              efficiently measuring spatial and temporal channel characteristics in various
              settings as well as for different antenna directivity and polarization
              properties; Development of statistical models that provide an accurate
              description of the MIMO channel space-time characteristics based upon fits to
              the observed data; Utilization of the model in assessing the validity of the
              assumptions used in the development of MTRx algorithms, and the degradation in
              performance of the algorithms when model mismatch occurs.

(2)Analysis of how
              space-time algorithms based on idealized assumptions fare in real multipath
              environments -- An investigation of how imprecisely known channels degrade
              performance, how accurately the channel must be known in order to obtain
              acceptably error-free data transfer; A study of how frequency selective
              channels degrade the performance of algorithms that assume flat fading; A
              determination of the effects of channel non-stationarities such as Doppler on
              space-time algorithm performance and on how often the channel be updated for
              reasonable performance; Analysis of the effect of co-channel interference and
              models for taking it into account.

(3)The development of new, practical
              strategies for space-time processing that are robust to realistic channel
              effects and geared to multiple user access -- Investigation of space-time error
              control coding strategies for real channels, with a focus on 3-dimensional
              interleaver design, space-time ARQ and hybrid-ARQ, and space-time
              code-combining; Implementation of various multiple access protocols using MTRx
              wireless systems, including a study of space, time, frequency, and code
              division multiple access, as well as packet-based approaches; Development of
              appropriate MIMO channel estimators to be used with the space-time processing
              algorithms requiring reliable channel state information. 
