Title       : The Early Development of Mathematical Cognition in Socioeconomic and Cultural
               Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a9979974

Award Number: 9979974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1586709            (Estimated)
Investigator: Prentice Starkey pstarkey@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,2816,7180,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A cross-cultural longitudinal research project will be conducted (1) to compare
              the development of informal mathematical cognition in 3- to 6-year-old Chinese,
              Japanese, and American children, and (2) to investigate how these cultures
              support children's early mathematical development in multiple learning
              enviornments.  One component of the project is a comprehensive cross-cultural
              study of early mathematical cognition encompassing both numerical and spatial
              geometric knowledge in young children.  We will include children from families
              representing different socioeconomic strata or parent-education levels in all
              three countries to ensure that variation within cultures as well as between
              cultures is addressed in the research.  A second component of the project
              comprises two intensive studies of young children's mathematical learning
              environments.  The objective of these studies is to examine the nature and
              extent of support for informal mathematical development which children are
              receiving at home and in classroom environments across diverse socioeconomic
              and cultural contexts.  Our investigation of how young children's learning
              environments support early mathematical development is informed by the
              theoretical construct of the "developmental niche" which includes three
              subsystems: (1) the physical and social settings in which the child develops,
              (2) culturally influenced customs of child rearing and care, and (3) knowledge
              and belief systems of parents, teachers, and other caregivers about children's
              behavior, learning, and development.
     It is expected that the findings of
              this research will reveal when and how to support effectively the development
              of children's informal mathematical knowledge prior to formal mathematics
              instruction in elementary school.  Moreover, these results will have
              implications for standards-based education reform efforts in mathematics in the
              United States.  They will also inform federal, state, and private preschool
              programs' efforts to accommodate to our nation's need for all children to enter
              school ready to learn formal mathematics.
