Title       : Integrated Antennas, Receivers, and Networks for Mobile, Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9979448

Award Number: 9979448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry D. Van Veen vanveen@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akbar M. Sayeed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan C. Hagness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajeev Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Parameswaran Ramanathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1596,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979448
Van Veen

An integrated program of research is proposed for
              exploiting all available modes of diversity in the wireless channel.  This
              requires the development of novel antennas for transmitting in diverse modes,
              digital receivers for exploiting these modes, and dynamic resources allocations
              for assigning them.  

The primary challenges in this research are to manage
              and exploit the complex and time varying nature of the wireless communication
              channel, while meeting the power and bandwidth constraints of mobiles, base
              stations and networks.  Hence, the work emphasizes integration of digital
              receivers for multiaccess communication with smart antennas and dynamic
              resource allocation.  The smart antenna excites the temporal, spatial, and
              polarizational modes in the wireless channel.  The multiuse receiver uses these
              modes to decode mobile users and to estimate channel parameters, which are used
              by the dynamic resource allocator to provide the required QoS to end
              users.

The design of a high frequency (e.g., 30 Ghz), high bandwidth
              radiating and receiving antenna which is agile in space, time, and polarization
              will involve numerical modeling, device construction, and testing of a
              prototype, based on prior experience with millimeter wave lens antennas.  The
              design of multiaccess receivers which exploit available degrees of freedom will
              be based on actual device characteristics and on realistic scattering models
              for the channel.  These receivers will be designed and implemented in reduced
              dimension subspaces.  These subspaces are generated by resolving the real
              channel into a parallel combination of virtual diversity channels, using a
              special canonical space-time coordinate system.  The designs will be evaluated
              using the software radio testbed currently under development at Eurecom..  The
              innovative aspect of the proposed dynamic network allocation work is the shared
              use of information at the physical and network layers to jointly optimize the
              use of channel and network resources for ensuring QoS.  Dynamic resource
              allocation will exploit all the channel modes made available by the antennas
              and receivers.  Estimates of signal to interference plus noise ratio (SINR) and
              bit error rate (BER) will be shared between the physical and network layers to
              dynamically allocate power and bandwidth across different channel modes, while
              keeping signaling and receiver complexity manageable.  This integrated research
              program will influence the conception, development, and implementation of
              future wireless communication networks.

A key element of this project is the
              integration of student and faculty research activities at three universities: 
              the University of Wisconsin, the University of Colorado, and Eurecom in France,
              the later a recipient of an IEEE Education Award for its innovative integration
              of mobile wireless, multimedia, and networking.  The likelihood of success I
              this collaborative program is high, because working relationships between the
              three schools have been established through prior visits, sabbaticals, and
              collaborations.

The management plan is built around regular visits between
              laboratories at the participating schools, and joint advising of students
              working at technology boundaries.  The integrated perspective developed in this
              research program will be incorporated into a new undergraduate wireless
              communication laboratory, a graduate colloquium course, and a wireless
              communication reading course.  This work will impact the content of existing
              courses in communications, signal processing, networks, antennas, and
              electromagnetics.
***

