Title       : RF-photonic wireless technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9979331

Award Number: 9979331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Levi alevi@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lutfollah Maleki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979331
Levi

The objective of this proposal is to develop a new class of
              RF-photonic device for use in power-efficient, small, light-weight, mobile
              wireless communication applications. These objectives will be achieved at the
              University of Southern California (USC) by bringing together the needed
              interdisciplinary expertise in RF-design, photonics, and systems in a
              university-based effort which leverages resources at the government Jet
              Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The initial focus of research is realization of
              efficient RF-to-optical conversion. The research challenges include creation of
              high-Q microresonators, low-loss optical coupling, and efficient coupling of RF
              power to microresonators. An initial system-level goal is detection of utW RF
              power and the demonstration of a wireless receiver using a 60 GHz RF
              carrier.

Future mobile wireless communication devices will operate using RF
              carrier frequencies in the range 10 GHz to 100 GHz (3.3 cm to 3 mm wavelength).
              Conventional RF design makes extensive use of electronic mixers and
              intermediate frequency stages to extract base-band information. Such designs
              are inherently power hungry due to the large number of components and the lossy
              electronic RF circuit environment. However, novel, potentially revolutionary,
              device concepts can have a dramatic influence on how RF signals are received
              and processed at these frequencies. For example, carrier frequency may be
              increased from RF to 200 THz (1.5 gm wavelength) by direct conversion to the
              optical domain. The resulting photonic signals may then be processed in a
              low-loss, ultra-fast photonic signal-processing environment. An additional
              advantage of this optical approach is the potential for reduced weight, size
              and power consumption - all of which scale with photon wavelength.

Efficient
              RF to optical conversion is a key challenge. This proposal identifies a
              solution which involves the intimate integration of high-Q RF and microphotonic
              components. Recent studies of microsphere and microdisk photonic resonators
              have shown that Qs exceeding 109 can be achieved in microspheres and very
              small, sub-micron diameter, multiple quantum well microdisk lasers can also be
              realized. These remarkable microphotonic components achieve their high-Q due to
              total internal reflection of whispering gallery photon resonances at the curved
              air-dielectric interface of the structure. The confinement of photon field to a
              region near the dielectric interface and the long photon lifetime of the
              resonance enhances nonlinear interaction with the material. By careful
              electromagnetic design it is possible to optimize the overlap between the
              RF-field and the nonlinear optical response of the resonator, thereby ensuring
              power-efficient RF-to-optical conversion in a small volume.

In a mobile
              wireless application, a microsphere or microdisk is optically pumped using a
              laser diode. Direct RF-to-optical conversion is via the nonlinear
              optoelectronic response of the material. Two approaches will be explored. In
              the first the microresonator will be fabricated from lithium niobate and the
              electro-optic modulation response of the device investigated. The second
              approach will use the incident RF field to induce stimulated atomic transitions
              in optically pumped ruby. In addition to component-level research, the program
              will also study system design issues and develop models capable of predicting
              the impact of these technologies for mobile wireless applications.
***

