Title       : Dynamic Adaptive Wireless Networks with Autonomous Robot Nodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9979457

Award Number: 9979457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498268             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Estrin   (Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Bekey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maja J. Mataric  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaurav Sukhatme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Govindan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1596,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Multihop wireless capabilities will enable communication and coordination
              among autonomous nodes in unplanned environments and configurations.  At the
              same time wireless channels present challenges of dynamic operating conditions,
              power constraints for autonomously-powered nodes, and complicating interactions
              between high level behavior and lower level channel characteristics (e.g. ,
              increased synchronized communication will significantly degrade channel
              characteristics).  The major goal of the research  is the development, testing
              and characterization of algorithms for scalable, application driven, wireless
              network services using a heterogeneous collection of communicating mobile
              nodes.   Some of these nodes will be autonomous (robots) in that their
              movements will not be human controlled.   The others will be portable thus,
              making them dependent on humans for transportation.   While the focus of the
              work is on the mobile nodes, include immobile computers on the network as well.
                It emphasize that most (though not all)
of the mobile nodes will have modest
              sensing, computational and communication resources.  The collection as a whole
              is an example of a sensor network.  The chief scientific motivation behind the
              work is the design of robust, efficient and scalable algorithms.   The
              researchers hypothesize that distributed algorithms that rely on local
              interactions have many compelling characteristics, resulting in these
              properties.   There is significant overlap between the problems of coordinating
              the autonomous mobile nodes that carry some of the sensors and the algorithms
              that direct the f ow of information from source(s) to sink(s) in the network.  
              Both setsof algorithms will be carefully designed to improve robustness,
              effciency and scalability.   
