Title       : PGE/SEP: Supporting university women in geoscience: the mentoring ladder, field
               experience, and academic training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9979305

Award Number: 9979305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Jansma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this project, to be conducted at the University of Puerto Rico
              Mayaguez (UPRM), is to improve the number of Hispanic women who complete
              undergraduate degrees and enter graduate programs in the Earth Sciences by
              targeting three critical transition points which strongly affect future career
              decisions:  1) entry into college; 2) the senior year and impending graduation;
              and 3) the beginning years of graduate school.  The objectives are:  to
              encourage the women during these transition periods to remain in geosciences
              and to nurture them into becoming leaders who will ascend through the
              scientific hierarchy and serve as role models.  The long-term goal is to
              increase the numbers and the visibility of Hispanic women at the national level
              in geosciences.  The total number of Hispanic women impacted is approximately
              80 during the 18-month tenure of the proposal.
     Project activities
              include:  establishing a support network of peers early in the college career
              with a weekend field-trip for entering female geoscience majors; building
              cooperation and leadership through teamwork during a two-week field experience
              for senior undergraduate and graduate women; developing self-confidence and
              academic proficiency through a mentoring ladder in which freshman are guided by
              upper-class women who are counseled by graduate students, who, in turn, are
              supported by a faculty member; improving professional and social skills through
              seminars given by female students of all levels and critiqued by their
              colleagues; and increasing awareness of opportunities through attendance at
              national meetings and a lecture series that brings prominent female
              geoscientists to UPRM.  Project activities are complementary.  The unifying
              theme is the focus on improving self-confidence and self-reliance through
              independent decision-making, mentoring, and a support network of peers that can
              be used throughout a woman's career.

