Title       : PGE/SEP: Project ADVANCE: Developing A Resilient Cohort of Women in Quantitative
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9979478

Award Number: 9979478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Thompson bobt@asdean.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea L. Bertozzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9979478
Duke University


Project Advance at Duke University will
              recruit and develop a resilient cohort of talented first-year women students in
              the quantitative sciences, focusing particularly on mathematics, computer
              science, and statistics. As a highly selective private research university,
              Duke attracts women undergraduates with demonstrated excellence in science and
              mathematics and high self-esteem. We seek to sustain and enhance these
              characteristics by developing an experimental project that intentionally links
              pedagogical components of the first-year curriculum, introduces an innovative,
              interdisciplinary half-credit seminar designed to develop students'
              self-perceptions and identity as scientists, and establishes a structure for
              guided mentorships to help this talented cohort navigate successfully through
              science and mathematics experiences. We have targeted the first college year
              because of the critical role it plays in the transition from high school to the
              undergraduate major, in fostering women's identity as scientists and
              mathematicians, and in providing the skills and experiences requisite for
              advanced study and successful careers. This multidimensional project builds on
              the pedagogies of engagement and current research on processes, such as
              self-identity and negative stereotypes, that have been shown to facilitate or
              inhibit achievement. It will provide experimental data that can be broadened
              across the sciences and serve as a model for how research universities, in
              general, can foster a more welcoming environment for the retention and support
              of women and, thus, foster careers of distinction.

