Title       : LCE: Protection Against Modeling and Simulation Uncertainties in Design
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9979711

Award Number: 9979711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Grossman grossman@aoe.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Layne T. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a method to improve automated
              design procedures through use of a diagnostic methodology to help designers
              handle situations where the computer simulations used in the design are not
              exact.  Modern design methods use computational simulations from a variety of
              disciplines simultaneously.  In principle this leads to much better designs in
              much less time.  In practice, the computer simulations are not completely
              accurate, and the accuracy will vary for different designs.  When embedded in
              automated systems it becomes difficult to assess the level of uncertainty
              arising from these simulations.  The uncertainties often appear as
              irregularities in the results.  Numerical optimization procedures have problems
              in this situation, unknowingly exploiting the weaknesses of the simulations to
              produce poor designs.   The research will develop a method to use discrepancies
              between simulations of varying fidelity and empirical data to identify when the
              design process is using poor simulation results to make design decisions and
              suggest means to correct the situation.  The method will use modern statistical
              methods and simulation models to identify areas of high uncertainty and to
              attempt to repair the simulation. 

If successful, the results of the
              research will lead to procedures that can be incorporated into an automated
              design process to improve confidence in design quality, provide an indication
              of the uncertainty associated with the design and reduce product design time. 
              The method will be developed for vehicle design using simultaneous fluid
              dynamics and structures as the key disciplines for multidisciplinary shape and
              structural design.  The uncertainty techniques will be applicable to design in
              related areas where the design methodology is based upon computer simulations.
