Title       : HBCU: Undergraduate/Graduate Initiative for Success in Science and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9979903

Award Number: 9979903
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3596876            (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnn W. Haysbert JoAnn.Haysbert@hamptonu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Johnnye M. Jones  (Principal Investigator former)
              Willie L. Darby  (Principal Investigator former)
              Claudia Rankins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold Marioneaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hampton University

Hampton University is requesting of the National Science
              Foundation support in the amount of $2,997,110 for the development and
              implementation of an HBCU Undergraduate program that will offer: (1) support
              for opportunities for curriculum enhancement in the development of
              interdisciplinary programs and research; and (2) a Pre-Freshmen Summer Science
              Institute Program that is targeted for entering freshman students; (3) faculty
              development opportunities that will impact the quality of instruction and
              research; (4) scholarships for qualified students; (5) an Integrated Learning
              Environment (ILE) for science majors, and (6) a plan to enhance and expand
              undergraduate research. The pre-freshman summer science institute is specially
              oriented toward the preparation of students to enter the freshman year of
              college with strong backgrounds in quantitative subject matter and
              communication skills that will help facilitate their entry into a challenging
              program at the undergraduate level. The undergraduate programs in the School of
              Science will be enhanced through (1) faculty developmental activities including
              retraining and other enrichment experiences at renown research centers; and (2)
              a Visiting Scientist Lecture series that will become an important resource in
              the offering of new courses; and participation in seminars, workshops and other
              enrichment activities.  Existing interdisciplinary research projects at the
              university will benefit significantly from the new dimension that the HBCU
              Undergraduate Program will bring to the undergraduate disciplines. These
              include biological sciences, chemistry, communicative sciences  computer
              science, mathematics, and physics. The HBCU Program will help underwrite the
              costs for additional faculty and staff, equipment, teaching and resource
              supplies, and the attendance of students and faculty at relevant professional
              meetings.
Anticipated outcomes of the program are: (1) a significant increase
              in the number of minority students who will pursue teaching and research
              careers in some of the frontier areas of the interdisciplinary sciences such as
              astrobiology bio-engineering, computer engineering, atmospheric sciences and
              environmental sciences; and (2) the development of a model program that other
              institutions having a similar mission may wish to emulate.


