Title       : Advanced Physics-Based Propagation Models for Channel Characterization in a
               Wireless Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9979376

Award Number: 9979376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kamal Sarabandi saraband@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,1596,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979376
Sarabandi

In this proposal the basic science issues related to the
              development of a high fidelity propagation model, for application in wideband,
              high data rate wireless systems, are addressed.  The emphasis is placed on the
              development of new methodologies for obtaining accurate and efficient field
              calculations needed for the propagation model.  The electromagnetic wave
              between a transmitter and a receiver, through its interaction with its
              environment, experiences phenomena such as shadowing, reflection, diffraction,
              attenuation and multiple scattering.  Development of advanced, high speed,
              innovative wireless systems requires accurate knowledge of the propagation
              channel and its effects on modulation and coding schemes, system bandwidth,
              transmitter power and antenna design.  Current methods of prediction are either
              heuristic or overly simplistic (based on ray-tracing and simple diffraction
              models) and tend to neglect physical phenomena which have a significant effect
              on radio wave propagation.  With this in mind development of a physics-based
              approach to propagation prediction, with emphasis in providing the basic
              understanding of the physical phenomena and developing advanced analytical and
              numerical electromagnetic (EM) models, is proposed.  Specifically, a number of
              realistic canonical geometries and generic propagation blocks for a propagation
              model are considered and detailed plans for acquiring the diffracted fields and
              its statistics accurately and efficiently are provided.  The propagation
              problem will be divided into three categories or environments, each of which
              has its own unique characteristics representing rural, urban, and atmospheric
              propagation.  Within each environment EM scattering and diffraction phenomenon
              will be investigated and appropriate models, representing various environmental
              features and including stochastic variations, will be developed and integrated.
               Within each environment a layered approach will be taken with each layer
              representing the degree of approximation necessary for accurate prediction. 
              These models will eventually be integrated with existing terrain data bases
              obtained from geographical information systems (GSI) or remote sensing
              technology to produce a highly accurate and general prediction tool.  For a
              given environment and transmitter and receiver configurations the proposed
              propagation model will provide mean-field strength (path loss estimate), signal
              fading statistics, spatial decorrelation distance, frequency decorrelation
              bandwidth, Doppler spectrum for mobile platforms, and the time delay response
              of the channel.
***










