Title       : Wireless Technology: Issues on QoS Stability, Sensitivity, Flow & Congestion
               Control in Wireless Broadband Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a9979401

Award Number: 9979401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301986             (Estimated)
Investigator: C-K Toh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1596,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There has been a lot of research work on Wireless ATM in the past 5 years; most
              of the research works are geared towards mobility and connection management. 
              The former is concerned with location and handoff management while the latter
              is concerned with signaling for call setup and teardown.  What are remaining
              are still some very open issues that demand answers.  In supporting QoS in
              Wireless ATM, the variation of QoS availability over space and time is
              different from one wireless cell to another.  Mobile calls that are established
              at call setup may longer to able to maintain their QoS demands if the mobile
              host migrates from cell to cell, unless pre-allocation of network resources are
              made in advance (however, this is very inefficient).  The trend so far has been
              towards an adaptive end-to-end Mobile QoS framework for Wireless ATM networks. 
              Although this proposal addresses mobile QoS for Wireless ATM, it is not another
              duplication of existing efforts.  Instead, we are investigating this area of
              work from another dimension - applying the know-how of control and network
              theory and protocols.  It shall address challenging research issues at the
              network and transport layers and hence this proposal demands vertically
              integrated research.

Most end-to-end QoS adaptation framework attempts to
              ensure the QoS (normally the bandwidth and delay requirements) over both wired
              and wireless links are consistent after a handoff.  However, such handoffs can
              occur on the two remote ends of the mobile-to-mobile connection.  If the
              adaptation protocols are not well designed, the WATM can experience instability
              problems.  The fact that a mobile host or the network triggers an adaptation is
              a sign of pro-active reaction.  This is called sensitivity.  A highly sensitive
              system can also cause substantial signaling overhead and result in network
              congestion and instability.  The instability refers to a regenerative
              phenomenon where another adaptation process is triggered even before the
              current one is completed.  The innovative approach is to apply control theory
              and to derive new network algorithms.   We plan to introduce a set of damping
              procedures to control sensitivity and instability associated with continuous
              and transient oscillation in QoS adaptation.  Our plan is to derive these
              adaptation damping procedures and to implement them on a WATM simulator/testbed
              to evaluate the feasibility of the approach and the resultant stability and
              sensitivity of the system under different traffic load, degree of mobility and
              number of users.  This area of this research proposal, therefore, enhances QoS
              support and more importantly, the  reliability, availability and performance of
              future broadband wireless network systems.  It views the understanding of
              underlying dynamics associated with QoS adaptation paramount to building high
              performance and reliable wireless broadband systems.

The second part of the
              research concerns with ABR and VBR flow control in WATM networks.  While there
              has been much on-going research associated with ATM flow and congestion
              control, little is devoted to wireless flow and congestion control in WATM
              networks.  This proposal reveals the impact of the dynamics associated with SS
              (Stability and Sensitivity) in QoS adaptation on ABR/VBR flow control.  This is
              a very genuine problem since current rate-based flow control relies on the use
              of feedback cells and these cells can be lost as a result of host mobility. 
              The innovative approach has two components:  (a) the separation of rate
              allocation and signaling in a vertically integrated design, (b) the
              optimization of flow control functions in both space and time.  It intends to
              develop and validate a theory of protocols that enables max-min optimization,
              enhancing stability and minimizing sensitivity to an appropriate level. 
              Protocols designed based on this theory will be amenable to rigorous analysis
              and proofs of behavior.

