Title       : Integrated Design of Wireless Information Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9979347

Award Number: 9979347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Demosthenis Teneketzis teneket@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne E. Stark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly M. Wasserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephane Lafortune  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979347
Teneketzis

Future Wireless Information Networks (WINs) will provide
              integrated services (e.g., voice, video, data, images, and multimedia) each
              with its own bandwidth and Quality of Service (QoS) requirements. To meet this
              challenge, it is necessary to design systems that deal effectively with
              bandwidth management, mobility, multipath fading, shadowing, interference,
              abrupt changes in link (channel) quality and network topology, variability in
              QoS re-quirements, and increasing user demand. Designs that deal effectively
              with the above issues will have to jointly optimize the operation of subsystems
              that potentially cut across several network architecture and protocol
              layers.
The proposed research aims at integrated designs of WINs that account
              for the interactions among layers and takes advantage of these interactions to
              discover algorithms that deal effectively with the above mentioned issues.
We
              believe that the physical layer plays a crucial role in the performance of WINs
              because it is the least controllable and predictable layer in the network
              architecture. This is why we propose to: (i) understand primarily the impact of
              the physical layer on the performance of the data link control, Media Access
              Control (MAC), network, and transport layers; and (ii) exploit this impact to
              develop a systematic approach to the integrated design of WINs. To achieve this
              goal, we propose to investigate single-hop and multi-hop problems separately,
              with the understanding that, eventually, an overall design will integrate, in
              an iterative manner, the issues critical for single-hop problems with those
              that are critical for multi-hop problems.
For single-hop problems, we will (i)
              investigate the interactions among components of the physical layer so that we
              can improve the layer's design; (ii) exploit the impact of the physical layer
              on the data link control, MAC, and transport layers in order to develop
              efficient Automatic Repeat request (ARQ) algorithms, and dynamic resource
              allocation algorithms, and to develop mechanisms to improve the performance of
              Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) over wireless links. For multi-hop
              problems, we will (i) exploit the impact of the physical, data link control,
              and MAC layers on the network layer to develop efficient multi-hop routing,
              alternate routing, power control (topology control), load-balancing, and
              congestion control algorithms; (ii) take advantage of the impact of the
              physical, data link control, and MAC layer on the transport layer to design
              simple, efficient, and robust mechanisms of TCP in multi-hop WINs; (iii) design
              and validate simple communication protocols incorporating the algorithms and
              mechanisms developed in (i) and (ii).
The proposed activities in connection
              with other relevant research activities at the University of Michigan and
              Purdue University will provide an excellent vehicle for the training of future
              wireless information network engi-neers.

Keywords: Wireless networks,
              resource allocation, receiver architecture, fading channels, integrated
              services, routing and flow control.
***
