Title       : Integration of Object-Oriented Methodologies, Petri Nets and Software
               Architectures for Distributed Control of Engineering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9979693

Award Number: 9979693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Kamen kamen@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yorai Wardi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Giorgio Casinovi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Spiridon A. Reveliotis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will develop a comprehensive and systematic approach to
              the problem of engineering system modeling, simulation and control.  Both the
              theoretical aspects of the problem, and the issues related to software
              implementation of simulation and control algorithms in a distributed computing
              environment will be examined.
Entities flowing through the system and their
              transformations by the various system processes will be modeled by
              object-oriented  representations.  Thus system inputs and outputs will be
              treated as objects having attributes, methods, and links to other objects.  The
              system flow dynamics, i.e., the structure of the supported entity flows and
              their associated event timings will be modeled using the formalism of
              stochastic Petri nets.  This formal modeling framework will provide adequate
              modeling capability to assist in the analysis of the real-time flow dynamics in
              the system, even in the presence of uncertainty.  It will also provide the
              basis for gaining new theoretical insights for the eventual synthesis of
              pertinent control policies.  In particular, topics of investigation will be the
              transfer of existing results in the area of structural control to the context
              of this new modeling framework, the interaction of structural and
              performance-oriented control, the systematic evaluation of the performance of
              existing sequencing and scheduling policies in the context of structurally
              controlled object systems, and the interaction between product quality and
              system throughput and productivity.
On the basis of the theoretical insights
              gained through these investigations, new algorithms for the simulation and
              control of engineering systems will be formulated, and distributed software
              implementations of those algorithms will be developed.  'The results obtained
              through this approach will be validated by their application to a surface-mount
              printed circuit board assembly line located in the Manufacturing Research
              Center at Georgia Tech.



