Title       : Integrated Active Antenna Arrays for Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a9979282

Award Number: 9979282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramakrishna Janaswamy janaswamy@esc.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Pozar  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert W. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kei M. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979282
Pozar

While the vast majority of commercial wireless systems
              deployed to date are characterized by the use of frequencies below 2 GHz and
              the use of low-gain antennas, many of the proposed high-speed wireless data
              networks of the future will use millimeter wave frequencies and high gain
              antennas. Examples include point-to-point radios operating at 23 and 38 GHz
              (largely used for cellular and PCS base station backhaul traffic), local
              multi-point distribution systems (LMDS) operating at 28 GHz, and ground
              terminals operating at 20 and 30 GHz for the Celestri and Teledesic low-earth
              orbit (LEO) satellite systems. Although micro-strip antenna technology has
              matured considerably over the last 15 years, a persistent problem has been the
              fact that micro-strip feed line losses increase exponentially with antenna size
              and with frequency, so that it is impossible to construct an efficient
              high-gain micro-strip array at millimeter wave frequencies using a coplanar
              micro-strip feed network. The research plan described here proposes to address
              this and related fundamental problems associated with millimeter wave wireless
              systems by studying the integration of as much of the critical antenna and
              front-end microwave electronics as possible. We will make use of recent
              advances in silicon machining, wafer bonding and polymer films to create
              structures that were not possible just a few years ago. In addition, by
              considering the antenna and RF electronics as a whole unit, we will be able to
              greatly reduce cost by focusing on processing only the component
              characteristics that are necessary for high efficiency arrays.

A three-year
              research effort is proposed to carry out experimental and theoretical
              investigations of millimeter wave antennas and RF front-end circuitry for
              future wireless data networks and systems. Both monolithic and semi-hybrid
              approaches will be studied. One component of the research involves the
              development of HBT power amplifiers with specific geometry, configuration, and
              characteristics that will be favorable for monolithic integration with
              micro-strip antenna elements on GaAs substrates to minimize feed losses at
              millimeter wave frequencies. Using state-of-the-art MOCVD techniques, we will
              develop optimum HBT structures with sufficient gain in the millimeter wave
              regime without the requirement of nano-fabrication technology. In fabrication
              of the HBTs, we will collaborate with researchers at the Raytheon Advanced
              Device Center where state-of-the-art millimeter wave devices and integrated
              circuits are presently being developed. We will work with Raytheon researchers
              on the device design (both epitaxial structure and layout), process sequences,
              and specific process steps. We believe their experience and expertise will
              significantly enhance and accelerate our development of HBT technology for this
              program. Graduate students involved will also benefit greatly from this
              interaction with our industrial partners.
***

