Title       : Reading and Writing About Science: A Design-Experiment Strategy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9979834

Award Number: 9979834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $944112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Calfee robert.calfee@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie Sperling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Several sources (NAEP reports and Adult Literacy surveys) document serious
              problems in students' ability to read and write expository text.  The problems
              pervade content areas like science.  In fact, the nation's weak international
              standing in science may reflect students' limitations in reading and writing as
              much as their knowledge of science content and procedures.  Many observers have
              noted that U.S. science education is "mile-wide and inch-deep."  The challenge
              is to steer students toward competence in digging beneath the surface, and in
              gaining the ability to transform technical materials into forms that
              demonstrate their understanding of the material and to apply knowledge in a
              variety of new settings.

This proposal explores the consequences of
              curriculum variations based on the concept of a "reading-writing connection" to
              enhance student ability to search out and select scientific information, to
              analyze the information using rhetorical structures, and to transform and
              synthesize the information using the same structures.  The practical aim of the
              proposal is to find out how to help teachers and students in mastering the
              research report, an ancient genre that remains critical to the scientific
              enterprise.  The conceptual foundation is the application of social-cognitive
              constructs to the explication of the research report task as an iterative
              sequence of subtasks: defining the writing assignment; analyzing and
              summarizing text information (prescribed or to be found), organizing and
              transforming the information to meet the demands of the assignment, and
              constructing the composition.  In all of these subtasks, the student is bound
              by the tension between (a) limited cognitive capacity to handle novel and
              complex information and (b) the organizational support available through
              various rhetorical structures.
