Title       : Wireless Packet Radio Network Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9979365

Award Number: 9979365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Branimir R. Vojcic vojcic@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond L. Pickholtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves a novel adaptive and scalable wireless network
              architecture utilizing a mixture of cellular and packet radio network
              topologies for broadband multimedia communications. The architecture enables
              rapid adaptability to traffic, channel and interference conditions and will
              result in significant reductions in transmit power and potential throughput
              improvements. We investigate techniques that, by coordination among physical,
              data link, and network layers enable significant improvements in capacity and
              quality of service relative to the current state-of-the-art. 


The main
              thrust of our research consists of selective use of multiuser detection;
              self-organization; and adaptive routing. We consider multiuser detection
              techniques that exploit information available at the data link layer.
              Specifically, we are investigating the benefits of error detection side
              information in aiding interference cancellation and suppression. Research in
              self-organizing involves network connectivity optimization and allocation of
              resources. This optimization adapts network to topological changes on a
              relatively longer time scale. Network adaptation to physical and application
              layer attributes is primarily accomplished via adaptive routing. The
              investigators are evaluating the suitability of centralized and distributed, or
              perhaps hybrid, routing approaches. It is desired to provide rapid adaptation
              to changes in traffic and channel conditions, including interference, as well
              as changes in quality of service requirements.
