Title       : Are New Approaches to SMET Education Making a Difference? A Report to the
               Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9979664

Award Number: 9979664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne L. Narum pkal@pkal.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Independent Coll Off
	      1730 Rhode Island Avenue
	      Washington, DC  200363101    202/232-1300

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The last decade has been one of unparalleled attention to transforming
              undergraduate SMET programs, accompanied by an extraordinary commitment of
              financial support, time, energy, and expertise of individuals and institutions
              across the scientific and educational communities.  In order to make a timely
              public accounting of this investment, this project is engaged in preparing and
              printing a synthesis report entitled; "Are New Approaches Making a Difference? 
              To Whom, and How Do We Know?  A Report to the Community."

The report will
              identify individuals and institutions leading the Nation in developing,
              implementing, and assessing new approaches in classrooms and labs, and analyze
              and report on their efforts.  The report will illustrate with data how students
              are learning more effectively as they take responsibility for their own
              learning.  It will describe how new spaces are emerging that support improved
              learning communities and better accommodate new educational technologies.  It
              will report how faculty careers are enhanced through their efforts to integrate
              research and education.  

The publication is expected to be completed in
              time for distribution before the major gathering to be held in the Washington,
              DC area in the Fall of 1999 to celebrate the 10th anniversary of Project
              Kaleidoscope and to anticipate the next decade of reform in undergraduate
              science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.  The intended audience for
              the publication, however, is far greater than the 1,000 persons expected to
              attend.  It includes all those with a stake in ensuring that the undergraduate
              SMET community serves the interests of students and society; parents and
              alumni; elected officials in local and national governments; and leaders in
              academic, corporate, foundation, and industrial communities.  

The
              publication is drawing on new data gathered from leading reformers, the
              experience and expertise of an editorial board, an analysis of files assembled
              by Project Kaleidoscope over the past decade, and materials and data emerging
              from programs supported the National Science Foundation and public and private
              funders of improvements in undergraduate education.  
