Title       : Building a Learning Community in Science and Mathematics through Educational
               Partnerships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9979491

Award Number: 9979491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1487568            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Scott scott@biology.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Carr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren D. Crown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jolie A. Cizewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Rosenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This GK-12 program enhances K-12 science and mathematics education by creating
              dynamic learning environments partnering Rutgers graduate and advanced
              undergraduate students in science, mathematics, engineering, or technology
              (SMET) with teachers, administrators, and students in three New Jersey school
              districts.  Each year, ten graduate and ten advanced undergraduate students in
              SMET (referred to as "fellows") serve as resources for middle school and junior
              high school teachers in science and mathematics instruction.  Ten teams of
              fellows form partnerships with two or three teachers in a participating middle
              school and collaborate during the year to develop curriculum-based SMET
              activities in areas targeted by the schools.  Teachers and fellows begin their
              partnerships each year in a Summer Institute which includes sessions on
              curriculum, pedagogy, and advances in SMET fields.  Teams of fellows and
              teachers begin the process of developing new curriculum-based science
              activities during the Summer Institute, and continue to work together in the
              schools for ten hours each week.  Fellows devote an additional five hours to
              preparation and regular meetings and seminars. This project benefits several
              constituencies.  While working in schools, fellows improve their teaching
              skills as they communicate and convey the spirit and substance of science and
              scientific research.  The science and mathematics background of middle
              school/junior high school teachers are strengthened and enhanced through their
              participation in these professional collaborations.  K-12 students experience
              the excitement and relevance of science, mathematics and technology education. 
              School districts, their administrators and educators, benefit from their
              sustained partnership with the University, its faculty and students. 
