Title       : PGE/SEP: interCONNECTIONS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a9979287

Award Number: 9979287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitzi R. Vernon VERNON@VT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   interCONNECTIONS is a new kind of book series designed especially for young
              girls ages 8-11.  The collection focuses on the ability to take abstract
              concepts such as atomic structure, the Pythagorean Theorem, music, color, or
              magnetic fields and explain them through metaphor and imagery that might be
              more familiar at a young age.  The series is meant not only to help explain
              these concepts but also to illustrate how they are connected to one another,
              how everything is connected.  These books are similar in format to modular toys
              and board games, with mechanical/scientific mechanisms embedded in them.  
   
               The goal of the project is to test and evaluate the education efficacy, the
              appeal of the narrative approach to the content, and the overall usability of
              these books.  Ultimately, this project will serve as a proof of concept and
              yield the first three books of the series ready for manufacture/publication and
              dissemination.  ODYSSEY Books will serve to position the books simultaneously
              in the educational and consumer markets.
     Girls ages 8-11 are the primary
              target audience of interCONNECTIONS.  However, this product will also serve
              elementary and middle school teachers, librarians, and parents.  All of these
              target groups will be involved in the prototype-testing phase of the project. 
              Subjects for testing will be invited from at least three different schools
              across the United States.  The research model for testing will be established
              and conducted with the consultation of Design Research Associates, Inc., and
              ODYSSEY Books.
     interCONNECTIONS will help girls connect to abstract
              phenomena at an early age, thus allowing them more accessibility and comfort in
              scientific and engineering fields as high school and college students.   In the
              earliest prototype, The Universe Is in My Face, concepts were introduced with
              something that young girls are more familiar with or interested in, such as
              their faces (eyes are part of faces, molecules make up eyes, atoms make up
              molecules and electrons give eyes color).  Suddenly, a scientific and
              intangible concept such as atomic structure is made perceptible and concrete.

                  Specifically, the series will enable girls to (1) make connections between
              mechanical activity and abstract ideas; (2) make physical connections between
              boards, using a new technology that also demonstrates the content of the books;
              (3) connect one book (representing, for example, magnetic fields) with the next
              books (atomic structure), and the next (color theory) and so on; (4) develop a
              confidence in their own inquiry through identification with the narrator,
              Phoebe.
     Previous research underscores the important roles of
              concrete/mechanical activity in education and play - hence the mechanical
              emphasis in the format of the project.  LORD Corporation will be collaborating
              with the principal investigator to develop a magneto-rheological (MR)
              connecting component for the books as a way of augmenting the overall content
              of interCONNECTIONS.  The MR technology will have particular resonance in book
              one, Phoebe's Field, which is about magnetic and electrical fields.


