Title       : GOALI-Faculty and Students in Industry: Reduced Order Aeroelastic Dynamic
               Modeling of Flexible Airplanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9979234

Award Number: 9979234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satish S. Nair nairs@.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Miles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolph M. Yurkovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Name:  		Satish S. Nair
Institution:  		University of
              Missouri-Columbia
Proposal Number:	9979234
Title:			Reduced Order Aeroelastic
              Dynamic Modeling of Flexible Airplanes


Project Abstract:

The objective
              of this GOALI Graduate Student Industrial Fellowship project is to develop
              accurate reduced order models for analysis and prediction of both quasi-steady
              and dynamic loads acting on aircraft.  A fundamental theoretical basis for
              integration of a rigid aircraft simulation that includes a nonlinear
              aerodynamic database with a flexible aircraft representation that includes an
              unsteady aerodynamic database is to be developed. Appropriate mathematical
              techniques will be identified to allow development of a new time domain reduced
              order 'integrated aeroelastic model'.  Next, techniques based on this
              integrated model will be developed to predict both quasi-steady and dynamic
              loads for aircraft design. The equations used to predict flight paths of an
              aircraft, and the loads acting on the aircraft, are inherently nonlinear and
              complex.  Accurate simplification of these equations, incorporating aeroelastic
              effects, is important to facilitate the development of design tools for
              predicting flight paths and dynamic loads early in the design cycle for
              advanced airplanes. 
	
The industrial partner for this project, Boeing, Inc.,
              St. Louis, will provide mentoring at the industry end for the graduate student
              supported, including access to the structural and aeroelastic models and
              analytical tools presently used by them.   The techniques developed will be
              useful to develop reliable integrated aircraft simulators, which would shorten
              the design and development cycle for advanced airplanes.


