Title       : Reconfigurable High-Q Evanescent Mode Micromachined Filters for Wireless
               Communications Front-Ends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9979374

Award Number: 9979374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda B. Katehi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979374
Katehi

A novel approach is proposed appropriate for the development
              of electronically tunable micromachined high-Q evanescent-mode filters. Small
              size, high-Q filters or filter banks with high isolation between the adjacent
              channels can be achieved by use of micromachined evanescent-mode cavities that
              appropriately couple to each other and to the input/output micro-strip or
              coplanar waveguide transmission lines. These monolithically integrated filters
              have the ability to electronically reconfigure their electrical performance by
              use of appropriate MEMS devices. The proposed approach is based on silicon (Si)
              micromachining and can effectively provide very high-Q and tunability by
              integrating evanescent mode cavities with MEMS devices in a three dimensional
              circuit. To allow for electronically adjusted frequency or reconfigurability of
              pass-band and out-band performance, the MEMS devices are placed at appropriate
              locations within the filter layout. These MEMS switch-like, compliant or
              membrane structures will be optimized to achieve as low of an activation
              voltage as possible and will be used for electronic tuning and control of
              filter performance.

The proposed work will be performed in two steps: (a)
              development of an evanescent mode filter using micromachined cavities in S, L
              and X Bands, Co) use of MEMS devices for reconfiguring filter characteristics
              and the development of a switched diplexer. The fabrication techniques required
              in this approach are compatible with standard IC processing and for this reason
              provide very low fabrication cost and very high precision. In the proposed
              filter configurations, small size and high density will be achieved by
              vertically integrating the evanescent micromachined cavities and by
              incorporating an effective on-wafer Si micromachined package to house the MEMS
              devices and provide critical control of the coupling between the filter
              resonators. The developed components will be very small in size but of
              performance comparable to the state of the art waveguide filters in order to
              demonstrate excellent electrical response in addition to monolithic character,
              very small size, low cost and high density. As part of this effort, electronic
              tuning will be designed and implemented to control appropriate geometrical
              parameters. In addition, the tuning range of the designed filters will be
              studied and a filter or diplexer with the capability to switch in and out of
              the circuit will be investigated. The effectiveness of the MEMS devices in
              reconfiguring the filter characteristics will be evaluated by measuring the
              possible tuning range and tuning speed and evaluating the resulting Q of the
              filter The proposed study has as a goal to demonstrate the concept of a
              monolithic high-Q reconfigurable filter and investigate trade-offs in design in
              terms of performance, size, fabrication yield and cost. The development and
              demonstration of the proposed concept will be accomplished via the use of
              full-wave analysis tools and state of the art fabrication and measurement
              techniques. Success in this effort has the potential to revolutionarize
              communications front ends for a variety of wireless applications.
****

