Title       : An Integrated Exploration of Wireless Network Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9979381

Award Number: 9979381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Hajek b-hajek@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Blahut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naresh Shanbhag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Upamanyu Madhow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research studies the design of agile wireless networks that
accommodate
              time variations in the communication channels, the
information sources, and
              the network topology.
The research will lead to design principles that, in
              addition to 
enabling more efficient use of the current cellular and PCS
              bands, will allow 
exploitation of frequency bands in the 10-100 GHz range to
              provide high-speed 
multimedia services for both indoor and outdoor
              applications.  While the basic 
cellular paradigm of wireless access to a
              high-speed communication and
computing backbone will be adhered to, nearly
              every other assumption
in existing second-generation and projected
              third-generation cellular
and PCS networks will be reexamined.  Some of the
              significant differences
from current designs are as follows.  A dense network
              of base stations
will provide connectivity despite the high path losses
and
              sharp shadowing at higher frequency bands.  Cells with
well-defined boundaries
              may no longer exist, and mobile terminals will
see a rapidly varying network
              topology.  A variety of traffic classes,
such as voice, data, and video, with
              diverse requirements regarding
delay, loss, quality of reproduction, and
              number of potential receivers
will be considered.

The integrated research
              effort is being conducted by five overlapping
research teams of University of
              Illinois faculty investigators and
their students, organized around the
              following interdisciplinary projects:
(1) Concept Systems, Modeling, and
              Performance Limits,
(2) Design Principles for Wireless Packet Networks,
(3)
              Design for Time-Varying Channels,
(4) Jointly Optimized Source Coding, Channel
              Coding, and Estimation, and
(5) VLSI Algorithms, Architectures, and
              Bounds.
The investigators are applying their expertise in digital
              signal
processing, communication systems, networking, circuit design and
              control.
A diverse array of methods will be applied, including modeling
and
              simulation, application of adaptive and universal algorithm
methodologies,
              exploitation of antenna arrays and polarization for
diversity and beamforming,
              algebraic coding techniques, linear and nonlinear
optimization techniques,
              information theory, and laboratory
implementation and measurement.  
