Title       : High-speed and High-quality of Service Wireless Communications in Outdoor
               Environments Through Realistic Test Bed for Transmitter, Channel and Receiver
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a9979413

Award Number: 9979413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piergiorgio L. Uslenghi uslenghi@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,5920,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979413
Uslenghi

The framework of this project is the third generation (3G)
              wireless system, which is presently undergoing its standardization process
              worldwide. A few milestones have already been agreed upon: it will provide
              high-speed, high quality of service (QoS) capabilities to support Intemet and
              intranet data applications. The main system characteristics will focus on the
              Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) and "turbo codes". In 3G system, industry
              is primarily interested in data services that should be packet-switched with
              data rates of 144-384 kbps, in the outdoor environment. Data services should be
              asymmetric (e.g., different rates on uplink and downlink).

During the
              standardization process, a few problems have emerged:
The difficulty of
              estimating by reliable simulations the low bit (and frame) error rates
              (BER,
FER) - matching the required QoS with a realistic model of the multipath
              fading channel;
The "error floor" phenomenon showed by turbo codes, which
              might prevent from reaching
BER below 10'6.
The goals of this project consist
              of:
Proposing and investigating a simple, yet realistic and flexible, channel
              model on which all
system simulation will be conducted; Verifying
              experimentally he propagation model using an anechoic chamber recently
              installed at UIC and comparing the channel model with others already in use;
              and Setting up a virtual test bed based on very fast multiprocessor digital
              signal processor (DSP) boards, which will simulate the overall system with the
              goals of testing with fast simulation several code alternatives to achieve very
              low BER (10-8) and FER (< 1%).	

The realistic channel model will be derived
              by extending the previous propagation prediction
model that uses ray-tracing
              methods to a realistic environment in order to extract information on
both
              fading and time-delay for each component of the multipath. This information
              will be used to
compute the parameters for identifying the channel. A related
              activity will be the experimental f
verification of the propagation model
              using the UIC anechoic chamber.
***		

