Title       : Experimental Studies of Intrinsic Nanoscale Localization for Low Lying
               Excitations in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  2001    
File        : a9979483

Award Number: 9979483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Sievers sievers@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9979483
Sievers

A recent advance of the theory of nonlinear excitations in
              discrete lattices was the discovery that some localized vibrations in perfectly
              periodic lattices can be stabilized in bulk crystals, at their surfaces or at
              their edges by lattice discreteness.  Because these excitations display
              nanoscale dimensions and are predicted to move through the lattice their
              experimental generation and observation is of paramount interest.  To this end
              the proposed  experimental study of nonlinear spin lattice systems has definite
              advantages because the dissipation of spin waves in magnetic materials is weak
              compared to that of lattice vibrations in crystals. Consequently, large
              amplitude excitations are more readily obtainable and one objective of this
              project is to examine experimentally the physical properties of such localized
              excitations in antiferromagnets.  In addition to generation and detection it is
              also important to explore the propagation and transport properties of intrinsic
              localized modes.  Depending on the successes found for magnetic excitations,
              experimental studies of intrinsic localization associated with macroscopic and
              quantum systems will also be explored.  The general feature that such
              localization in periodic lattices depends only on nonlinearity plus
              discreteness ensures that graduate and undergraduate students working in this
              area will have training in nonlinear dynamics spanning a variety of length
              scales, ranging from the nano- to the macroscopic one.
%%%
This experimental
              program is directed at probing the underlying simplicity of the dynamics of
              nonlinear periodic physical systems, which range from studies of large
              amplitude excitations in atomic lattices to those in micro electrical
              mechanical arrays.  Graduate and undergraduate students working in this new
              research area will have training in condensed matter nonlinear dynamics
              involving all the technologically important length scales.
***

