Title       : Entry Point!: Discovering and Developing Talent Among Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9979220

Award Number: 9979220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia W. Stern vstern@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The AAAS Project on Science, Technology and Disability proposes to initiate
              within the National Science Foundation (NSF) its highly successful project,
              ENTRY POINT!  ENTRY POINT! is a national effort to discover and develop talent
              among students with disabilities and place them in paid summer internships. 
              The program seeks out students majoring in biology, chemistry, computer
              science, science education, mathematics, all fields of engineering, and
              engineering technology.  The long-term goal of the project is to increase the
              diversity of the Nation's science and engineering work force.
     AAAS will
              provide orientation activities and materials for the interns to assist them in
              quickly learning about NSF needs and operations.  These will include
              orientation packets for student interns before they begin their summer
              internships.  Information on disability accommodations will also be provided to
              managers and co-workers.  Site visits will be made to each intern during the
              summer, and follow-up interviews will be conducted in the fall.
     AAAS has
              extensive experience in identifying students with disabilities at postsecondary
              institutions across the country facilitating a broad and deep recruitment
              effort for identifying highly qualified undergraduate and graduate students
              with disabilities pursuing science and engineering disciplines.  AAAS will
              screen the students as candidates for paid 10-week summer internships.  NSF
              will provide interns with meaningful job assignments, building their skills and
              complementing their academic studies, and assign mentors to the students.  The
              project will provide stipends, worksite accommodations as needed, and limited
              travel funds to those who relocate.
     Prior to, during, and after the
              summer internships, AAAS will maintain regular contact with the students,
              advising them on academic and employment issues, and connecting them with users
              and developers of assistive technology.

