Title       : HBCU: UVI Science and Mathematics--Research Throughout the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a9979896

Award Number: 9979896
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3531168            (Estimated)
Investigator: LaVerne Ragster lragste@uvi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Orville Kean  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of The Virgin Islands
	      2 John Brewer's Bay
	      Charlotte Amalie, VI  00802    340/693-1202

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Univ. of Virgin Islands

The Division of Science and Mathematics at the
              University of the Virgin Islands seeks to become a center for excellence for
              the preparation of minority scientists, mathematicians and engineers.
              Cornerstones for achieving this goal are already in place: a dedicated science
              and mathematics faculty with a successful record of mentoring undergraduate
              students in SMET fields; a large pool of motivated minority students with
              outstanding potential; and the commitment of the University's administration to
              substantial revitalization of the science and mathematics programs.

Through
              the NSF HBCU Undergraduate Program, UVI will:
1. increase the number of
              under-represented minority students majoring in SMET disciplines through early
              intervention in junior high and high schools. Students will get excited about
              science and mathematics through explorations which will encourage conjecture
              and proof.
2. support faculty research, which will in turn support research
              with undergraduate students. The research infrastructure will be supported,
              while introducing world-class research opportunities to the UVI students and
              faculty.
3. introduce all science and mathematics students to the rewards of
              research through an innovative research-infused curriculum;
4. provide an
              avenue for students to participate in additional research through summer
              programs and scholarships during the year which require involvement in a
              research project;
5. offer Virgin Islanders an affordable means of acquiring a
              degree in engineering while creating ties with Columbia University and
              Washington University in St. Louis.
6. provide support for successful entry
              into SMET graduate programs through a strong
undergraduate curriculum and
              adequate GRE preparation.

The above multi-pronged approach to the solution
              is indicative of the problems that we face in the US Virgin Islands. The
              University, in its role as the only provider of higher education in the VI,
              must provide leadership in these areas.

Successful completion of the planned
              activities will yield an increase in the number and quality of students that
              attend and successfully enter and complete graduate programs in science,
              mathematics, engineering and technology fields. The curriculum, the atmosphere,
              and the increased mentoring and guidance will increase opportunities for
              students in science and mathematics to pursue graduate study.

UVI Division
              of Science and mathematics will be a model for successful science and
              mathematics programs. This proposal has the support of all members of the
              division and the administration. The division is committed to being at the
              forefront of pedagogical issues in science and mathematics and will make
              research the unifying theme throughout the curriculum.

