Title       : From Medium Access to Physical Layer: An Integrated DSP Framework for Wireless
               Packet Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9979295

Award Number: 9979295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176347             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaos D. Sidiropoulos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              First and second generation wireless networks have had a remarkable success in
              providing voice services with global coverage. Building on this success, third
              and fourth generation networks are envisioned with more emphasis on flexible
              data rather than voice services. Such an infrastructure will enable the
              implementation of advanced and diverse wireless services which are perhaps not
              yet imagined. One of the thorniest technical challenges in implementing high
              speed wireless data networks is that of multiplexing variable-bit-rate data
              users over the wireless channel. Classical solutions like TDMA, FDMA, or even
              CDMA are not appropriate, since they adhere to a connection-oriented, rather
              than packet-based, connectionless philosophy. Random access techniques on the
              other side offer the required flexibility, but suffer from severe
              throughput/delay penalties under heavy traffic. In order to handle the
              anticipated diverse traffic mix, novel Medium Access (MAC) schemes have to be
              developed. As the NSF 99-68 initiative underlines, there is growing consensus
              that such novel solutions require breaking away from the traditional layered
              approach to network design, moving towards integrated design across multiple
              layers.

The goal of this research is an integrated approach to wireless
              packet network design that cuts across the medium access and physical layers.
              Starting from a recently introduced MAC protocol (termed NDMA for Network
              Diversity Multiple Access) which utilizes MAC-level network resources to create
              a synergy between the physical and MAC layers, the investigators study joint
              collision resolution, blind beamforming, and power control in packet radio
              networks, with the goal of demonstrating substantial throughput-delay
              performance gains over traditional layered designs. This research involves
              advanced signal processing, factor analysis, optimization, and queueing tools.
              Aimed at developing the NDMA concept into a complete state-of-art physical and
              data link layer solution, the following specific issues are under
              investigation: 

(i)NDMA performance analysis for realistic SNR, and system
              design for frequency selective channels; 
(ii)development of blind and
              semi-blind NDMA collision resolution methods and associated performance
              analysis; and 
(iii)system integration issues: joint blind beamforming,
              collision resolution, power control, and ARQ design in packet radio networks.
              

The project also includes an integrated educational component promoting
              graduate and undergraduate research in wireless communications and networking.
