Title       : Wireless Technology: Issues on QoS Stability, Sensitivity, Flow and Congestion
               Control in Wireless Broadband Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9979469

Award Number: 9979469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208627             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin W. Tsai wtsai@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1596,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There has been a lot of research work on Wireless ATM in the past 5 years; most
              of the research works are geared towards mobility and connection management. 
              The former is concerned with location and handoff management while the latter
              is concerned with signaling for call setup and teardown.  What are remaining
              are still some very open issues that demand answers.  In supporting QoS in
              Wireless ATM, the variation of QoS availability over space and time is
              different from one wireless cell to another.  Mobile calls that are established
              at call setup may no longer be able to maintain their QoS demands if the mobile
              host migrates from cell to cell, unless pre-allocation of network resources are
              made in advance (however, this is very inefficient).  The trend so far has been
              towards an adaptive end-to-end Mobile QoS framework for Wireless ATM networks. 
              Although this proposal addresses mobile QoS for Wireless ATM, it is not another
              duplication of existing efforts.  Instead, the researchers are investigating
              this area of work from another dimension - applying the know-how of control and
              network theory and protocols.  It shall address challenging research issues at
              the network and transport layers and hence this proposal demands vertically
              integrated research.

Most end-to-end QoS adaptation framework attempts to
              ensure the QoS (normally the bandwidth and delay requirements) over both wired
              and wireless links are consistent after a handoff.  However, such handoffs can
              occur on the two remote ends of the mobile-to-mobile connection.  If the
              adaptation protocols are not well designed, the WATM can experience instability
              problems.  The fact that a mobile host or the network triggers an adaptation is
              a sign of pro-active reaction.  This is called sensitivity.  A highly sensitive
              system can also cause substantial signaling overhead and result in network
              congestion and instability.  The instability refers to a regenerative
              phenomenon where another adaptation process is triggered even before the
              current one is completed.  The innovative approach is to apply control theory
              and to derive new network algorithms.   The researchers plan to introduce a set
              of damping procedures to control sensitivity and instability associated with
              continuous and transient oscillation in QoS adaptation.  Their plan is to
              derive these adaptation damping procedures and to implement them on a WATM
              simulator/testbed to evaluate the feasibility of the approach and the resultant
              stability and sensitivity of the system under different traffic loads, degree
              of mobility and number of users.  This area of this research proposal,
              therefore, enhances QoS support and more importantly, the  reliability,
              availability and performance of future broadband wireless network systems.  It
              views the understanding of underlying dynamics associated with QoS adaptation
              paramount to building high performance and reliable wireless broadband
              systems.

The second part of the research concerns with ABR and VBR flow
              control in WATM networks.  While there has been much on-going research
              associated with ATM flow and congestion control, little is devoted to wireless
              flow and congestion control in WATM networks.  This proposal reveals the impact
              of the dynamics associated with SS (Stability and Sensitivity) in QoS
              adaptation on ABR/VBR flow control.  This is a very genuine problem since
              current rate-based flow control relies on the use of feedback cells and these
              cells can be lost as a result of host mobility.  The innovative approach has
              two components:  (a) the separation of rate allocation and signaling in a
              vertically integrated design, (b) the optimization of flow control functions in
              both space and time.  It intends to develop and validate a theory of protocols
              that enables max-min optimization, enhancing stability and minimizing
              sensitivity to an appropriate level.  Protocols designed based on this theory
              will be amenable to rigorous analysis and proofs of behavior.

