Title       : PGE/SEP: Partners in Engineering: A Problem-Based Learning Approach for
               Encouraging Women and Girls in SMET
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a9979279

Award Number: 9979279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92899              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Powers sep@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy K. Zander  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jan E. DeWaters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Partners in Engineering Program brings together adolescent girls from the
              University's rural region and a team of women engineering students from
              Clarkson University.  Students will meet after school on a weekly basis for
              mentoring, leadership, and multidisciplinary problem solving activities,
              interspersed with field trips and visiting speakers.  The program will increase
              students' participation, awareness, and interest in science and engineering,
              and will increase their capabilities and confidence in their critical thinking
              skills.  Fifty to fifty five students will be directly impacted by the project.
               The project includes thorough assessment and dissemination activities.

A
              holistic, problem-based learning approach will be employed as a vehicle to
              teach math, engineering, computing and science concepts.  This approach not
              only improves students' critical thinking and problem-solving skills, but also
              foster an understanding of the relevance and usefulness of engineering within a
              larger social, political, and economic context, which tends to make these
              subjects more "female friendly."  Throughout the course of each of two school
              years, college student mentors will lead middle school participants through the
              solution of a "real-world" problem of relevance to their school community. 
              They will be challenged to understand critical issues associated with the
              problem and then find and implement an acceptable solution.

