Title       : Peer Effects in a Randomized Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a9979260

Award Number: 9979260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23726              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce I. Sacerdote Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9979260
Sacerdote

We all rely heavily on our peers and colleagues in every
              aspect of our economic life. We use our peers to gather information, make labor
              market decisions, investment decisions, locational choices, and perhaps even to
              help determine our underlying preferences. But how can one begin to isolate and
              measure these peer effects? After all, along with making all of our basic
              economic choices, we also choose our friends. How can one separate out the
              effect of our peers on a given labor market choice from those aspects of our
              underlying preference function that made us choose the peers?  This project
              takes a novel approach to this problem. Freshmen entering Dartmouth are
              assigned a dorm and 1-2 roommates using a random process. The random assignment
              effectively removes the selection problem which normally prevents researchers
              from separating out the actual treatment effect of the peer group from
              selection into that peer group. By construction, there is no correlation
              between students' pre-treatment characteristics and their roommates'
              characteristics.
The hypothesis of the research is that in spite of this
              random assignment, a student's roommates and other dorm peers are an important
              influence on the student's behavior. The research focuses on peer effects on
              outcomes such as Freshman year GPA, future housing choices, membership in a
              fraternity, choices in foreign study programs, and athletic participation. 
              

Dartmouth College has agreed to provide access to its extensive database on
              its students.  Dartmouth has a myriad of data on every student ranging from
              admissions data, to academic performance, to post-graduation and career
              choices. This will enable the project to match students together with their
              freshman year (randomly assigned) roommates and determine the correlation
              between students and their roommates. For example, if X is assigned a roommate
              with an unusually high SAT scores and high school GPA, is X more likely to have
              a high freshman year GPA ?  Student confidentiality will be protected by
              stripping identifiers such as names, college IDs, and home addresses. Instead
              of student names and dorm names, codes will be substituted which will allow the
              PI to match roommates and dorm mates.


