Title       : University of Illinois at Chicago Graduate Fellows in K-12 Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9979537

Award Number: 9979537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Ortega                            
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1317220            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Wink dwink@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Moher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wade A. Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Varelas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip D. Wagreich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) Graduate Fellows in K-12 Education
              program encompasses four different components built on existing innovative
              science and math instruction and teacher development programs at UIC. Thus, the
              program features the addition of Fellows to existing or emerging teacher
              development initiatives. Each cohort of Fellows is trained as they, K-12
              teachers, and University faculty work together during summer workshops and
              academic year seminars and meetings. In the classroom, UIC GK-12 Fellows
              support teachers by a process of (a) documenting an understanding of the
              schools, classrooms, students, and teachers, (b) assisting teachers in
              developing and implementing activities in classrooms, and (c) assessing their
              impact. The four components are a high school Chemistry Van project that
              currently offers equipment but little teacher support beyond of a summer
              in-service program; a K-8 mathematics curriculum with laboratory options that
              can be further developed to utilize computer analysis of data; state-of-the-art
              virtual reality platforms in support of conceptual learning in elementary
              science; and a whole school development project built on a partnership between
              UIC and an urban high school. Themes of learning processes, materials
              development, and technology are all present. Program benefits include increased
              student conceptual learning, enhanced curricula for classroom use, and
              increased ability for teachers to teach science and mathematics using a broad
              base of activities. Evaluation focuses on portfolio development by each Fellow
              and a separate evaluator of the teacher-Fellow, student-Fellow interactions
              during the interventions and then the resulting changes in teacher-student
              interactions. 
