Title       : CONFERENCE: Travel Support for 5th International Congress of Comparative
               Physiology and Biochemistry to be held in Calgary, Alberta, Canada from August
               23-28, 1999.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9979751

Award Number: 9979751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51544              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren W. Burggren burggren@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The International Congress for Comparative Physiology and Bichemistry is held
              every 4 years to facilitate the meeting of comparative phsiologists and
              biochemists world wide to report and discuss current trends resutlts and issues
              in these comparative disciplines.  This grant provides support for the 1999
              International Congress for Comparative Physiology and Biochemistry to be held
              in Calgary, Alberta, Canada from August 23-28, 1999.  Due to the global nature
              of the participating societies of the Comparative Physiology and Biochemistry 
              Division  of IUBS, worldwide representation is assured, as is major
              participation from expected from the US and Canada.  High registration is also
              expected from Japan and Europe since the Japanese and European societies have
              decided to locate their annual meetings at the 1999 Calgary Congress.  Because
              this Congress will be an international showcase, a major objective of this
              particular congress will be to highlight and illustrate work of North-American
              comparative physiologists and biochemists.  These disciplines have long been
              specialities in North America, and the PIs have tremendous expertise to offer
              to scientists from other countries especially those from the PIs newly
              incorporated societies from Australaisa, South America and Eastern Europe.     
                     Because of the wide applicability of biochemical and physiological
              processes, the ground covered in the Congress is very broad - including topics
              such as the control of responses to environment disturbance, the control of
              vision, neuroscience, the physiology of animals in aquaculture and even
              dinosaur phsiology!  A total of 46 symposia, 6 plenary lectures and several
              satelite meetings are programmed.  Thus the Congress should also attract many
              researchers from other disciplines.   A final major objective of this congress
              is to expose graduate students and post-doctoral fellows to the best
              researchers in their area from all over the world.  Having these experts
              comment on their research is a major motivator for these students and one which
              they will treasure.  These experts are not restricted to the fields of
              comparative physiology and biochemistry.  Among the invited speakers are many
              experts in other fields who would not normally attend these meetings and to
              whom graduate students, PDFs and younger faculty would not normally be exposed.
               The awarding of NSF funding is particularly important for these participants.
              The PIs  final objective is to make this meeting, probably the last at a North
              American venue for many years, a major sucess.
