Title       : An Undergraduate Astronomical Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9351745

Award Number: 9351745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14523              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore B. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlton P. Pryor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Merritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Molnar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9351745  Williams  An undergraduate astronomical observatory is the focus of an 
              upper division laboratory course that will accompany an intro-  ductory
              astronomy lecture course for science and engineering  majors. The observatory
              will also be used for undergraduate  honors research projects and finally will
              provide the students  in the liberal arts astronomy course firsthand experience
              of  the phenomena, tools, and methods of modern astronomy. The  observatory
              will be centered around a 20-inch telescope,  equipped with a CCD solid-state
              imaging camera and a grating  spectrograph. Computerized image display and
              processing  facilities will be used to examine and analyze the data  acquired
              at the telescope. the equipment and techniques of  modern research astronomy
              will be  emphasized in order to give  the students an appreciation of the way
              observations are really  performed. The larger goal of the laboratory course,
              beyond  improving the understanding of the material covered in the  lecture
              course, is to introduce students to both the power and  the pitfalls of using
              modern instrumentation and computers to  collect, manipulate, and understand
              information. Projects will  include measuring the masses of planets in our
              solar system,  determining the physical properties of stars and nebulae, 
              measuring the ages and distances of star clusters in our  galaxy, and
              determining the redshifts of distant galaxies,  among other topics. The project
              aims to use the appeal of the  astronomical observatory to reach out to a
              diverse group of  students and to thus introduce them to the methods, power,
              and  limitations of modern science.  ***
