Title       : Enhancing Video Laboratories with Computer Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1995   
File        : a9351597

Award Number: 9351597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18196              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Lemley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Heidelberg College
	      310 E Market Street
	      Tiffin, OH  448832434    419/448-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              Heidelberg College Physics Department has used the camcorder                   
              and VCR to conduct introductory physics laboratories during the                
              past 2 years.  The advantage of video in the physics lab is                    
              that it has enabled students to study "real world" events.                     
              Overall the use of video has been excellent; however, the                      
              process of collecting and analyzing data using a VCR and                       
              monitor requires an exorbitant amount of time.  In order to                    
              make the video system more effective at helping students learn                 
              physics, Heidelberg College requested funding for 6 computer                   
              workstations (MacintoshTM computer, laboratory probe interface,                
              software, and a video-digitizing board).The computer                           
              workstations, combined with already existing video equipment,                  
              are being used to conduct experiments in the areas of                          
              kinematics, dynamics, momentum, angular motion, and energy.                    
              The video-taped motion can be shown on the computer's monitor                  
              when played through a video-digitizing board.  The video can be                
              converted into a digitized movie or played "live."  The                        
              playback speed of the images can be controlled, thereby                        
              allowing the student, with the appropriate software, to carry                  
              out measurements using a "mouse."  The collected data can be                   
              linked to a graphing or spreadsheet program for the student to                 
              carry out further analysis.The power of the video/computer                     
              workstation is that it allows the student to quickly and                       
              efficiently observe and quantify events that cannot be done at                 
              the laboratory bench. The workstations allow the students to                   
              fully utilize the advantages of the video system by eliminating                
              the drudgery of collecting data from a video tape.  This                       
              enables the students to spend more time learning the physics.
