Title       : Integration of Advanced Analytical Applications into the Geological Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9351058

Award Number: 9351058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75835              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Wendlandt rwendlan@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy J. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              This project integrates advanced analytical techniques into an                 
              undergraduate geological engineering curriculum.  An x-ray                     
              diffraction system (XRD) will be used in conjunction with an                   
              existing scanning electron microscope (SEM) to develop an                      
              accelerated educational program.  Geological engineers                         
              typically enter the workplace with only a B.S. degree and,                     
              thus, they are not trained in analytical methodologies normally                
              taught in graduate-level courses. We propose to remediate this                 
              educational deficiency through a coordinated, multi-year                       
              program involving 9 courses and 11 faculty. XRD and SEM                        
              techniques and applications will be introduced into the                        
              undergraduate curriculum using an applied, hands-on approach.                  
              A survey of 13 other geological engineering programs in the                    
              United States indicates that (a) our proposed project is                       
              innovative and unique; (b) there is a great need for this type                 
              of training; and (c) at least 11 schools would seriously                       
              consider implementing curricular changes modeled on ours.                      
              The program will begin in the first semester of the sophomore                  
              year by introducing XRD/SEM theory, operation, and basic skills                
              into Mineralogy and Materials of the Earth courses. In                         
              subsequent Petrology, Structural Geology, and Geomorphology                    
              courses, skills introduced in the sophomore year will be                       
              maintained and further developed allowing students to solidify                 
              their understanding of basic principles and advance to more                    
              complex, process-related applications. At the senior level, new                
              laboratory exercises in capstone courses, Petroleum Geology,                   
              Mineral Exploration, Hydrogeology, and Engineering Geology                     
              Project Design, will expose students to advanced XRD/SEM                       
              techniques for solving a wide range of real-life geological                    
              engineering problems. The feasibility of our approach was                      
              assessed during a 2-year trial period involving sophomore                      
              Mineralogy and junior Petrology students in which we found the                 
              students to be enthusiastic about the applied, hands-on nature                 
              of the program. When the project is fully implemented, annual                  
              participation will be approximately 125 undergraduate                          
              engineers.
