Title       : Undergraduate Semiconductor Characterization Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1995 
File        : a9351604

Award Number: 9351604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark G. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The faculty of the Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, in            
              conjunction with the physics faculty in the Science & Mathematics              
              Department, at GMI Engineering & Management Institute (GMI-EMI)                
              have recognized the need for upgrading the electronics curriculum              
              to include more comprehensive coverage of solid state materials and            
              devices. To this end, a course Solid State Devices, was added to               
              the curriculum to provide undergraduates with a workable                       
              theoretical background in the field. Through this project, GMI-EMI             
              adds a laboratory component to the course. Such a supplement                   
              enhances understanding by providing a hands-on !earning environment            
              where students can practice the science of solid state device                  
              characterization and correlate their observations with well                    
              established theories.                                                          
              Specifically, the solid state materials and device curriculum                  
              component at GMI-EMI is enhanced by adding experimental                        
              investigations in the areas of: 1. Fundamental semiconductor                   
              transport parameters; 2. Deep energy impurity levels; 3.P-N                    
              junction device characterization; and 4. MOS device                            
              characterization. The proposed experiments are intended to foster              
              a depth of understanding, an appreciation for theoretical models,              
              a sense of practicality, and an element of interest, excitement and            
              enthusiasm among students.                                                     
              The major equipment purchased includes current sources,                        
              electrometers, capacitance meter, monochromator, cryostats, and                
              microcomputer hardware/software for instrument control and data                
              acquisition. This equipment facilitates dynamic laboratory                     
              investigations and promotes clear conceptual understanding for the             
              students.
