Title       : Computational Chemistry And Visualization Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9351671

Award Number: 9351671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. DuBois   (Principal Investigator current)
              Banita W. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart F. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Paul Rillema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernadette T. Donovan-Merkert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9351671  DuBois  We are establishing a new course in computational chemistry and
               visualization applications and a Computational Chemistry and  Visualization
              Laboratory.  This laboratory facility is enabling  us to teach computational
              chemistry and visualization  applications to students in a laboratory
              environment as well as  providing lecture demonstration capabilities through
              our video  classroom facilities.  This integrated use of molecular  modeling
              and visualization tools is being implemented  throughout our curriculum (and
              especially in the junior and  senior years) and is enabling our students to
              visualize a  number of fundamental molecular properties which are important  in
              relating microscopic concepts to the macroscopic properties  of materials. 
              Recent advances in computational chemistry  programs, 3D visualization
              software, workstation power and  computer networking have combined to allow
              this exciting  opportunity to make fundamental pedagogical changes in the 
              undergraduate curriculum.  These changes are enabling students  to better
              understand and comprehend the critical, basic  concepts of molecular bonding,
              intramolecular and  intermolecular interactions, and molecular interactions
              with  electromagnetic radiation.  Perhaps most importantly, the  students are
              gaining that understanding much earlier in their  chemical education which, in
              turn, is permitting them to  advance to much higher levels of chemical
              understanding during  their undergraduate education.  ***
