Title       : A Senior Design Project Laboratory: Experiments in Parallel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9351001

Award Number: 9351001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Behrooz A. Shirazi shirazi@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bill D. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Banios  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              Parallel processing as a subject has already been introduced in                
              the CSE curriculum by an Honors program in Parallel Processing.                
              Through this ILI program, we introduce an instructional plan to                
              make the subject available to all CSE majors in order to                       
              prepare them for large-scale, meaningful parallel processing                   
              projects in the Senior Design Project courses. This plan                       
              includes: introducing an applied parallel processing topics                    
              course, covering parallel processing as a subject in the Senior                
              Design Project courses, and making the proposed equipment                      
              available to undergraduate courses for programming exercises.                  
              In addition, several new industry-sponsored, parallel                          
              processing student projects will be introduced in the Senior                   
              Design Project course sequence.One of the goals of the Senior                  
              Design Project course sequence is to provide real-life                         
              industry-like experiences for our undergraduate students                       
              through industry-sponsored projects. Because of the interest of                
              local industries in the proposed ILI program, a major portion                  
              of the institutional matching funds has been provided by                       
              contributions (contingent on this NSF grant) from E-Systems and                
              Mercury Computer Systems. Thus, this project will provide a                    
              unique opportunity for us to achieve our goals through the                     
              cooperation and contributions of the NSF, UTA, and industry.
