Title       : Undergraduate Optics In Electrical Engineering Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9351968

Award Number: 9351968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42566              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty L. Anderson anderson@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Ringel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley D. Clymer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jimmie L. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              Optoelectronics and optics are becoming an integral part of                    
              current electrical engineering, as optical solutions are being                 
              used for everything from compact disc players and laser                        
              printers to neural networks, satellite communications, and                     
              machining. On the whole, however, undergraduates in electrical                 
              engineering receive little exposure to principles and practical                
              applications of optical devices and systems.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project involves an undergraduate optics laboratory in                    
              which students can learn about a variety of subjects pertinent                 
              to contemporary optical engineering within electrical                          
              engineering. Eight individual laboratory projects covering a                   
              broad spectrum of key topics, including fiber optics,                          
              semiconductor optoelectronic devices, electro-optic and                        
              acousto-optic modulation, lasers, liquid crystals, and                         
              detection are planned. Students will become proficient in the                  
              use and application of such important optical devices and                      
              instruments as lasers, optical fibers, monochromators,                         
              detection systems, state-of-the-art modulators and                             
              photodetectors. An important feature of the laboratory course                  
              is the inclusion of a strong design element. It should also be                 
              noted that significant emphasis is placed on laboratory safety                 
              procedures. A laboratory manual will be published and serve as                 
              a prototype for similar educational laboratories at other                      
              universities.
