Title       : Photonics And Sensors Laboratory For Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9351785

Award Number: 9351785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43383              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teodoro C. Robles robles@kirk.msoe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Bray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee School of Eng
	      1025 N. Broadway
	      Milwaukee, WI  532023109    414/277-7300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              The Milwaukee School of Engineering is in the process of                       
              curricular revisions and developments that will place a major                  
              new emphasis on photonics and sensors in engineering and                       
              physics. An important part of this program is the development                  
              of a Photonics and Sensors Laboratory in the Electrical                        
              Engineering Department. A new laboratory sequence for Optical                  
              Electronics and revisions of Sensors and Fiber Optic Technology                
              are planned. The Senior Design Project sequence will now                       
              encourage more projects in sensors and photonics. This project                 
              will provide significant improvements in the education of our                  
              upper division students in Electrical Engineering, Electrical                  
              Engineering Technology, and Manufacturing Engineering                          
              Technology. To a lesser extent this laboratory will also                       
              support the Mechanical Engineering (and Technology) curricula.                 
              The major equipment requested includes fiber optic apparatus to                
              demonstrate a broad variety of optical and communication                       
              principles. The optical time domain reflectometer and optical                  
              power meters will support both photonic and sensor                             
              experimentation. Vibrating and optical angular rate sensors and                
              piezo-film kits will provide the basis for studying motion-                    
              sensing systems and phenomena. The sequence and content of the                 
              experiments, as well as the instrumentation, were selected to                  
              optimize the student's advancement, building upon their prior                  
              applied optics foundation.This laboratory's impact is expected                 
              to result in undergraduates who are literate in the areas of                   
              photonics and sensors, and should serve as excellent                           
              preparation for graduate work. During off-hours, we expect to                  
              use the laboratory to teach and demonstrate photonics and                      
              sensors to middle and high school science teachers, and also                   
              during Open Houses to help attract students into science and                   
              engineering.
