Title       : Mathematics Archive: Internet Archives for the Mathematical Software Suitable
               for Mathematics Education at the CommunityCollege, College, and University
               Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1993       
File        : a9351398

Award Number: 9351398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97563              (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl D. Fife fife@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
                              The mathematics department of Calvin College in                
              conjunction with the mathematics department of the University                  
              of Tennessee, Knoxville, under the ILI-LDD program is                          
              developing and maintaining a readily accessible depository for                 
              mathematical software and related materials used in education                  
              at the two- and four-year college and university                               
              levels.Computer programs serve several important roles in                      
              education. They make possible visualization of mathematical                    
              objects in a way inconceivable 30 years ago. They allow                        
              instructor and student to generate examples quickly. They often                
              serve as model exercises for students to program, testing their                
              knowledge of newly learned concepts. Many instructors have                     
              taken advantage of this and have written software specifically                 
              to illustrate or explore a mathematical concept. Several years                 
              ago, much of this software was distributed through software                    
              exchanges, such as Kinko's, and the user paid a modest fee.                    
              Internet has made distribution of software faster, easier, and                 
              available world-wide.The Mathematics Archives, started by                      
              volunteer efforts, are the only archives in the world totally                  
              dedicated to posting, reviewing, and supporting software                       
              suitable for mathematics education at the college and                          
              university level in a form that allows for downloading by                      
              anonymous ftp.  This project is expanding the services of the                  
              Archives to facilitate locating and downloading software,                      
              reviews, Mathematica notebooks, and other documents in                         
              electronic form. In addition, the Archive is being moved to a                  
              dedicated site which will allow for quick expansion and                        
              maintenance of the Archives.
