Title       : Introduction Of High Performance Computing Across the Science and Mathematics
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9351140

Award Number: 9351140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olaf A. Runquist orunquis@piper.hamline  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. Kaske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Smaby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur Guetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wojciech Komornicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamline University
	      Snelling & Hewitt Avenues
	      Saint Paul, MN  55104    612/641-2800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9351140  Runquist                                                           To
              improve laboratory instruction in the sciences (Biology,  Chemistry,
              Mathematics, and Physics), Hamline University will add  high-end workstations
              with capacity for graphics to support on-  going curriculum reform across the
              sciences. These systems will be  introduced into both introductory and advanced
              laboratory courses  and undergraduate research programs of all four science 
              departments.  Hamline University has initiated a three-stage plan  for
              introducing high performance computing (HPC) into the  undergraduate science
              curriculum. During Stage 1, which is underway  and financed entirely by Hamline
              University, eight Sun workstations  and one server were purchased and connected
              to Internet, a science  faculty training program was initiated, and HPC
              teaching modules  are being developed. During Stage 2, hardware and software
              holdings  will be expanded, teaching modules will be introduced, tested, 
              refined and expanded, cooperative faculty and student HPC-supported  research
              programs with remote institutions will be developed, an  HPC-focused science
              curriculum will be designed, and course content  and teaching methodologies
              will be further modified to incorporate  HPC. This proposal requests funds to
              support Stage 2. During Stage  3, a new science building with an HPC-focused
              curriculum as its  architectural theme will be designed and constructed, and
              HPC use  will be expanded into social science fields. Experiences gained  from
              this program will enable Hamline to serve as a regional  HPC/science curriculum
              resource center.
