Title       : EOS - An Operating Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9351916

Award Number: 9351916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Erickson erickson@stream.csis.gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The study of operating systems requires an understanding of                    
              some of the fundamental concepts in computer science:                          
              concurrency, synchronization, deadlock, communication, and                     
              efficiency. The traditional method of lecture and reading does                 
              a disservice to students who are being exposed to these                        
              difficult concepts for the first time. Undergraduate computer                  
              science students need creative, innovative ways of learning                    
              these concepts in the context of the operating systems course.                 
              The future of computing is in distributed and parallel                         
              processing. The operating systems course is the best place to                  
              assure every computer science student receives a solid                         
              foundation in these fundamental concepts.The EOS operating                     
              system lab is designed to increase the number of ways a student                
              has to learn major operating systems principles. Computer                      
              laboratory exercises actively involve students with concept-                   
              relevant programming and graphical simulations. The ease-of-use                
              and graphical output of the lab applications encourage                         
              exploration of operating system subject matter and allow for a                 
              more effective teaching mode; that of directed discovery                       
              learning. The exercises developed for the EOS lab provide a                    
              high learning to coding ratio for programming assignments, and                 
              elucidate fundamental computer science concepts in an exciting,                
              interactive manner through simulation. Assignments associated                  
              with the subject content of each lab are performed on the                      
              workstation and are submitted and graded through electronic                    
              mail.
