Title       : Active Learning: Group Design Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9351807

Award Number: 9351807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48426              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. McDonald dmcdonald@gw.lssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. Niemi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Superior State Univ
	      
	      Sault Ste. Marie, MI  49783    906/632-6841

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The project goal is to develop students' life-long team problem                
              solving and communication skills through active learning                       
              experiences that simulate industrial situations. These                         
              experiences create team design activities that integrate                       
              problem solving, project planning, and oral and written                        
              communications.The project objectives require curriculum reform                
              that revises two upper level courses and creates a new senior                  
              project design course. Both the instructional technique and the                
              content of the two upper level courses  change to prepare the                  
              student for the new senior project design experience.The                       
              instructional method focuses on supplementing traditional                      
              lectures with instructor-guided collaborative learning using                   
              computer control technology. Course content in a revised                       
              microcontroller course introduces modern technology such as C                  
              programming, logic analyzer use, and embedded design. An                       
              industrial electronics course now covers programmable logic                    
              controllers, data acquisition, and test instrument interfacing.                
              These changes in course content require the purchase of control                
              computers, data acquisition and logic analyzer boards, test                    
              instruments, and software.The senior capstone design course                    
              reinforces the skills that are developed in the team approaches                
              in the two revised courses. Senior students will use the new                   
              equipment in team design projects that simulate graduates first                
              assignments in industry.Throughout the three courses students                  
              use computer related projects as a vehicle to learn team                       
              communication and problem solving techniques. Group                            
              communications skills include written and oral exams,                          
              communication of team findings, generation of student                          
              portfolios, and final presentations.
