Title       : Laser-Based Experiments For An Improved Upper-Division Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9351838

Award Number: 9351838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Spiegel dspiegel@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is upgrading an existing one-semester Modern                      
              Physics Laboratory into a two-semester Junior Physics                          
              Laboratory through the development of new experiments in laser                 
              spectroscopy and modern optics.Physics majors at Trinity                       
              receive an excellent introduction to experimental physics.  We                 
              have established a first-rate lower-division laboratory                        
              sequence, including an exceptional program on the use of                       
              computers in physics.  However, we are convinced that students                 
              at Trinity and many of its peer institutions do not obtain                     
              sufficient experience with the advanced experimental techniques                
              employed in today's research laboratories.  We are therefore                   
              introducing revisions in our curriculum, including a required                  
              Senior Thesis research project, to bring students much closer                  
              to the research capabilities of contemporary physics.  By                      
              placing a very high priority on modern experimental techniques,                
              we intend to attract a much larger number of talented majors                   
              interested in careers in advanced physics research, and to                     
              prepare these majors for study in highly competitive graduate                  
              programs.The laboratory improvements defined in this proposal                  
              is providing the capstone of our new emphasis on contemporary                  
              experimental methods.  We are taking advantage of the wide                     
              range of advanced experimental topics that can be investigated                 
              using moderate-cost lasers, and the high level of student                      
              interest in laser-based experiments.  A nitrogen-pumped dye-                   
              laser system, a Fabry-Perot spectrometer, and Macintosh                        
              computer systems are the major apparatus that have been                        
              purchased for the experiments. These equipment items are quite                 
              versatile; most are being used in more than one investigation.                 
              The laser-based experiments proposed here can thus serve as                    
              models for the next generation of upper-division physics                       
              laboratories.
