Title       : Undergraduate Laboratory In Polymer Science And Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9351972

Award Number: 9351972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67460              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen I. Winey winey@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Composto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
                  We aim to establish an Undergraduate Laboratory in Polymer                 
              Science and Engineering to update the undergraduate engineering                
              program at the University of Pennsylvania. The proposed                        
              laboratory will benefit undergraduate students by teaching                     
              important principles in polymer science and by introducing them                
              to state-of-the-art equipment. The scope of the project                        
              involves required core courses, elective polymer courses and                   
              independent undergraduate research or design projects. The                     
              planned laboratory exercises include polymer syntheses,                        
              computer simulations, molecular and structural                                 
              characterizations, morphology investigations and mechanical                    
              property measurements. Upon synthesizing their own polymers,                   
              thermodynamic, kinetic and mechanical properties will be                       
              investigated using a differential scanning calorimeter and a                   
              dynamic mechanical analyzer. This thermal analysis equipment                   
              will be a major component of the undergraduate polymer                         
              laboratory, because of the variety of polymer characteristics                  
              which these instruments can probe (e.g. glass transition,                      
              crystallization, moduli). A unique feature of the project is                   
              the incorporation of molecular modeling for illustrating chain                 
              conformations and tacticity and for predicting macroscopic                     
              properties from molecular structures. A hot stage is necessary                 
              to study the phase transitions and crystallization of polymers                 
              using an existing undergraduate light microscopy facility. This                
              project is significant for three reasons: undergraduate                        
              laboratory facilities for the study of polymer science and                     
              engineering currently do not exist at Penn, our undergraduate                  
              engineers frequently find employment in polymer or polymer-                    
              related fields, and finally, polymeric materials are of immense                
              commercial and scientific importance.
