Title       : Optical Test and Measurement Laboratory to Enhance Electro-Optics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9351872

Award Number: 9351872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas M. Massa massa@stcciphub.stcc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Vangel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arvind Karnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret E. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield Tech Cmty Col
	      Armory Square
	      Springfield, MA  01105    413/781-7822

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Laser Electro-Optics Technology Department at Springfield                  
              Technical Community College (STCC) is enhancing its curriculum                 
              by acquiring an Optical Test & Measurement Lab with assistance                 
              from the National Science Foundation. The major instrument is                  
              the Zygo Mark IVxp Phase Measuring Interferometer.                             
              Interferometers have long been used for both macro and micro                   
              surface characterization in the fabrication and assembly of                    
              precision optical components and systems. The Zygo Mark IVxp                   
              Interferometer System represents the state-of-the-art in                       
              optical surface evaluation and is being used increasingly in a                 
              variety of measurement purposes in manufacturing and quality                   
              assurance. Access to such equipment by students is enriching                   
              the already diverse laser electro-optics offerings at STCC, one                
              of but a handful of colleges in the country with a laser                       
              major.With the opportunity to engage in hands-on applications                  
              employing "real world" hardware in a laboratory setting, STCC                  
              students are being significantly better prepared to continue                   
              their studies at the university level and/or to pursue their                   
              technical careers in the private or government sectors.
