Title       : Scientific Visualization Computer Graphics Technology Associate Degree Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9351488

Award Number: 9351488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman J. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Revels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sunny T. Christensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Technical Cmty Col
	      9101 Fayetteville Road
	      Raleigh, NC  276035655    919/772-0551

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              Wake Technical Community College of Raleigh, North Carolina, is                
              establishing a curriculum to provide education and training to                 
              area adults and non-traditional students (minority adults,                     
              women in transition and re-entry, and employed or unemployed                   
              adults seeking retraining) who wish to learn the techniques and                
              applications of scientific visualization computer graphics.                    
              This program, designed by the originator and several of the                    
              teachers of the highly successful Parkland College of Illinois                 
              program, blends mathematics, physical and computer sciences                    
              with art and humanities in a unique and powerful new way. It is                
              necessary to revise and upgrade the first program's structure                  
              and curriculum to take into account the greater and more                       
              diverse local employment needs of the four area universities                   
              (UNC, NC State, Duke, and NC Central) and the major high                       
              technology firms in the Research Triangle Park area counties.                  
              A recent feasibility study in this tri-county area found over                  
              225 potential positions that employers would create if                         
              graduates of such a associate degree program were available to                 
              hire. By all accounts, this is a conservative estimate of the                  
              growing demand in this field. In designing the new curriculum,                 
              consideration is being given to area demographics, the                         
              availability of local and non-local expertise, recent updates                  
              in available graphic software and hardware technology, and the                 
              fact that no formal undergraduate training now exists in North                 
              Carolina for scientific computer visualization graphics. This                  
              is a new field where, in most states, the demand for trained                   
              people far exceeds the number of qualified candidates. Thus,                   
              Wake Tech's curriculum development will focus or creating an                   
              effective educational model for establishing similar degree                    
              programs in other states by fostering col laborative efforts                   
              among local academic, industrial, and private sector resources.                
              Funding for this proposal will assist in the establishment of                  
              a state-of-the-art computer visualization laboratory crucial to                
              the success of this program.
