Title       : Tools for Teaching Undergraduate Geophysics in the Field and Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9351877

Award Number: 9351877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25437              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Sheriff GL SDS@SELWAY.UMT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9351877  Sheriff                              For undergraduate geology students
              exploration geophysics can be  abstract and difficult.  A new course in
              geophysical methods,  taught in the field and directed towards local problems
              suitable  for undergraduate research, is being developed.  Five systems are 
              being incorporated into the course: 1) a portable 12 channel  seismograph, 2)
              magnetic equipment for susceptibility, total field  and vertical gradient
              measurements, 3) an electromagnetic induction  system for near surface
              conductivity mapping, 4) a global  positioning system to extend our gravity
              work into the surrounding  mountains, and 5) a generic MS/DOS computer with
              graphics software  to facilitate data analysis and presentation.  Electrical 
              resistivity equipment, a gravimeter, a field computer, and modeling  and
              interpretation software also are being used in the course.  All  of the
              equipment also is being used for senior thesis research, and  the gravity,
              magnetic and seismic equipment is being integrated  into labs for the honors
              course in introductory geology.  The focus  of the geophysics methods course is
              to geophysically characterize  the Missoula aquifer which is the sole source of
              Missoula's  drinking water. The aquifer is recharged by the Clark Fork River 
              which drains the nation's largest collection of EPA superfund  sites. 
              Significant ground water and geochemical research has  focussed on contaminant,
              water quality, and water abundance  problems. Geophysical studies are greatly
              benefitting this  research; geophysically the aquifer is poorly known.  This 
              situation is providing an excellent natural laboratory for  obtaining data that
              is publicly important and of ample scope for a  long term research project and
              for dissemination in the  professional literature.
