Title       : Intergrating Molecular Modeling into the Chemistry Curriculum at UNCW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1993     
File        : a9351758

Award Number: 9351758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27704              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned H. Martin MARTINN@UNCWIL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack B. Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela J. Seaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sybil K. Burgess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Cahill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The project will integrate molecular modeling into six existing                
              undergraduate chemistry courses in an innovative way which                     
              consists of combining modeling results with laboratory results,                
              thus using an integrated approach to problem solving. The                      
              process of integrating modeling techniques will be progressive,                
              starting with basic operations in lower level courses, adding                  
              more sophisticated applications in subsequent courses, until                   
              the student is capable of carrying out a mini-research project                 
              as part of a senior level course.  Fundamental applications of                 
              modeling will be introduced in Organic Chemistry and in                        
              Chemical Applications of Microcomputers.Progressively more                     
              sophisticated applications will be taught in Advanced                          
              Techniques of Organic Chemistry and Biochemical Techniques and                 
              Instrumentation Lab, ultimately allowing students to perform                   
              mini-research projects in the senior level Advanced Organic                    
              Chemistry and Medicinal Chemistry. The impact of these changes                 
              will be to allow students for the first time to visualize                      
              molecular structures in their minimum energy conformation,                     
              calculate the relative energies of conformers, measure                         
              distances and angles between atoms and bonds, predict the                      
              outcome of physical measurements made later in the laboratory,                 
              or even predict the product of a chemical reaction that they                   
              will confirm by synthesis and subsequent instrumental analysis.                
              Students will learn how chemistry is really done today in the                  
              chemical and pharmaceutical industries, using a discovery based                
              approach to learning that should stimulate and sustain                         
              students' interest in chemistry.
