Title       : An Innovative Cross-Disciplinary Motion Control and Energy Management Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9351740

Award Number: 9351740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nagy N. Bengiamin Bengiami@vml.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9351740  Bengiamin               It has been nationally recognized that the
              nature of present  day control engineering practices pose the challenging
              question  of "how to educate engineers to span the multiple disciplines  used
              in the control field".  This project involves the  implementation of scientific
              equipment for developing a cross-  disciplinary controls laboratory. The
              objective is twofold:  first, to broaden the horizon of electrical engineering 
              students and further their understanding of multidisciplinary  problems;
              second, to equally satisfy the desire of a cross-  departmental student body in
              grasping realization concepts. The  requested equipment, usually found in
              typical industrial  processes, is used to design three work cells; an engine- 
              generator system, a robot arm mechanism, and a variable speed  AC drive with
              simulated fan/pump loads. The applications  contribute in a coherent way to the
              understanding of  fundamental concepts in feedback control, systems modeling
              and  analysis, and instrumentation and data acquisition. EE and ME  students
              indiscriminately are asked to look at both the  electrical and mechanical
              engineering aspects of the system. To  bridge the gap between EE and ME in a
              non-superficial way, the  students  work in groups and at their own pace on
              small  projects. Many schools may find the developed experiments and  facility
              of special interest by combining departmental  resources and providing an
              effective controls education. The  experiments will be documented and made
              available to other  schools, and the outcomes will be communicated in
              professional  society coferences.  ***
