Title       : Cosmology, Theoretical and Computational Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9507695

Award Number: 9507695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $790866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramesh Narayan   (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Press  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A research program in computational astrophysics will be  carried out by Prof.
              William Press and his group.  Topics to  be investigated will include the
              following:  (1) Continued  development of a new class of fast statistical
              methods  (discovered by Rybicki and Press) that reduce some formerly 
              intractable problems in signal and data processing to  computationally fast
              problems.  (2) Application of these  methods to the study of galaxies at
              moderate to high  redshifts, where new cosmological information can be 
              discerned.  (3) Several tests on the reality of large scale  cosmological
              flows, including the use of Type Ia supernovae.  (4) A systematic investigation
              of new and unified methods  for measuring the galaxy correlation function (or
              power  spectrum) on the very largest scales accessible to  observation.  (5)
              The possible role of cataclysmic variable  stars as an indicator of the early
              history of evolution of  our Galaxy.  (6) Measurement of mass-to-light ratios
              on  large cosmological scales.  (7) A study of parallel  computational
              algorithms and "idioms" with application to  scientific computing generally. 
              (8) Possibly, the  development of large scale computer codes in the areas of 
              hydrodynamics in wavelet basis, and/or classical three-  dimensional field
              theory calculations.    Prof. Press and his group work on a variety of topics
              in  cosmology, theoretical astrophysics, and computational  physics and
              astrophysics.  Behind this diversity of topics,  lies the central focus of
              interest:  Given the hot big bang,  did the structure in the Universe today
              form  gravitationally?  And, if so, how, when, and with what  implications
              regarding the Universe's initial conditions?  The group has a major interest
              not only in developing new,  testable, theoretical ideas that bear on this
              question, but  also in developing new analytical, statistical, and 
              computational techniques that are capable of extending the  power and relevance
              of existing and future observational  data sets.  Towards this end, P ress and
              his co-members have  a continuing interest in fast computational methods, 
              parallel computing, and the development of new algorithms.  Often these have
              application not only to gravitational  physics and astrophysics, but also to
              science and  engineering more broadly.
