Title       : Workshop on the Limits of Syntax, Columbus, Ohio, Fall 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9507805

Award Number: 9507805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15288              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Culicover   (Principal Investigator current)
              Louise McNally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9507805  CULICOVER                                ABSTRACT    Over the past
              thirty-five years, generative grammarians have made  a great deal of progress
              in understanding human language by  characterizing a very wide range of
              linguistic phenomena in  syntactic terms. This inquiry has focused on
              developing theories  that illuminate speaker competence and it has led to many 
              interesting and successful predictions about cross-linguistic  similarities and
              differences. However, as this reqearch has grown  to incorporate a greater
              variety of within-language and  cross-linguistic data, it has become
              increasingly clear that  certain phenomena that have been given widely accepted
              syntactic  explanations (for instance, constraints on question formation or 
              the distribution of pronouns) quite possibly cannot be analyzed  in exclusively
              syntactic terms without an undesirable impact on  the explanatory value of the
              syntactic theories themselves.    Consequently, it is essential to explore
              seriously the question  of how the greater incorporation of nonsyntactic
              explanations  into linguistic research could deepen our understanding of 
              problematic linguistic phenomena and, at the same time,  strengthen syntactic
              theory. We will hold a workshop as a forum  for such an exploration, with the
              following overarching goals:            identifying clear and convincing
              arguments that some or       all aspects of a given linguistic phenomenon must
              or cannot       be analyzed syntactically;           identifying and evaluating
              specific proposals for       nonsyntactic analyses of natural language
              phenomena;           exploring the implications of candidate nonsyntactic      
              analyses for syntactic theory; and           exploring whether and how
              nonsyntactic analyses of       linguistic phenomena can be expressed in a      
              "parameterizable" theory that can cover typologically       diverse languages. 
                Among the topics to be explored in the workshop will be:  constraints on
              extraction, bound variable anaphora, and th e  "triggering" of movement. These
              examples all share the potential  of being illuminated by a theory or theories
              of the informational  import of sentences -particularly their presuppositional 
              properties and informational articulation.
