Title       : Spin, Charge, and Disorder in Correlated Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1997   
File        : a9507873

Award Number: 9507873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Rosenbaum t-rosenbaum@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9507873  Rosenbaum  The  physics of the metal-insulator transition is intimately
              tied  to  the  unusual  ground  state properties  of  highly-correlated 
              metals,  including  the  heavy fermions  compounds,  the  high-Tc 
              superconductors, and the Mott-Hubbard systems V2O3 and Ni(S,Se)2.  An 
              important, unresolved issue is the nature of the interplay of  the  itinerant 
              magnetism with the Coulomb interactions  and  the  disorder.  This research
              project focuses on the transition  metal  oxides and sulfides. It aims to
              deconvolute the influences of the  spin  and  charge  degrees of freedom in the
               barely-delocalized,  disordered  metal  through  a program  of  electrical 
              transport,  magnetic  susceptibility, specific heat, neutron scattering,  and 
              optical  measurements.  Temperature  capabilities  down  to   the  milliKelvin 
              regime provide new diagnostics of  localization  and  electron   interaction 
              effects  as  well  as   simplifying   the  theoretical  description  of  the 
              problem.  Moreover,   possible  deviations  from the usual Fermi-liquid
              behavior, with  different  forms  posited for the quantum and classical
              regimes,  should  be  revealed by high-resolution pressure studies of the
              transport and  calorimetric response.  %%%  A  sharp  change from a state where
              electrons can flow freely  to  one  where  they  are unable to move lies at the
               heart  of  many  device  applications. This "metal-Insulator"  transition  can
               be  driven  by  a  number  of  external  parameters,  including   the 
              application  of pressure, the introduction of disorder,  and  the  manipulation
               of material characteristics. The research  proposed  here seeks to explore the
              interaction between disorder, found  in  all  real  materials,  and control
              parameters  such  as  changing  electron  density and internal chemical
              pressure at the  boundary  between  metal  and insulator. Of prime interest 
              are  transition  metal  oxides and sulfides, classes of materials whose
              electronic  and magnetic responses are acutely sen sitive to small changes  in 
              the  control parameters. Depending on the particular material and  the  nature 
              of  its  preparation, it may have  potential  as  an  electronic  switch,  a 
              magnetic  storage  device,  or  a   high-  temperature superconductor.  ***
