Title       : The Impact of Mental Simulation on Goal-Directed Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9507642

Award Number: 9507642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley E. Taylor taylors@psych.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research explores the self-regulatory functions of mental simulation, that
              is the mental rehearsal of real or hypothetical events.  The work distingushes
              between outcome simulations, which involve rehearsal of successful completion
              of a goal, and process simulations, which involve the rehearsal of the specific
              steps required to achieve a goal.  Previous research suggests that both types
              of simulations may beneficially affect performance, but that process
              simulations enhance planning, leading people to make progress on meeting their
              goals; outcome simulations sometimes enhance motivation and perceived
              self-efficacy without affecting goal-directed activity.  A program of nine
              experimental studies examines the self-regulatory effects of outcome and
              process simulations on goal-directed activity and identifies the conditions
              when process versus outcome simulations successfully facilitate progress toward
              an educational goal.  These studies also examine the relation of mental
              simulation to the planning fallacy, namely people's overly optimistic estimates
              of the amount of time and effort it will take to achieve a goal; it is
              hypothesized that increasing realism may occur at the expense of reduced
              motivation, task enjoyment, and, paradoxically, longer time to task completion.
               The research examines the self-regulatory effects of negative simulations,
              arguing that when such simulations are performed briefly or with otherwise
              positive simulations, they may benefit goal-directed activity, but that
              continued rehearsal of negative simulations may bring about a partial
              self-fulfilling prophecy.  The significance of the proposed research lies in
              its capacity to elucidate the importance of mental simulation as a cognitive
              underpinning of educational interventions to improve school performance and
              study skills.     This program of research addresses the question of how people
              achieve their goals by investigating the effects of mental rehearsal
              (simulation) on goal achievement.  A series of experiments compar es the
              effects of outcome simulations, in which people rehearse the successful
              achievement of a personal goal, and process simulations, in which people
              mentally rehearse the steps they will need to go through in order to achieve
              their goal. It is hypothesized that outcome simulations may "hype" people,
              making them feel motivated and excited without necessarily producing effective
              action toward their goals.  In contrast, process simulations enhance planning,
              and, consequently, help people begin goal-directed activity earlier, ultimately
              achieving more successful performance.  This research also examines the effect
              of mental simulation on the planning fallacy, namely the commonly-reported
              tendency for people to be overly optimistic about how quickly and easily they
              can achieve personal goals, and it tests the hypothesis that outcome
              simulations may exacerbate the planning fallacy, whereas process simulations
              may reduce it.  Finally, the research explores the benefits and liabilities of
              negative mental simulations, namely imagining how one's efforts may go awry in
              the process of trying to achieve a goal.  All of the studies will be conducted
              in educational settings which examine the impact of simulations on student
              achievement.    Hence, this program of research  is highly relevant to the
              'education' component of the Human Capital research agenda.  Since the results
              of the educational investigations translate directly to the work environment, 
              it also has considerable relevance to the 'workplace' component.  Finally, it
              bears directly on the 'disadvantage' component inasmuch as  much of the work
              will focus on students who are the first in their families to go to college, an
              intrisically talented population that is heavily minority,  poor, and at high
              risk for dropping out of college. The goal of the research is to develop an
              understanding of  mental simulation techniques that can improve school
              performance and improve cognitive skills, especially among high-risk students.
