Title       : Ecophysiological Correlates of Vertebrate Freeze Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9507437

Award Number: 9507437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon P. Costanzo costanjp@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Layne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507437    Freeze   tolerance  is  an  adaptation  that  permits   some 
              organisms  to  tolerate ice formation within  their  bodies.  Previous studies
              of freeze tolerance have been conducted  in  the  laboratory,  under conditions
              far  removed  from  those  experienced  by  animals in nature.  This research 
              combines  both  field and laboratory studies to elucidate the role  of  freeze 
              tolerance in promoting over winter survival  in  two  freeze-tolerant  
              species.   Freezing   episodes   naturally  experienced  during  winter  will 
              be  characterized   using  computer-assisted   monitoring  systems   to  
              record   body  temperature,  environmental temperature, and  water  content 
              and  water potential of the microenvironments in which over-  wintering  
              occurs.   Parallel  measurement  of   protective  responses  including glucose
              mobilization and relocation  of  organ  water will provide understanding of the
              physiological  mechanisms  that protect against freezing injury  to  cells, 
              tissues,  and  organs, and of the ecological  importance  of  these  responses
              in the natural environment.   Some  studies  will   focus   on   the  energetic
               costs  of   hibernation,  particularly  with regard to freezing and thawing.  
              Nuclear  magnetic  resonance (NMR) imaging will be used to  determine  cell
              energy status and show whether survival duration in the  frozen state is
              limited by the availability of finite energy  reserves.   These  integrated
              field and  laboratory  studies  will provide insights into the physiological
              mechanisms that  promote survival at temperatures below the freezing point of 
              tissue,   and  into  their  ecological  significance.    The  research  may 
              also  provide valuable clues  for  developing  technology  for the preservation
              of tissues  and  organs  by  freezing.
