Title       : Delta Excitations in Nuclei, US-Jordan Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9507430

Award Number: 9507430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19346              (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Vary jvary@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description: This project supports cooperation between  Dr. James  Vary of the
              Physics Department at Iowa state University and Dr. Mahmoud Hasan of the
              Physics Department at the Applied Science University in Amman, Jordan.  The
              collaborative research will be in the area of theoretical nuclear physics
              dealing with Delta excitations in nuclei.  Specifically, realistic
              nucleon-nucleon and nucleon-delta interactions will be used to map out the
              properties of nuclei under extreme conditions.  For light nuclei, exact
              diagonalization with effective Hamiltonians will be performed.  A Brueckner
              constrained mean field approach will be used to relate finite nuclear results
              to the nuclear equation of state.  The effort encompasses a collaboration
              involving the two scientists, from Iowa State and from Jordan, and Dr. T.-S. H.
              Lee at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) to solve for a set of
              Brueckner-Bethe-Brandow effective NN and ND interactions in a realistic single
              particle basis.     Scope:  This project will allow a cooperative activity
              between two investigators with complementary expertise.  Dr. Vary is a member
              of the Nuclear Theory Group under the International Institute of Theoretical
              and applied Physics (IITAP) at Iowa State.  The group has two faculty, two
              postdoctoral associates, and six graduate students.  It collaborates with the
              ISU nuclear experimental group, has established strength in microscopic nuclear
              theory and aims to use those strength to address issues related to high energy
              reactions with nuclei. Vary has developed capability and techniques to evaluate
              effective nuclear Hamiltonians which will form central elements of this
              project.  Dr. Hasan has developed a major constrained mean field dynamic
              capability and techniques for evaluating effective ND Hamiltonians.  The IITAP,
              with sponsorship from UNESCO, will provide research support for the project and
              will assist the ASU in building its electronic networks, and in internet
              access.  The project represents a good case of meeting INT objectives in
              promoting cooperation with benefits to both sides.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
