Title       : Endocrine Basis of Genetic Variation and Covariation of Life-History Traits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9507388

Award Number: 9507388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Zera azera@unlinfo.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507388  Zera    Life  history  traits, such as the age at which reproduction 
              begins,  total  egg  production  and  duration  of  juvenile  development    
              differ    dramatically    among     species.  Understanding how these
              differences evolve is  an  important  part   in   understanding  modern 
              patterns  of   biological  diversity, yet we know very little about the
              mechanisms that  are responsible for variation in life histories.  This study 
              will  identify  differences  in  endocrine  mechanisms  that  underlie  the 
              first stages of life history  evolution.   It  will  determine  how 
              genetically  based  variation  in  key  developmental and reproductive hormones
              cause populations to  differ  il  life history traits, using crickets as  a 
              model  system.  The research will show whether differences  in  age  of  onset
              of reproduction result from differences in  timing  and  concentration  of
              juvenile hormone levels,  or  whether  they  result from genetically based
              differences  in  ovarian  hormone  receptors.   The results will reveal  the 
              role  of  genetic  differences in juvenile hormone or molting  hormone  systems
               in  producing correlation between the  duration  of  juvenile  development and
              the onset of  adult  reproduction.  The research is a synthesis of evolutionary
              genetics, insect  endocrinology, and life history evolution.  It will identify 
              for  the  first time the specific mechanisms  that  underlie  genetic 
              differences in life history traits and correlations  between those traits.  In
              the long term, it may lead to  new  approaches to managing insect populations.
