Title       : Intermodal Determinants of Self-Exploration in Infancy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9507773

Award Number: 9507773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe R. Rochat psypr@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507773  ROCHAT     Infants from birth are actively involved in exploring and
              acting  in their environment, playing an active role in the rapid  development
              of their cognitive capacities.  Although research has  provided much
              information on the early development of physical  knowledge, and in particular
              how infants perceive, explore, and  act on objects, little is known regarding
              what they perceive of  their own body and how they develop an understanding of
              their own  physical actions.  Considering that the body is a primary object  of
              knowledge, self-exploratory behavior in infancy is an  essential aspect of
              early cognition.  This research will  investigate self-exploration and the
              perception of self-produced  movements in infants between birth and 6 months. 
              In the course  of the first six months, infants spend much of their waking
              hours  exploring their own body, bringing hand(s) to the mouth and in  the 
              field of view for long bouts of inspection.  Questions  remain as to what
              determines such behavior and what kind of  perceptual information young infants
              pick up when engaging in  self-exploration.  This research will examine what
              perceptual  information young infants are sensitive to and are capable of 
              detecting while engaging in self-exploratory behavior.  In  particular, the
              focus will be on the early development of the  capacity to perceive
              self-produced movements.  A first experiment  will investigate the early
              capacity to discriminate tactile and  proprioceptive information specifying
              either self- or non-self-  produced stimulation by neonates, 1-, and
              2-month-old infants.   Five other experiments will investigate what 2- to
              6-month-old  infants perceive while engaging in the exploration of self- 
              produced movements.  In particular, these experiments will  document the early
              development of the perceptual ability to  discriminate between different levels
              of congruence of  proprioceptive, auditory, or visual feedback accompanying
              self-  produced movements.  In general, this research wil l provide new 
              empirical data on the origins of knowledge about the body and  self-produced
              actions, a fundamental aspect of human perception  and cognition.  It will
              provide information on the importance of  self-exploration and self-initiated
              action in perceptual   development, and in particular in the process of
              discovering the  body and its effectivities.  The collected data will be 
              potentially useful for the assessment and prevention of hindered  perceptual
              and cognitive development in children lacking  opportunities for
              self-exploration and self-initiated actions due  to physical or mental
              handicaps.    ***
