Title       : CAREER: A Simulation Study of Reconnection Layers in the Magnetotail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9507993

Award Number: 9507993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Lin ylin@physics.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1045,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The objective of this proposal is to develop a full, balanced  academic
              career which involves both research and education  activities, as emphasized by
              the NSF CAREER Program.  A brief  summary of the research and education plans
              follows.         (A)  Research Plan:  Magnetic reconnection plays a very 
              important role in the transfer of the solar wind mass, momentum,  and energy
              into the earth's magnetosphere through the magnetospause  and in the
              development of geomagnetic substorms and energy release  in the magnetotail. 
              In the reconnection process, a layered  structure which contains several
              magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)  discontinuities and waves can be formed in the
              outflow region.  The  energy conversion in the magnetic reconnection is mainly
              through  the discontinuities and waves in this reconnection layer.  The 
              purpose of the research plan is to systematically study the  formation and
              structure of reconnection layers in the magnetotail.   The primary research
              tools of the study are one-dimensional )1-D)  and two dimensional (2-D) hybrid
              simulations, guided by MHD  theories and simulations of the reconnection layer.
               Specifically,  this proposal is to:   (1) Determine the structure of the
              distant-tail reconnection layer  and associated discontinuities in quasi-steady
              reconnection during  quiet time;  (2) Study the structure and evolution of the
              near-tail reconnection  layer during transient stages of magnetic reconnection
              in a  substorm active time:  (3) Investigate the structure and ion heating of
              slow shocks in the  magnetotail  The proposed study is expected to contribute
              significantly to our  understanding of the structure of the tail plasma sheet
              boundary,  the slow shocks and electromagnetic waves, and the ion dynamics in 
              the magnetotail magnetic reconnection.         (B) Education Plan:  In addition
              to the scientific research,  the other important component of academic
              activities at the Physics  Department of Auburn University is science
              education.  Instruction,  research, and out reach are inexorably intertwined in
              a manner that  each re-enforces the other.  The PI's education plan is made to 
              balance the research activity of the PI and to be consistent with  the
              department goals.  Specifically, the education plan includes:  (1) A five-year
              plan of undergraduate and graduate course teaching  at the introductory level,
              advanced undergraduate and graduate  level, which effectively utilizes the
              expertise of the PI;   (2) Research projects for undergraduate students in
              order to  attract students to higher levels of study and to contribute to the 
              research activities of the PI;  (3) Outreach activities to area high schools,
              to interact with and  train high school science teachers and students, and
              participation  in the $1.3 million Hughes Initiative.
