Title       : Basic and Applied Statistical Inference and Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9507926

Award Number: 9507926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Gastwirth jlgast@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Statistical information plays an important role in establishing the facts upon
              which public policies are based.  For example, the levels of employment and
              unemployment and other important economic and health statistics are obtained
              from sample surveys.  Statistical evidence is also used in legal cases,
              especially those concerning equal pay or employment discrimination and
              trademark infringement.  Since there are some imperfections in most real world
              data sets (e.g., a question in a survey may not be clear to all respondents or
              it is difficult to obtain information about some potentially relevant
              variables), it is important to develop methods for assessing the accuracy of
              the data used in statistical analyses as well as techniques which are less
              sensitive to modest errors in the data.  One goal of the project is to further
              develop a new approach to determining the misclassification rates in the labor
              force survey.  The effect of these errors on the reported rates of unemployment
              and employment will be studied.  This should enable policy makers to adjust for
              these misclassification errors when they interpret the monthly economic
              statistics.  Often reasonably sound studies are questioned because some
              variables that might influence the outcome under investigation (e.g., the
              efficacy of a drug or educational program) were not included.  Methods for
              assessing the potential impact of an omitted variable are being developed and
              applied to data arising in legal cases, economics, and public policy.  Quite
              often it can be shown that the main conclusion of the study would not be
              changed so that action, such as providing a public warning about a potentially
              harmful drug or introducing a better educational method, can be implemented
              with further delay and study.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
