Title       : Political Organization at Teotihuacan, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9507803

Award Number: 9507803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42525              (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Cowgill Cowgill@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Saburo Sugiyama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. George Cowgill and his colleagues
              will analyze the physical remains and associated burial goods of individuals
              buried beneath the Feathered Serpent Pyramid at Teotihuacan in the Valley of
              Mexico. Occupied during the first millennium AD, Teotihuacan had more than
              100,000 occupants and was one of the major urban centers of Mesoamerica. Near
              its center was a compound, 400 meters on a side, of great religious and
              political significance with palatial room complexes, platforms and 16 stepped
              pyramids. The Feathered Serpent is the largest of these. Recent excavation has
              uncovered over 130 sacrificial victims and exceptionally rich associated
              offerings. Evidence indicates that these were all associated with the
              construction of the temple. Dr. Cowgill and his collaborators will analyze
              these materials to determine how these individuals fit into the larger society
              and what status they held. To accomplish this they will study patterns of
              dental filing and inlay, evidence of provenance through stable isotope
              signatures of bone and tooth, paleodiet and DNA. Analysis of these as well as
              non-metric skeletal and dental traits can furnish evidence about the genetic
              relatedness of the victims to other Teotihuacan and non-Teotihuacan groups and
              studies of skeletal and dental stress markers provide evidence for social
              status.   The goal of this research is to understand the political organization
              of this large precolumbian city. Archaeologists have generally believed that
              sacrificial victims are war captives but analysis to date of associated
              materials suggests that these individuals were part of Teotihuacan society.
              While prehistoric Middle American peoples had a form of writing and this has
              revealed much about the political organization of adjacent Mayan groups, very
              few inscriptions have been recovered at Teotihuacan and archaeologists wish to
              understand how much power rulers and ruling elites actually held. Preliminary
              evidence indicates that the victims were from upper classes and if this is so
              it implies that these groups functioned within considerable constraints.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide new insight into how
              state level societies arise and are maintained. It will yield data of interest
              to many archaeologists and help to write a poorly understood chapter of New
              World prehistory.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
