Title       : Mechanisms of Directionally Selective Motion Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9507878

Award Number: 9507878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick B. Rudolph fbr@bioc.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymon M. Glantz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                          IBN-9507878  Raymon Glantz    A broad spectrum of brain activities,
              from object recognition to  postural adjustments, require that neurons and
              neural circuits  make computations. In recent years, neurobiologists have made 
              impressive progress in two related areas: one concerns the  biophysical and
              molecular mechanisms of synapses and the second  concerns the mathematical and
              logical operations which formally  describe what whole systems of nerve cells
              do. In the study of  how the visual system works, algorithms successfully model
              visual  tracking and fixation, binocular vision, and motion detection.  Future
              progress in understanding more about the visual system  depends upon
              integrating the biophysical and algorithmic  approaches. This will require
              detailed information about the  structure and dynamic properties of neurons
              involved in  particular computations. Many visual systems can compute the 
              direction and velocity of moving targets. Recent studies indicate  that
              directional motion detection is achieved through synaptic  operations embedded
              in the structure of the neuron's receptive  field. The same directional
              mechanisms were independently found  in visual neurons in higher vertebrates
              and in the crayfish. The  mechanisms depends upon spatial and temporal
              asymmetries of the  excitation and inhibition within the receptive field.  This
              project focuses on experimental and theoretical studies of  the synaptic
              mechanisms which support directional motion  detection. Physiological
              measurements will quantify the  characteristics of the synapses which form the
              directional  mechanism. The simulations will determine if the measured 
              properties of the synapses are sufficient to support the  directional
              mechanism.
