Title       : Gene Regulation During Heterocyst Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9507490

Award Number: 9507490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie E. Curtis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507490  Curtis  The cyanobacteria are a very ancient and diverse group of
              photosynthetic bacteria which have a wide distribution in freshwater, marine,
              and terrestrial environments. They are unique among photosynthetic prokaryotes
              in their ability to perform an oxygen-evolving, or oxygenic, form of
              photosynthesis characteristic of plant chloroplasts. A subset of the
              cyanobacteria can respond to nitrogen limitations in the environment by the
              production of fixed nitrogen. Nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by the
              oxygen-sensitive enzyme nitrogenase and requires large amounts of energy in the
              form of ATP and reductant. In cyanobacteria, this energy requirement is met
              through photosynthesis, and this presents a dilemma as the oxygen byproduct of
              photosynthesis inhibits nitrogenase. In Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 (Anabaena
              7120), this problem is circumvented by spatial separation of nitrogen fixation
              and photosynthesis.  In the presence of fixed nitrogen, Anabaena 7120 grows as
              filaments of uniform photosynthetic vegetative cells. Starvation for fixed
              nitrogen triggers the initiation of a differentiation pathway that culminates
              in the production of a new cell specialized for nitrogen fixation. These
              terminally differentiated cells, heterocysts, develop from vegetative cells at
              regular intervals along the filament. During the thirty to forty hours required
              for development, the cells destined to become heterocysts undergo a series of
              biochemical and morphological alterations that provide an environment favorable
              for nitrogen fixation. Though the genetic mechanisms governing heterocyst
              development are largely unknown, there is considerable precedent in other
              bacterial systems for control at the level of gene transcription. As in other
              developmental systems, heterocyst differentiation involves the sequential
              activation and repression of a large number of gene sets. Although the
              regulation of gene expression during heterocyst development undoubtedly occurs
              at many levels, transcriptional control is believed  to play a major role.  The
              broad goal of this project is to extend our knowledge of how genes are
              regulated in Anabaena 7120 with an emphasis on transcriptional control. The
              work is focused on three genes, rbcL, gnd, and AD239, that fall into three
              classes with regard to regulation of transcript levels during vegetative growth
              and heterocyst development.  The objectives are to understand how these genes
              are regulated:  1) The rbcL gene, which encodes a enzyme of carbon fixation is
              abundantly expressed in vegetative cells and turned off heterocysts.
              Experiments are proposed to identify cis elements that regulate rbcL expression
              in vegetative and heterocyst cells, and to begin identification of trans-acting
              factors that interact with these cis elements.  2) The gnd gene, which encodes
              an enzyme of carbon metabolism, is expressed at low levels during vegetative
              growth, and up-regulated during heterocyst development.  Experiments address in
              which cell types the multiple gnd promoters are utilized, the relative
              contribution of each promoters to gnd expression, and the location of cis
              elements required for up-regulation during development.  3) The AD239 gene, of
              unknown identity, is not expressed in vegetative cells, and is induced by
              nitrogen starvation. Experiments address when, and in which cell types AD239 is
              expressed, whether AD239 is required for heterocyst development, and the
              location of cis elements required for expression of the gene after nitrogen
              starvation.  %%%  This research will  help us understand how photosynthesizing
              cells can fix nitrogen from their environment.  This process is essential to
              plant life, and requires the addition of fertilizers if the cells cannot do it
              themselves.  ***
