Title       : Attention, Memory, and Social Perception in a Multicultural Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9507921

Award Number: 9507921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Zarate mzarate@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This program of research investigates the cognitive processes involved in social
              perception, focusing on how memory and attention influence social
              categorization and stereotyping processes.  The research is grounded in the
              Smith-Zarate exemplar model of perception which holds that social judgments are
              based on a target's similarity to past specific memory traces of persons rather
              than on the target's similarity to abstract prototypes or group stereotypes. 
              Eight studies will test this model within an inter-ethnic context on an
              international border, investigating how past experiences with individuals from
              various social groups influence the application of social stereotypes. 
              Questions addressed include how minorities are perceived, how the passage of
              time influences specific memory traces about people, how people learn about new
              groups, and how a perceiver's own gender and ethnicity influence social
              perception processes. The consequences of targets' multiple category membership
              (e.g., ethnicity and gender) on social judgments are examined in this work
              which, by using photographs rather than linguistic labels, provides more
              ecological validity than much of the existing research on stereotyping. 
              Another significant strength of the project is the use of an ethnically diverse
              subject population, which will provide meaningrful answers to the question of
              how target and perceiver attributes influence intergroup categorization
              processes.  Finally, the project will advance the theoretical development of
              exemplar theories of memory and categorization, incorporating modeels of
              steroetyping into other domains of decision making.     This research addresses
              how and why humans categorize others into groups, the mediating processes
              predicting categorization, and the consequences of categorizations for
              stereotype formation and change. The fact that any individual can be
              categorized in multiple ways (e.g., by gender, ethnicity, occupation) is
              explored in investigations of how categorization of people is influen ced by
              the social context in which they appear as well as by the perceiver's own
              attributes. Thus, for example, one study will test the hypothesis that people
              will be categorized according to whichever of their attributes is most salient
              (e.g., most unique) in the social context in which they appear, and that such
              contextually induced categorization can produce later stereotyping even by
              judges who were not intially so disposed.  This research employs a population
              of Hispanic students that is underrepresented in basic research on stereotyping
              and it has the unique advantage of advancing theoretically relevant
              steroetyping research in an envrionment where a disadvantaged minority
              (Hispanics) are the local majority. The subject population make these studies
              ideally suited to providing meaningrful answers to the theoretically important
              question of how target and perceiver attributes influence intergroup
              categorization processes.  This work is highly relevant to the goals of the NSF
              Human Capital  research agenda in the domain of 'disadvantage in a diverse
              society', since it will contribute to the understanding of basic cognitive
              processes that foster stereotyping and discrimination as well as how these
              effects can be exacerbated or ameliorated by different social contexts.
