Title       : Fecundity in Populations with Different Progesterone Profiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9507320

Award Number: 9507320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian R. Bentley grb20@cam.ac.uk  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Chatterton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0312000   Population                              
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently published data demonstrate that different populations have varying
              levels of salivary progesterone (P), but researchers are uncertain as to its
              significance.  Among less well-nourished and more stressed populations, P
              levels are chronically lower than among healthy Western controls.  Some
              reproductive ecologists have suggested that this variability represents
              different levels of ovarian function, but other demographers counter that women
              living in such marginal conditions exhibit high fertility and hence must remain
              fecund.  There has been no direct measures of the relationship between
              interpopulational differences in fecundity (the capacity to conceive) and
              interpopulational variability in such reproductive steroids that would clearly
              support either of these assertions.  Resolving this dispute is essential before
              considering either the implications or causes of interpopulaitonal variability
              in salivary P.  This research project by two younger women researchers 
              proposes to examine the following related three hypotheses: 1) there are
              significant interpopulational differences in chronic levels of P; 2) women in
              more stressful environments have lower levels of P than women living in better
              conditions; and 3) these interpopulational differences do not translate into
              differences in fecundity and fertility.  To test these hypotheses, the
              investigators have chosen for study a traditional Quechua-speaking population
              in rural Norte de Potosi, Bolivia, who live in dispersed communities and rely
              almost exclusively upon agriculture and herding for subsistence.  They do not
              attempt to limit the number of births and venereal diseases are not common. 
              Women will be sampled longitudinally for levels of salivary P, and concurrent
              conceptions will be detected using urinary indicators of human chorionic
              gonadotropin.  Demographic information will also be collected related to
              fertility determinants.  The study is expected to help resolve the outstanding
              and much-debated issue between demographers and reproductive ecologists
              described above - specifically, whether recorded physiological indicators of
              variable ovarian function reflect differences in fecundity and fertility.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
