Title       : Role of Phosphorylation in DNA Replication and Nuclear Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9507034

Award Number: 9507034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Radhakrishnan Padmanabhan rpadmana@kumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Med Center
	      39TH & Rainbow Boulevard
	      Kansas City, KS  66103    913/588-1207

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              L  5                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     L  5   
              L  5                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    B   C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J   K    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9507034
              Padmanabhan PRIVATE    DNA tumor viruses, adenovirus in particular, have played
              a pivotal role in our current understanding of biological processes in a
              eukaryotic cell, such as replication, transcription, and translation, primarily
              due to the protein protein and protein DNA interactions involving viral and
              cellular regulatory sequences and proteins. The cell free adenovirus and SV40
              DNA replication systems have contri`uted immensely to our current understanding
              of the functions of viral and host proteins that participate in the replication
              machinery in a eukaryotic cell. Recent evidence indicate that phosphorylation
              states of adenovirus DNA polymerase (AdPol) and preterminal protein (pTP) are
              important for their interaction with the origin of DNA replication (Ori DNA).
              The major phosphorylation site of AdPol has been mapped in the vicinity of its
              bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) sequence, and by site directed
              mutagenesis, this site has been shown to be important for its replication
              initiation activity. Many nuclear proteins have potential phosphorylation sites
              in the vicinity of  their NLS. The presence of a major phosphorylation site in
              AdPol in a region proximal to its bipartite NLS could modulate the
              nucleocytoplasmic transport of AdPol and its associated proteins. Recent
              evidence suggests that the viral DNA polymerase is phosphorylated in vivo by an
              associated protein kinase of the cdc2 family. This project focuses on
              understanding of the role of phosphorylation in protein protein and protein-
              DNA interactions during DNA replication and nuclear transport. These studies
              are likely to shed light on (1) the role that phosphorylation plays in the
              protein protein and protein DNA interactions occurring during DNA replication
              and in nuclear transport of the replication proteins.  These studies are
              especially important because currently the role of phosphorylation on the
              nuclear targeting of proteins with bipartite NLS sequences is unknown. %%% DNA
              tumor viruses, adenovirus in particular, have served as excellent model systems
              for providing a clear understanding of complex biological processes in
              eukaryotic cells. Many of these processes are regulated by
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation reactions carried out by a number of protein
              kinases and phosphatases, which respond to intra  as well as extracellular
              stimuli. In this project, the role of phosphorylation of proteins involved in
              DNA replication and in their intracellular location, cytoplasm versus nucleus,
              will be studied. This project focuses on understanding of the role of
              phosphorylation in protein protein and protein DNA interactions during DNA
              replication and intracellular localization. To achieve these specific aims, the
              sites of phosphorylation of replication proteins will be identified and
              characterized using a number of biochemical and genetic experimental
              approaches. ***                                 @                              
                                                                                             
                                                      ....()()))()()                         
                                          Z   :                                              
                      phoenix      @                                                         
                           Oh     +'  0                                       $       H      
              l                                               D       h                      
                                          R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                      
                              marcia steinberg                    marcia steinberg           
              @     m  5                          @                                   @      
               5                            S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n              
                          (                                                   A              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  @    0                     
                              Microsoft Word 6.0                                             
                      2                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            e =       e               b                       U              
                                      "       "   "       "       "       "       "       L  
                  L       L       L       L       d       n       L           C   x       |  
                  |       |       |       |       |       |                                  
              #
