Title       : Biological Characterization of an Amphibian Melanization Inhibiting Factor (MIF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9507374

Award Number: 9507374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Bagnara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507374  Bagnara      The proposed research is directed toward understanding the
              cellular and molecular basis for pigmentation patterns (e.g. dorsal, ventral,
              spots, stripes, mottling, etc.) of vertebrates of all classes.  It is based
              upon the premise that local pigmentary patterns are expressed under the
              localized influence of trophic or inhibitory factors (molecules) that are found
              in the skin manifesting the circumscribed pigmentary pattern.  Thus, the common
              dorsal/ventral pattern would result from the enhanced expression of
              melanophores (-cytes) dorsally under the influence of a localized melanization
              stimulating factor (MSF) while the pale ventral surface would result from the
              inhibition of melanophore (-cyte) expression by a ventrally located
              melanization inhibiting factor (MIF).  Presumably, localized action of MSF
              leads to a localized expression of dark pigmentation while the opposite holds
              for MIF.  MIF has just been purified from leopard frog skin (Rana forreri) and
              a monoclonal antibody has been raised against it.  The monoclonal antibody
              against MIF is being used as a probe to both further purify MIF and to detect
              its localization in the skin.  In fact, MIF has been essentially purified and
              characterized biochemically.  It is Dr. Bagnara's primary objective to clone
              and sequence the gene for MIF with an eye toward comparing it with the protein
              product of the agouti gene.  The latter is responsible for the agouti
              pigmentation pattern of mammals.  In addition, he proposes to examine the
              mechanism of action of MIF on the process of melanin synthesis.  In particular,
              he wishes to test the effects of MIF on the specific enzymes responsible for
              the synthesis of the black pigment of the skin, hair, and feathers.  ***
