Title       : Molecular Organization of Mammalian Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a9507102

Award Number: 9507102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Burnett BURNETT@WISTAR.UPENN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507102  Burnett  The overall goals are to explore the principles by which
              mammalian  viruses are constructed from their constituent proteins, and to 
              develop methods for imaging very large biological structures at  high
              resolution. A major aim is to determine the complete molecular  structure of
              the adenovirus virion. In previous work, the  high resolution X ray
              crystallographic structure of trimeric hexon  (polypeptide ll), the major coat
              protein, was used to interpret  images from electron microscopy (EM) and
              develop a model of the  capsid. A three dimensional image reconstruction using
              cryo EM then  revealed the virion at 35 A resolution. As the shape of the EM 
              hexon is in excellent agreement with that seen by X rays, images  from the two
              methods could be combined to produce difference  images. These defined the
              shapes and locations of the vertex  proteins, penton base (Ill), and fiber
              (IV), and three minor  "cementing" proteins (Illa, Vl, and IX). The current
              project  continues the attack on this challenging structural problem. High 
              resolution EM data will be collected to extend the resolution of  the
              reconstruction. Novel maximum entropy refinement methods will  be used to
              improve the reconstructed image and obtain more accurate  difference images.
              The hexon positions in the capsid will be  refined and their interactions
              analyzed to understand the chemical  forces important for hexon hexon
              recognition and stability of the  virion. The adenovirus study emphasizes that
              cementing proteins are  an important new class that has received little
              previous attention.  These proteins resolve the conflicting requirements for
              weak  interactions between the components of a large macromolecular  structure
              to ensure its accurate assembly, and for the strong  bonding necessary for its
              ultimate stability. Their use in viruses  suggests that novel "anti structural"
              drugs could act by  stabilizing a virus particle to prevent uncoating, or
              destabilizing  the particle to make it vulnerable to denaturing force s in the 
              environment. The combined approach will be extended to a second  viral system,
              bacteriophage PRD1, that has an unusual internal  membrane. PRD1 shows
              remarkable similarities with adenovirus in its  capsid packing and the shape of
              the major coat protein, P3. The  crystal structure of P3 will be determined and
              correlated with the  emerging EM structure of PRD1.  %%%  The overall goals are
              to explore the principles by which mammalian  viruses are constructed from
              their constituent proteins, and to  develop methods for imaging very large
              biological structures at  high resolution. One aim is to determine the complete
              molecular  structure of the adenovirus virion. In previous work, the structure 
              of the coat protein, hexon, which was known from X ray  crystallography, was
              used to interpret electron microscopy (EM)  images and develop a model for the
              virus. This was confirmed and  extended using cryo EM and image reconstruction
              methods. The images  of hexon, obtained from X ray crystallography and electron
               microscopy, were combined to define the shapes and locations of  several other
              viral proteins, including three minor "cementing"  proteins. The current
              project continues the attack on this  challenging structural problem by
              extending the detail at which the  virus is imaged. Novel mathematical methods
              will be used to improve  the images. The interactions of the molecules in the
              virion will be  analyzed to understand the chemical forces important for its 
              stability. The adenovirus study emphasizes that cementing proteins  are an
              important new class that has received little previous  attention. These
              proteins resolve the conflicting requirements for  weak interactions between
              the components of a large macromolecular  structure to ensure its accurate
              assembly, and for the strong  bonding necessary for its ultimate stability.
              Their use in viruses  suggests that novel "anti structural" drugs could act by 
              stabilizing a virus particle to prevent uncoating, or destabilizing  the
              particle to make  it vulnerable to denaturing forces in the  environment. The
              combined approach will be extended to a second  viral system, bacteriophage
              PRD1, that has an unusual internal  membrane. PRD1 shows remarkable
              similarities with adenovirus in its  capsid packing and the shape of the major
              coat protein, P3. The  crystal structure of P3 will be determined and
              correlated with the  emerging EM structure of PRD1.  ***
