Title       : Classical and Quantum Gravitation and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9507740

Award Number: 9507740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1120875            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Allen ballen@gravity.phys.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard E. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This group will pursue a broad program of research in  gravitation and
              astrophysics.  Among the topics to be  investigated are the following:    1) 
              Aspects of quantum gravity associated with noneuclidean  topology will be
              examined.  The possible existence of  stationary states with noneuclidean
              topology will be  considered in the context of asymptotically flat spacetimes 
              and spacetimes with Kaluza-Klein symmetries.  Complementary  approaches to
              quantization will be considered.    2)  In the area of quantum fields and
              gravitation, research  includes an investigation of the effect of quantum 
              electrodynamic anomalies on the energy density of fermions  in the expanding
              universe.  Also under study are quantum  corrections to the metrics of general
              relativistic fluid  spheres, the possible loss of information and correlations 
              in black hole evaporation, and relativistic Bose-Einstein  condensation in the
              early universe.    3)  Exotic processes in the early universe, such as the 
              formation of a network of cosmic strings, and the  amplification of quantum
              fluctuations by rapid expansion,  leave behind a stochastic background of
              gravitational waves.  A detailed study will be pursued to determine the
              observable  properties of these waves, their effects on the isotropy of  the
              Cosmic Background Radiation, and their detectability by  ground-and space-based
              gravitational wave antennae.    4)  Research in general-relativistic
              astrophysics will  include the construction of a code that computes the 
              nonaxisymmetric instability points of perfect fluids.  The  nonlinear dynamical
              evolution of unstable stars will be  examined in collaboration with workers
              developing a  relativistic 3+1 code.  Other work will involve the 
              determination of an upper limit on rotation independent of  the equation of
              state.    These topics are of high interest in exploring the  fundamentals of
              modern gravitation theory, and connecting it  to possible astronomical
              observations.
