Title       : Basic Mechanisms and Evolution of Acoustic Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9507394

Award Number: 9507394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244997             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Carl Gerhardt gerhardtc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gerhardt, Carl  IBN-9507394    Title: Basic Mechanisms and Evolution of Acoustic
              Communication                                Abstract    The  main  goal  of
              gaining knowledge about basic mechanisms  and  evolution  of  acoustic 
              communication will  be  accomplished  by  studying members of the gray treefrog
              complex as a model  system.  Males  of  these  treefrogs produce a small set 
              of  stereotyped,  unlearned  signals,  and  females  base  their  choice  of 
              mates  entirely  on  these  signals.  The use  of  synthetic,  computer- 
              generated sounds in playback experiments will be used to identify  the  exact 
              acoustic  criteria extracted from  these  signals  by  females  from different
              populations throughout the range  of  the  complex.  A  major  selective factor
              that may  shape  differences  between  populations is the complexity of the
              acoustic community,  and  female selectivity will thus be compared between
              populations  where  two,  genetically incompatible members of the complex  co- 
              exist  with  populations in which only a single  species  occurs.  Further 
              experiments  will  explore  the  effects  of  increasing  acoustic  complexity 
              (background noise and number  of  competing  signalers)  on intrapopulational
              mate choice. Finally,  the  gray  treefrog  complex consists of three lineages
              of tetraploids  that  have  acoustic signals with similar acoustic structures. 
              Because  these  lineages are thought to have arisen independently  and  in  one
               generation by autopolyploidy (doubling of chromosome numbers  caused by
              environment factors), the question of how they achieved  behavioral  isolation 
              from their diploid ancestors  arises.  The  hypothesis  that  the  changes  in 
              cell  size  and  number  that  accompanies autopolyploidy have behaviorally
              important effects on  call structure, female-choice criteria, or both will be
              tested by  creating  artificial  polyploids from the  cold-shocked  eggs  of 
              diploid individuals.
