Title       : Tyrosine Kinase Coupling of Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors to Potassium
               Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9507000

Award Number: 9507000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin-Yun Huang xyhuang@med.cornell.ed  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507000  Huang    The long term goal of this project is to understand the signal
              transduction mechanisms of the muscarinc acetylcholine receptors (mAchRs)  and
              how they modulate ion channel activities.  This investigator has demonstrated
              that regulation of the activity of a delayed rectifier potassium channel (RAK)
              by  the mAchR involves activation of a tyrosine  kinase          by the G
              protein coupled to the receptor.  Tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor
              channel protein results in its suppression.  Two hypotheses will be tested in
              this proposal: whether the (( subunits of the G protein directly activate the
              pleckstrin-homology domain containing tyrosine kinases and whether the channel
              phosphorylation state is correlated with the channel subconductance state. 
              This investigator has shown that the mAchR can activate multiple families of
              tyrosine kinases.  One family, Btk/Tsk, is a new class of tyrosine kinases
              which contains the pleckstrin-homology  (PH) domain, which has been suggested
              to interact with the ((  subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins.  In this study
              the PI will see if the these subunits can activate the kinase in vitro and
              after cotransfection into cells. The region of the BtK/Tsk that binds to the G
              protein subunits will be identified. Studies will be done to determine which
              tyrosine kinases that act on the RAK channel to decrease its activity, and the
              effects of tyrosine phosphorylation on channel function will be determined. 
              %%%  These studies will provide information on how tyrosine kinases couple to
              the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and how the resultant tyrosine
              phosphorylation of the potassium channel affects it s activity.   This is an
              important signal transduction mechanism which has not been elucidated.   ***
