Title       : The Role of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling Pathway in Drosophila
               Retinal Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9507857

Award Number: 9507857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Moses   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9181,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507857  Moses  The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a cell-surface 
              protein that acts to carry signals from outside the cell into its  interior. 
              One of the molecules that binds to the EGFR, on the  outside of the cell, is
              Transforming Growth Factor-alpha  (TGF-alpha).  Such signals are then used to
              regulate cell division  and growth, and are necessary for normal development. 
              For these  reasons the EGFR, and the other steps in its pathway are the 
              objects of intense study, and much is known about the molecular  events that
              follow activation of the EGFR.  Unfortunately, little  is known of how the
              signals that act on the EGFR are regulated  (such as TGF-alpha): the genes that
              control TGF-alpha are unknown.   This is due, in large part, to the great
              expense and time needed to  do genetic experiments in vertebrate animals.  This
              research will  use the economy and power of invertebrate genetics to overcome 
              these difficulties to search for the genes that control TGF-alpha.  
              Invertebrate homologs of TGF-alpha and the EGFR function in the  development of
              the compound eye.  Some mutations in the  invertebrate EGFR affect the number
              and spacing of developing eye  facets.  Mutations in an invertebrate homolog of
              TGF-alpha (called  spitz) also affect compound eye development.  Recent data
              suggest  that spitz function is required in the founding cell of the 
              developing facet, and in the absence of spitz function, the  founding cell
              cannot induce the differentiation of its neighbors,  and facet development is
              aborted.  The immediate objectives for  this research project are to study
              early spitz mutant eye defects  by histological examination, make antibodies to
              spitz protein to  study its expression in the developing eye, make
              heat-sensitive  mutations of invertebrate EGFR, to study its activity over time
               and, finally, to search for other genes that regulate the spitz  signal.  The
              results of these studies will provide fundamental  information concerning the
              mechanisms by which extracellular   signalling molecules regulate the growth
              and development of the  nervous system.
