Title       : Worker Control of Reproduction in Multiple-queen Wasp Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9507515

Award Number: 9507515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Strassmann strassm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Queller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                         Abstract                                  Strassmann
              & Queller  IBN-9507515    Worker control of reproduction in multiple-queen wasp
               societies           The social insects provide one of the best models for 
              studying cooperative behavior in the natural world.  Kin  selection theory has
              successfully explained why a social  insect might help relatives instead of 
              trying to reproduce  alone, but a more difficult problem remains unsolved. 
              Given  that an individual decides to join a group, it should often  be selected
              to prefer being a reproductive rather than  helping.  But if this  is so, how
              is anarchy avoided, particularly in large  colonies where the queen cannot hope
              to physically dominate  all her subordinates?   The most promising hypothesis 
              appears to be collective worker control of reproduction, but  this possibility
              has not been tested very widely.          Strassmann and Queller will take
              advantage of  extensive past work on a species of social wasp,  Parachartergus
              colobopterus, to test for collective worker  control in three distinct
              contexts.  First, do workers  determine who lays the haploid male eggs?  
              Second, do  workers determine which of the numerous queens survives to  produce
              new queens?   Third, do workers determine the timing  and the identity of new
              queens?  In each case the  predictions will be derived from kin selection
              theory and  will be  tested through the analysis of videotaped behavior, 
              combined with kinship analysis based on DNA microsatellite  genotypes.         
              This research will ultimately reveal much about the  expression and resolution
              of genetic conflicts of interest.  It will also contribute to the new
              technology surrounding  microsatellite genes, methods which are important in
              many  areas, including evolutionary studies, conservation  genetics, forensics,
              and gene-mapping studies for  agricultural and medical needs.  Besides
              contributing to the  training of postdoctoral and graduate students, Strassmann
               and Queller encourage p articipation of undergraduates,  high school students,
              and teachers who take the knowledge  they gain back to the classroom.
