Title       : RUI: Control of DNA Replication and Mitotic Checkpoint Function by the
               Aspergillus nidulans nim0 Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9507485

Award Number: 9507485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. James sjames@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507485  James  The goal of this project is to define the function of the
              Aspergillus nidulans cell cycle regulator nimO. In particular, the experiments
              will address the role of nimO in controlling the initiation of DNA replication
              and in establishing the checkpoint that prevents mitosis from occurring until
              DNA has been replicated. The specific aims of the research are as follows:  I.
              nimO function will be defined through a combination of molecular and phenotypic
              analyses, with the following specific objectives:  (a) Define precisely when
              nimO function is required during the cell cycle using in vivo DNA labelling and
              double reciprocal shift experiments.  (b) Determine the consequences for cell
              growth and cell cycle progression of a disruption of the nimO gene.  (c) Map
              functional domains of the nimO gene by site-directed mutagenesis and
              overexpression of mutant nimO alleles. In particular, analyze the function of
              the novel Cys2-His2 zinc finger domain  collaboration .  (d) Characterize the
              abnormal mitotic induction of nimO18 mutants using immunocytological methods. 
              (e) Determine the temporal expression of the nimO gene during the cell cycle by
              Northern blot analysis.  II. Identify genes whose products interact with the
              nimO protein in order to mediate cell cycle control. A genetic approach will be
              used to isolate extragenic suppressors of the nimO18 mutation. Alternatively, a
              two-hybrid approach may be used to identify nimO-interacting proteins.  %%% 
              Control of the eukaryotic cell cycle, the carefully orchestrated series of
              events in which the chromosomes are replicated and then segregated into
              identical daughter nuclei, is an issue of fundamental importance in cell
              biology.The proposed molecular and genetic analyses of the nimO gene of the
              fungus Aspergillus nidulans will enhance the understanding of eukaryotic cell
              cycle regulation by characterizing functionally important regions of the
              protein and by delineating the role of this gene in cell cycle progression and
              mitotic checkpoint functi on. Given the scientific excellence of this project
              and the investigator's deep commitment to involving undergraduates in it, this
              project is an example of the type which will raise the scientific literacy of
              the population.  ***
