Title       : Recognition and Regulation of Protein Phosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9507357

Award Number: 9507357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Brautigan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               y J      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      w J    
              w J        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       ?   @   A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9507357
              Brautigan The overall goal of this research is to understand the molecular
              basis for the high affinity binding and the modulation of substrate specificity
              of type 1 protein phosphatase (PP1) by its glycogen binding regulatory subunit
              called RG. Anchor proteins bind cAMP dependent protein kinase with nanomolar
              affinity by a relatively short sequence with a helical structure. This project
              will test the hypothesis that in a similar way a helical segment in RG is the
              recognition site for PP1. Extremely well conserved among all eukaryotes, from
              yeasts to humans, PP1 has been shown to play an essential role in mitosis, as
              well as in regulating intermediary metabolism and maintaining integrity of the
              cytoskeleton. It is thought that the catalytic subunit of PP1 can carry out
              these diverse biological missions by forming distinctive heterodimers with
              regulatory subunits that, like RG, target the PP1 to intracellular locales,
              alter its substrate specificity, and become phosphorylated as a means of
              modulating these functions. The objectives of this research plan are to: 1.
              generate, express, and purify  a bacterial fusion protein containing the
              functional N terminal 40 kDa domain of RG linked to glutathione S transferase
              (GST). Show the correct folding of the recombinant protein by circular dichroic
              spectra and by limited digestion with proteases; 2. establish assays for the
              binding of PP1 catalytic subunit to this GST RG -fusion protein, and to the RG
              domain cleaved from GST after purification, using solid phase adsorption; 3.
              produce truncated versions of the RG domain as fusion proteins and analyze them
              for their ability to bind PP1. Make single amino acid substitutions in putative
              helices in the RG domain by site directed mutagenesis to precisely map the
              interaction site with PP1. These experiments will test the specific hypothesis
              that one of four putative helices in RG is the primary binding site for PP1.
              The results will provide new information by identifying the protein structures
              that bind PP1, and the portion of RG that can modify PP1 specificity,
              representing a fundamental advance in our understanding of the operation of
              this essential enzyme. The details of these protein protein interactions could
              prove valuable in designing reagents to immobilize PP1 or other enzymes used in
              manufacturing processes. Solid phase, active PP1 could be used as a way to
              detect toxins in water or other samples, because several classes of fresh water
              and marine toxins are potent inhibitors. %%% The goal of this research is to
              understand the molecular basis for the function of a regulatory subunit of
              protein phosphatase type 1 (PP1), all essential enzyme highly conserved among
              all eukaryotes. Different regulatory subunits target PP1 to specific
              intracellular sites such as glycogen, myosin, or chromosomes. This research
              will provide new fundamental information about the molecular structure of a
              protein protein interface that immobilizes an active form of an important
              regulatory enzyme. ***         @     @                         ;               
                                  Oh     +'  0                                        $      
              H       l                             S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n      
                                  (                                                   >      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    Sharon Alston               @    k   :            
                           @                                   @      i J                    
                                                                                           @ 
                 q                                     Microsoft Word 6.0                    
                                               3                                             
                                                           ;                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     e =     
               e                                                                             
               j       j   j       j       j       j       j                                 
                                                       L                                     
                                                                       &   9
