Title       : Options in a Variable Social System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1997     
File        : a9507365

Award Number: 9507365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis L. Dickinson sialia@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dickinson, Janis  IBN-9507365                              Abstract    Options
              in a variable social system    Western bluebirds, in most cases, are
              monogamous, pair for  life, and the male and female share equally in feeding 
              offspring.  However, several observations suggest that  breeding opportunities
              are limited for males.  Some males  don't breed, but instead  help feed
              nestlings at their parents' nests.  Others fill  vacancies at nests of widowed
              females and care for  young  that were presumably sired by the female's former
              mate; the  presumed benefit of this apparent altruism is the  opportunity to
              breed with the female the next time around.  Superimposed on this variation in
              the reproductive options  of males, breeding males vary in the extent to which
              they  fertilize eggs of their social mates; DNA fingerprinting has  revealed
              that over one-third of nests have at least one  offspring that is not sired by
              the caregiving male. Dr.  Dickinson will use single-locus fingerprinting
              techniques  and field experiments to discover the processes underlying 
              extrapair fertilization and to measure accurately the  fitness consequences for
              breeders, helpers, and adoptive  males.   Through large-scale genotyping of the
              population  using mini- and micro-satellite DNA fingerprinting  techniques, she
              will characterize males successful in  fertilization.    Understanding the
              unusual array of alternative reproductive  behaviors in this species will
              provide substantial insights  into the evolution of monogamy, biparental care,
              and  cooperative breeding.  Dr. Dickinson will train three  undergraduate or
              recently graduated biology majors in field  ornithology.  In the past, a high
              proportion of trainees  have gone on to other jobs in field biology or, in 
              most  cases, graduate programs in animal behavior or ornithology.  The results
              of these basic studies  are likely to yield  significant information concerning
              the population and  conservation biology of avian species.
