Title       : Vacuolar Targeting Machinery in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9507030

Award Number: 9507030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $636377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natasha V. Raikhel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9507030  Raikhel    The long-term goal of this project is to investigate the
               molecular mechanisms of protein sorting to plant vacuoles.  Three types of
              plant vacuolar sorting signals have been  identified, based on their location
              within proteins.  Signals within the propeptide regions at the C-terminus 
              (CTPPs) and N-terminus (NTPPs) have been characterized as  well as signals
              within the body of mature proteins.  Among  the different types of signals,
              there does not appear to be  a common sequence motif responsible for vacuolar
              sorting,  and a distinct receptor is implicated in the recognition of  each
              signal.  We have characterized the CTPP signals in  plant secretory proteins
              and identified specific mutations  that cause secretion of vacuolar proteins. 
              There is no  homology between different CTPPs, and various mutations and 
              deletions in CTPP are tolerated by the sorting machinery.  Although vacuolar
              sorting signals and most likely receptors  that recognize these signals are
              unique, the components  involved in vesicle transport are common among
              eukaryotic  cells.  To this end we have isolated a functional homolog of  yeast
              Pepl2p from Arabidopsis thaliana, an integral protein  thought to be involved
              in the specific recognition of  vesicles destined to the vacuole. We plan to
              characterize  the A. thaliana Pepl2p and use it as a tool to isolate other 
              components of the machinery, including the receptors that  recognize vacuolar
              sorting signals.  To compliment our  molecular and biochemical approaches we
              have isolated  several putative A. thaliana mutants with Altered Vacuolar 
              Sorting (AVS).  Based on this the following objectives are  proposed: 1)
              Completely sequence the aPEP12 cDNA clone,  raise antibodies against aPepl2p,
              and use them to determine  the subcellular location, by organellar
              fractionation and  electron microscopy.  2) Study the function of aPepl2p in 
              plant cells by transforming aPEP12 in the antisense  orientation in to A.
              thaliana plants expressing  independently barley l ectin, sporamin, or 
              phytohemagglutinin, and analyze the effect of altered levels  of aPepl2p on
              sorting of either one or all three different  soluble vacuolar proteins by
              pulse-chase labeling followed  by immunoprecipitation and organellar
              fractionation.  3)  Identify components that interact with aPepl2p by gradient 
              centrifugation and purify them by co-immunoprecipitation  using aPepl 2p
              antibodies.  Additional approaches will  include affinity chromatography or
              chemical cross-linking.  Corresponding genes will eventually be cloned.  4)
              Isolate  avs mutants of Arabidopsis.  We shall continue to screen for 
              additional mutants that secrete CTPP-containing proteins and  set up a similar
              screen to isolate mutants that secrete NTPP-  containing proteins.  Priority
              will be placed on the  isolation of transacting mutations.  5) Characterize avs
               mutants of Arabidopsis.  The mutants isolated for secretion  of CTPP
              containing proteins will be tested for secretion or  vacuolar sorting of
              NTPP-containing proteins (and vice  versa) by pulse-chase analysis and
              organellar purification.  Mutantsspecific for either the CTPP or the NTPP
              pathways  will be of particular interest because these have the  highest
              potential to identify components unique to plant  vacuolar sorting.  However,
              mutants that affect both  pathways could also help us to identify important
              common  components.  The research should provide important insights  into the
              fundamental processes of the vacuolar sorting  machinery that may be unique to
              plants or of broad  significance.  Beyond its contribution to basic knowledge, 
              this work could improve the success rate of sorting novel  gene products to
              desired parts of the cell which might lead  to crop improvement.  %%%  The
              vacuole is the site of storage of protein and sugars  within the plant cell. 
              It is also the site at which many of  these storage proteins and sugars are
              broken down.  With  regard to this latter function, the vacuole is somewhat 
              similar to the animal cell lysosome.  Over  the past five  years, there has
              been rapid progress in identifying some of  the cellular machinery by which
              material is trafficked to  the iysosome in mammalian cells and yeast.  In this
              study,  this machinery is described in plants.  The plant machinery  is
              explored starting with a plant protein involved in  vacuole traffic which can
              also work to allow traffic to the  yeast vacuole.  This protein and the protein
              and membranes  with which it interacts in the plant cell are described.  Other
              proteins and genes important in correctly targeting  proteins to plant vacuoles
              are discovered through generating  mutants defective in correct targeting of
              soluble vacuolar  proteins.  This enhances our understanding of how traffic to 
              the plant vacuole is regulated.  There are many eventual  applications of this
              work, including altering the components  of the targeting machinery in order to
              get more efficient  storage and transport of novel proteins to the plant
              vacuole  for the production of enhanced grain and seed crops.  ***
