Title       : Developmental Regulation of Ferredoxin Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  2000   
File        : a9507396

Award Number: 9507396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299861             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Thompson William_Thompson@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn F. Dickey  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507396  Thompson  This project concerns the expression of Fed-l, a nuclear gene
              encoding chloroplast ferredoxin in higher plant leaves.  Fed-l mRNA accumulates
              in response to illumination, both in dark-grown seedlings and in
              photosynthesizing leaves of green plants. However, the response mechanism in
              green leaves differs dramatically from the promoter-mediated transcriptional
              responses typical of most other plant genes. Previous work has focused on the
              response in green leaves and identified an internal light response element
              (iLRE) within the transcription unit. Sequences located both in the
              untranslated leader and in the 5' portion of the coding region are essential
              for iLRE function, and an open reading frame is required in this portion of the
              coding region. These observations support the hypothesis that light effects are
              mediated by translation-dependent changes in mRNA stability.  Such mechanisms
              are only beginning to be studied in plants, but are likely to be of
              considerable importance.  Experiments are designed to provide additional
              information about the sequence requirements for iLRE function, and to test the
              hypothesis that the Fed-l light response involves changes in mRNA transport
              and/or degradation. Components of the iLRE will be defined at the nucleotide
              level and additional nonsense codon insertions will be tested in order to
              determine whether an open reading frame must extend over the full length of the
              coding region.  Chemically inducible and repressible promoters will be used to
              determine the in vivo half life of Fed-l mRNA in the absence of inhibitors and
              to test for light effects on the kinetics of mRNA accumulation in nuclear and
              cytoplasmic compartments. Our experiments will provide a basis for future
              investigations, including a genetic analysis of mutations affecting Fed-l
              expression, and will help us reach our long term goal of defining the entire
              set of events and factors that regulate production of this important
              photosynthetic protein.  %%%  This project concerns the e xpression of Fed-l, a
              nuclear gene encoding chloroplast ferredoxin in higher plant leaves.  Fed-l
              mRNA accumulates in response to illumination, both in dark-grown seedlings and
              in photosynthesizing leaves of green plants. This research will investigate the
              hypothesis that light effects are mediated by translation-dependent changes in
              mRNA stability.  Such mechanisms are only beginning to be studied in plants,
              but are likely to be of considerable importance.  Our experiments will provide
              a basis for future investigations, including a genetic analysis of mutations
              affecting Fed-l expression, and will help us reach our long term goal of
              defining the entire set of events and factors that regulate production of this
              important photosynthetic protein.  ***
