Title       : The Economic, Social, and Political Reorganization of Late Prehistoric Pueblo
               Communities in the Silver Creek Area, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1996  
File        : a9507660

Award Number: 9507660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Mills bmills@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills and her colleagues
              will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research at sites located in
              the Silver Creek region of Arizona. Archaeologists believe that this area marks
              the location of significant and far-reaching changes during the late
              prehistoric period in the American Southwest. There is strong evidence from
              settlement pattern data to support the idea that large groups of peoples moved
              into the region between 1000 and 1400 AD. The region therefore has the
              potential to shed light on the causes and consequences of population
              reorganization, including the processes of migration, aggregation, integration
              and dispersion. Relatively little archaeological research however has been
              conducted, and Dr. Mills' work will remedy this situation. Over the course of
              two field seasons she will excavate three sites representing different time
              periods between the 11th and 14th centuries. She will collect ceramic and tree
              ring samples to refine chronology. She will examine demographic trends and note
              changes in social and economic organization. She will also compare and
              synthesize cultural and paleoenvironmental data.  The membership of small-scale
              agricultural societies throughout the world is often fluid as individuals,
              households, groups of households and even whole communities change residences.
              These moves vary in their causes, the distances moved, their permanence and
              ultimately in their effects. In some cases new residential sites are colonized
              through village fissioning and connections are maintained with the original
              villages through extension of existing social networks. In other cases,
              portions of the population are incorporated into preexisting communities and
              social, political and religious institutions established or extended to
              integrate the host and migrant populations. In both cases, changes in
              integrative mechanisms may ensue. Understanding changes in community
              organization, especially those processes relating to community integration is a
              key to understanding wider economic, social and political changes. Dr. Mills
              Silver Creek study provides an excellent opportunity to study these processes
              over an extended period of time.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will shed new light on the prehistory of the United States and
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists. Given the fluidity of
              populations in today's world, the work will increase our understanding of how
              new social entities emerge and are maintained.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
