Title       : Genetic Determinants of the Neurospora crassa Life Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9507509

Award Number: 9507509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuck Staben   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507509  Staben  The goal of this research is to determine the molecular basis
              of the mating type-specific responses in the Ascomycete fungus, Neurospora
              crassa.   The N. crassa mating type locus regulates critical aspects of fungal
              development and sexual reproduction that are widely conserved in fungi.  This
              research focuses upon the biochemical and biological functions of the mating
              type polypeptides, particularly the MT a-l polypeptide encoded by the mt a
              idiomorph of the mating type locus.  The MT a-1 polypeptide appears to be the
              only product of the mt a idiomorph essential to determine a mating type.  This
              polypeptide binds specific DNA sequences.  It is proposed that MT a-l regulates
              the transcriptional activity of the DNA segments that it binds.  In addition,
              MT a-l has separable properties essential for its vegetative incompatibility
              function.  The biochemical functions of MT a-1 in both mating and vegetative
              incompatibility are likely to be modulated after mating or after heterokaryon
              formation by interaction with A-specific products.  At least one of these
              polypeptides, MT A-3, binds to DNA fragments that also bind MT a-1 in vitro. 
              The proposed research will determine whether MT a-l directly interacts with
              products of the mt A idiomorph, whether these interactions affect DNA binding
              by MT a-l, and whether such interactions have biological consequences.  This
              research will involve molecular genetic and biochemical characterization of the
              functions of MT a-l and its interactions with other developmental regulators in
              vegetative incompatibility and mating responses.  The research will involve the
              creation of novel genetic tools including libraries of Neurospora genomic or
              cDNA suitable for yeast-based two-hybrid screens for interacting gene products.
               MT a-1 is a member of an important class of DNA binding proteins and
              developmental regulators, the HMG box proteins.  MT a-l, unlike many members of
              this family, is amenable to genetic analysis.  These studies will also yield
              valuable insi ghts into fundamental aspects of developmental biology of
              filamentous fungi like Neurospora.  %%%  The filamentous ascomycetes include
              important animal and plant pathogenic fungi.  In this project the investigator
              will study the mating system of one such fungus, Neurospora crassa.  His work
              will further our understanding of  what signals control certain mating proteins
              and how these proteins, in turn, lead to the developmental consequences of
              mating.  The insights into mating may be crucial in applied concerns such as
              control of infection as well as to understanding basic biological phenomena,
              such as how control of mating may relate to species barriers and to speciation
              mechanisms within the ascomycetes.  ***  ??
