Title       : Is Fungal Laccase Truly Necessary for Lignin Degradation?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9507331

Award Number: 9507331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl-Erik L. Eriksson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia B. Eggert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               ? 5                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        5    
                5        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       METABOLIC
              BIOCHEMISTRY              Shelley A. Graves                   Shelley A. Graves
                        @    W    e =       e                                                
                                            j       j   j       j       j       j       j    
                                                                                    1        
                                                                        z       |       |    
                |               *                   T       L                           j    
                                                                                             
                  j       j                                                                  
                  j               j               z                       ~           "   j  
                  j       j       j               z                                          
                                                                                Metabolic
              Biochemistry Panel Summary  Eriksson, Karl-Erik L. MCB-9507331  The study of
              laccase and its importance in lignin degradation was considered interesting and
              important.  Concern, however, was voiced regarding the molecular approaches. 
              Many of the experimental designs are unusual in being neither conventional nor
              straightforward.  Nevertheless, the panel recognized the need to examine the
              role of laccase in lignin degradation to complement lignin peroxidase studies. 
              The panel also supported the use of Pycnoporus cinnabarinus as an alternate
              model for these studies with potentially important roles in biodiversity and
              biochemical ecology. Form 7: This is the resubmission of a proposal to examine
              the role of the fun gal laccase enzyme in lignin degradation.  At present, most
              of the effort in basic research has been invested in study of lignin
              peroxidase, an enzyme clearly involved in the degradation.  However, lignin
              peroxidase cannot alone lead to lignin mineralization, other proteins must also
              be involved.  One may be laccase.  The proposal was strongly reviewed, but was
              given a  good  rating by Dr. S. Aust.  Discussion of this review at the panel
              meeting and from my own interpretation of this reviewer s comment suggest that
              the area of lignin is extremely competitive and more than one  camp  exists. 
              Dr. Aust seems to be in an opposing group.  Perhaps this has  confused  his
              review and led to several difficult to understand statements.  Consequently,
              Dr. Aust s review does not present a clear analysis of the research plan  and
              is not useful in judging the scientific merit of the project.  Lignin is a
              heterogeneous chemical that must be enzymatically attacked on may different
              fronts.  Laccase action may represent one avenue worth exploring.  On this
              basis, I am pleased to recommend funding this research project. Eriksson,
              Karl-Eric L. MCB-9507331  Phenoloxidases are absolutely essential for lignin
              degradation by white-rot fungi.  The known phenoloxidases functioning in the
              process are lignin peroxidase (LiP), manganese peroxidase (MnP), or laccase. 
              Phanerochaete chysosporium, the model organism for studies of the  enzyme
              mechanisms involved in lignin degradation, produces multiple forms of both LiP
              and MnP, but laccase is not used as part of this ligninolytic system.  It is
              now becoming evident that the majority of white-rot fungi operate with a
              different set of phenoloxidases, i.e., laccase in combination with either LiP
              or MnP or even all three together.  To investigate the role of laccase for
              lignin degradation Pycnoporus cinnabarinus was identified as an excellent
              organism for further study because it produced only one isoelectric form of
              laccase.  To investigate the importance of laccase, the classi cal approaches
              of reacting and identifying mutants, i.e., laccase-less (lac-) and
              peroxidase-less (per-), as well as pleiotropic (i.e., lac-per-), mutants will
              be used.  Substantial efforts will also be expended for the physico-chemical
              and spectroscopic characterization of the laccase.  Materials and procedures
              earlier enveloped in this laboratory for cloning of plant laccase genes, will
              be used to clone the genomic DNA sequence encoding the P. cinnabarinus laccase.
               This research will provide information on the role of fungal laccases in
              lignin degradation to be compared with that of the well studied P.
              chrysosporium system. %%% The oil crisis during the 1970 s turned interest
              towards the utilization of renewable resources, and towards lignocellulosics,
              in particular.  Lignocellulosic materials are a source of fiber, energy and
              liquid fuels.  However, the technologies presently used to take advantage of
              this raw material are mostly energy consuming and not always environmentally
              friendly.  Since one of nature s most important biological reactions is the
              degradation of wood and other lignocellulosic material, biotechnical methods
              for utilization of lignocellulosic materials from agriculture and forestry are
              both possible and important to develop.  Efficient ways to degrade lignin are
              particularly important in this context.  White-rot fungi are the only
              microorganisms which can degrade lignin to any extent.  To efficiently use
              these organisms for a better utilization of lignocellulosic materials requires
              an incisive knowledge of the enzyme mechanisms they utilize in the lignin
              degradation process.  The approach we will take in our proposed research will
              particularly provide information on the role of laccase, i.e., whether or not
              this is one of the necessary phenoloxidases for lignin degradation. ***        
                              ;
