Title       : Roles of a Rhizobium-induced Plant Peroxidase in Infection and Nodulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1997  
File        : a9507535

Award Number: 9507535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. VandenBosch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507535  VandenBosch  Nitrogen-fixing root nodules, which form on legume roots
              in response to infection with bacteria in the family Rhizobiaceae, are a key
              source of nitrogen available to plants in both natural and agricultural
              environments.  Because of its ecological and economic importance, this
              symbiosis has stimulated many studies into the interactions between host plant
              and symbiont.  Although key determinative events of the legume/Rhizobium
              symbiosis are likely to precede bacterial infection, no plant genes have been
              identified previously that are expressed strongly prior to infection and nodule
              morphogenesis.  We have used subtractive hybridization to enrich for plant
              genes induced during this early, pre-infection phase of the Medicago truncatula
              /Rhizobium meliloti symbiosis.  One gene so identified encodes a putative plant
              peroxidase, named MtRip1 for Rhizobium-induced peroxidase.  The timing,
              localization and manner of induction of Mtrip1 indicate that it may be of key
              importance to symbiotic establishment.  Although the role of the Rip1 protein
              during symbiotic establishment is uncertain, it is hypothesized that the enzyme
              may be required for nodule morphogenesis, and/or it may be used during arrest
              of rhizobial infection, and/or it may be a sink for hydrogen peroxide.      The
              experimental plan of this project is designed to investigate the function(s) of
              the Rhizobium-induced peroxidase using several complementary approaches.  The
              outcome of this work will allow us to address several long-standing questions
              in nodulation research, including how the plant regulates infection by its
              symbiont Rhizobium, and how Rhizobium avoids triggering a generalized defense
              response as occurs in response to plant pathogens.  More fundamentally, the
              research will advance our understanding of the functional consequences of
              changes in cell walls during development.
