Title       : Study of Prehistoric Ceramic Technology at Point of Pines, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9507599

Award Number: 9507599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23879              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria N. Zedeno mzedeno@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zedeno    With National Science Foundation support Dr. Maria Zedeno will 
              analyze a sample of archaeological ceramics from the site of  Point of Pines
              located in east-central Arizona. The site saw the  development of large
              multi-ethnic communities between ca. AD 1250  to 1400. It presents a strong
              prehistoric case for migration and  co-residence and well dated architecture
              and human remains  provide a secure background for the proposed ceramic study.
              Dr.  Zedeno will identify local ceramic traditions, nonlocal ceramics  obtained
              before migration occurred, nonlocal ceramics associated  with immigration
              episodes, local manufacture of foreign pots, and  development of hybrid
              technologies. This will be accomplished  through the application of neutron
              activation and petrographic  analyses to 20 samples of decorated and plainware
              shreds and the  reconstruction of manufacturing technology. A survey to
              identify  and sample raw material sources will also be conducted.     One goal
              of archaeologists is to trace the movement and  intermingling of different
              cultural groups and often this is  extremely difficult to do given the limited
              nature of the  archaeological record. The Point of Pines region is important 
              because data derived from a number of sources indicates that just  such
              immigration and mingling did occur. Because of its  widespread use and its
              durability, abundant pottery remains are  recovered on many sites and Dr.
              Zedeno will use the controlled  Point of Pines situation to determine how
              ceramics are affected  by these social processes. The work is important not for
              the  information it will provide about this site but because the  insight
              gained will provide a useful archaeological tool which  can be used to analyze
              ceramics in many parts of the world. The  potential impact of this research is
              extremely broad.
