Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of Choice in Avian Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9507514

Award Number: 9507514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy T. Burley ntburley@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

                  The Role of Choice in Avian
              Speciation

A question of central interest to scientists studying the process
              of evolution is how the formation of new species ("speciation") occurs.  Common
              mechanisms of speciation involve physical isolation of populations for long
              periods of time: when sufficiently isolated such that virtually no migration
              occurs between populations, populations regularly diverge in their traits.  If
              isolation continues long enough, the result is speciation.  Even occasional
              migration between populations, however, leads to gene exchange that prevents
              genetic divergence of populations from occurring, at least when the consequence
              of mi.-ration is joint reproduction of individuals derived from different
              populations. Thus, the tendency of organisms to accept as mates those
              individuals born in different populations should affect the probability and
              rate of speciation.  For organisms with good powers of dispersal, physical
              isolation between populations may occur rarely, and mate choice for members of
              one's natal population could have an important role in speciation
              processes.

This study experimentally investigates the occurrence and
              significance of mate preferences for natal population in two populations of
              longtailed finches.  The longtailed finch is a small songbird native to
              nor-them Australia; although it is a strong flier, natural populations
              occurring at short distances from one another are highly distinctive.
              Preliminary work has established that birds from one population refuse to mate
              with birds from a different population.  Additional work will determine the
              causes and functions of this preference for natal population.  Research will
              include investigation of the cues birds use to recognize birds from their own
              population; how early life experiences may modify a bird's perception of what
              constitutes "its own" population; and the role of preferences for associating
              with kin in these population preferences.

Results of these experiments will
              be relevant to several broad areas of contemporary scientific exploration in
              biology, including population biology, evolution, ecology, and animal behavior.
               Results may be useful in furthering our understanding of captive breeding of
              wild animals and management of threatened species.

