Title       : Role of Cellular Titin in Cytoskeletal Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9507003

Award Number: 9507003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Keller tkeller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB9507003  Thomas Keller III   The interaction of myosin II and actin filaments
              in cells produces force for important cell processes including cytokinesis. The
              mechanism by which myosin II is restricted to interacting with only subsets of
              actin filaments such as those in certain regions of cells or in structures such
              as stress fibers and cleavage furrows remains poorly understood. In vertebrate
              striated muscle, myosin II filaments are tethered to the sarcomere structure by
              interaction with muscle titin. Besides a structural role, muscle titins may
              also play regulatory roles in sarcomere assembly and contraction through
              activity of a kinase domain found in vertebrate muscle titins and invertebrate
              muscle minititins.   The PI's discovery of c-titin, a cellular isoform of titin
              that is colocalized with cellular myosin II in the intestinal epithelial cell
              brush border cytoskeleton and in stress fibers and cleavage furrows of other
              cells, raised the possibility that c-titin plays a role in localizing and
              organizing cellular myosin II. Additional support comes from the demonstrations
              that c-titin can organize cellular myosin II filaments into highly ordered
              arrays in vitro and that smooth muscle alpha-actinin and actin incorporate into
              the c-titin-myosin II structures to yield assemblies that resemble stress
              fibers. Assembly of the actin-myosin system depends on a direct interaction
              between a-actinin, an actin-associated protein, and c-titin, a myosin
              II-associated protein.   The objective of the research is to further
              investigate properties of c-titin that could contribute to its function. The
              first specific aim is to use purified proteins in in vitro reassembly assays to
              reinvestigate the interaction of alpha-actinin with c-titin using a cellular
              isoform of alpha-actinin for which interaction with actin is Ca2+-sensitive.
              This investigation will reveal whether the interaction between cellular
              a-actinin and c-titin also is Ca2+-sensitive thus elucidating how Ca2+ might
              regulate stability and integra tion of actin-myosin II cytoskeletal structures.
              The second specific aim is to determine whether c-titin has kinase activity
              that regulates the activity of c-titin or other proteins. The ability of
              c-titin to autophosphorylate would suggest that it has an enzymatic mechanism
              and means of activity regulation similar to those of other well-characterized
              kinases, including CaM kinase II. Several other proteins also will be tested as
              possible substrates for c-titin kinase activity, including myosin heavy and
              light chains. Demonstrating c-titin kinase activity and identifying possible
              substrates will support the possibility that c-titin plays more than a
              structural role in cytoskeletons. The third specific aim will address whether
              c-titin is a substrate for and thereby regulated by other kinases, including
              cAMP-dependent protein kinase and protein kinase C. In vitro phosphorylation by
              various kinases will be tested for effect on c-titin activity in organizing
              myosin filaments in vitro. These three biochemical characterizations should
              elucidate key properties of an important new cytoskeletal organizing component
              of cells.  %%%  Cells use the protein myosin to produce force for important
              cellular functions such as cell division. What controls the localization of
              myosin and thus where force can be produced in cells remains a mystery.
              Investigation of the activity of c-titin, a newly identified myosin associated
              protein, should elucidate key aspects of cellular regulation of myosin
              activity.  ***
