Title       : Evolution of Ureotely in Batrachoidid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9507239

Award Number: 9507239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Walsh pwalsh@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dmitri A. Maslov  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507239  Walsh    The  broad outlines of the evolution of how animals  excrete 
              their  waste nitrogen are reasonably well understood.  Fully  aquatic  animals 
              typically excrete ammonia  as  their  main  nitrogenous waste product because
              the water surrounding them  will   dilute  the  toxic  ammonia.  Terrestrial 
              and  semi-  terrestrial  animals,  in order to conserve  water,  excrete 
              nitrogenous waste products like as urea and uric  acid  that  are   less  toxic
               and  can  be  stored  safely  at   higher  concentrations.    The  production 
              of  these   less   toxic  compounds is costly, however, because of their higher
              energy  content.  In  spite  of this expense,  one  fish,  the  gulf  toadfish,
              has recently been shown to synthesize and  excrete  urea.   This   research  is
               aimed  at   understanding   the  biochemical  pathways  the fish uses  to 
              make  urea,  their  similarity  to  those  of  terrestrial  organisms,  and 
              the  genetic   basis  for  this  ability.   Field  studies   will  determine
              what advantage this ability provides in an aquatic  environment.    
              Preliminary    results    indicate     that  environmental  stress  induces the
               fish  to  make  urea.  A  variety  of biochemical, physiological, molecular
              and  field  techniques  will be used both in the laboratory and  in  the 
              fish's  natural  setting  to  identify  synthetic  pathways,  control
              mechanisms, and the functional significance of  urea  excretion.  This research
              should provide unique insight into  the  genetic  mechanisms,   physiological 
              significance  and  evolution  of an important physiological trait in vertebrate
               animals.   Ultimately, it may lead to genetic advances  that  would  enable 
              culture  of fish that make  urea  instead  of  ammonia  that  could  simplify
              high-density  aquaculture  by  reducing   the   need   to  control   ammonia  
              levels.   If  environmental  stress  is the trigger  that  initiates  urea 
              production, the abundance of the fish may make it  a  useful  bioassay for
              biologically im portant changes in coastal water  environments.
