Title       : RUI: Antioxidant Defenses of Legume Root Nodules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9507491

Award Number: 9507491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325080             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Dalton david.dalton@reed.edu                   Ext. 7473  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507491  Dalton  The proposed work deals with the relation between biological 
              nitrogen fixation and defenses against active forms of  oxygen such as hydrogen
              peroxide and superoxide.  Nitrogen-  fixing systems, such as legume root
              nodules and  cyanobacteria, are at high risk from active (partially  reduced)
              forms of oxygen due to the strong reducing  conditions required to reduce
              dinitrogen to ammonia.  A  major source of free radicals in nodules is
              leghemoglobin,  an extremely abundant protein in nodues with the unfortunate 
              tendency to autoxidize and release superoxide and hydrogen  peroxide.  Defense
              against active oxygen in legume nodules  and in some cyanobacteria is provided
              by a series of coupled  reduction-oxidation reactions involving ascorbate 
              peroxidase, monodehydroascorbate reductase, dehydroascorbate  reductase, and
              glutathione reductase.  This pathway  effectively removes hydrogen peroide from
              the cytosol.  A  major objective of this work is to determine the extent to 
              which ascorbate-glutathione pathway is essential for the  process of nitrogen
              fixation.  This will be examined by  constructing transgenic plants that are
              antisense for  ascorbate peroxidase.  Nodules of these plants will be  examined
              on molecular and physiological levels to determine  the effects of impaired
              peroxide scavenging.  In addition,  an in vitro system containing functional
              bacteroids,  leghemoglobin and the components of the ascorbate-  glutathione
              pathway will be constructed.  Criticality of  this pathway will be investigated
              by examining the  consequences of omission of various components such as 
              ascorbate, glutathione or the individual enzymes.  The role  of the
              ascorbate-glutathione pathway in cyanobacteria  cultured under various nitrogen
              and light regimes will also  be examined in hopes of developing a flexible
              prokaryotic  system for genetic manipulations.  Finally, nodule oximetry  will
              be used to investigate the role of the ascorbate-  gluthathione pathway
              vis-a-vis the variable oxygen diffusi on  barrier in antisense and wild type
              legume root nodules.  Since nitrogen fixation is oxygen-limited, an increased 
              understanding of oxygen defense processes could facilitate  long range goals of
              improving nitrogen fixation by  increasing the oxygen supply.
