Title       : Moving the Ribosome Database Project (RDP) to a DBMS Foundation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9507343

Award Number: 9507343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Olsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl R. Woese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sakti Pramanik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences are central to biology from  both the basic and
              the methodological perspectives. As the  key elements in the cellular
              translation process they are  subjects of detailed structure/function studies
              in their own  right. In addition, their evolutionary characteristics make  them
              extremely useful as tools in other areas, microbiology  in particular.
              Comparative analysis of rRNA sequences has  (i) provided the secondary
              structure of the rRNAs; (ii) led  to the inference of the universal tree of
              life--a basis for  a natural microbial classification--and the discovery of the
               Archaea, (iii) provided the basis for new and powerful  approaches to
              microbial ecology; (iv) defined targets for  much of the organism-specific
              probe development in medical  diagnosis; and (v) provided new methods for
              environmental  impact and bioremediation assessment. Such studies require 
              large amounts of the rRNA data, and these can be used  effectively only in the
              context of the appropriate database  of rRNA sequences and related data. It is
              not sufficient to  provide just the raw sequence data; many analyses require 
              that the data be organized into alignments, that there be a  phylogenetic
              overview, and that tools and (for many users)  ser vices be available for data
              handling and analysis.    In that an rRNA sequence database this useful, this 
              versatile, did not exist, the Ribosome Database Project  (RDP) has been
              established at the University of Illinois  with support from the NSF. Through
              its E-mail  (server@rdp.life.uiuc.edu), ftp (rdp.life.uiuc.edu), gopher 
              (rdpgopher.life.uiuc.edu) and World Wide Web 
              (http://rdpwww.life.uiuc.edu/index.html) servers, the RDP  offers aligned and
              phylogenetically ordered rRNA sequences  in a variety of user-selectable
              formats, as well as various  software for handling and analysis of the data. In
              addition,  services including automated sequence alignment, organism-  specific
              (or group-specific) probe design checking,  retrieval of user-selectable
              subsets o f the sequence data  and phylogenetic trees, and rRNA secondary
              structure  diagrams are provided.    The RDP currently maintains its data in
              files with formats  that are appropriate for the tools used by the RDP and by 
              the researchers served. As the volume of data increases, the  need for a more
              robust and structured system is clear. A  properly designed and implemented
              version of the RDP on a  database management system (DBMS) will: (i) ensure
              smooth  growth of the RDP; (ii) provide a uniform and efficient  interface to
              the RDP data for data accumulation, curation  and querying; and (iii)
              facilitate the addition of new modes  of access to the RDP data and services.
              The increased  structuring of the data is being carried out with an eye  toward
              linkage of the RDP's resources with other available  data, facilitating the
              creation of a federated database. In  addition to increasing the value of the
              RDP (and the data  that will be linked to it), the proposed work will explore 
              methods for efficient storage and retrieval of aligned  sequence data (the
              largest component of the RDP), and for  performing the kinds of complex queries
              that are used in  curating and exploiting these data.    Specific objectives of
              this proposal are: (i) complete a  detailed design and implementation of a
              DBMSbased version of  the RDP; (ii) provide the graphical user interfaces
              (GUIs)  necessary for the efficient curation of the data; (iii) use  the
              increased data structuring to further automate the RDP's  data updating and
              management procedures; (iv) provide all  existing user access modes through the
              DBMS implementation  (v) improve and expand the access modes and query 
              capabilities available to users of the RDP; and (v provide  the necessary
              "hooks" for integration of the RDP with other  data, initially the federation
              of microbial databases being  proposed by the Center for Microbial Ecology
              (CME) at  Michigan State University (MSU).    Given the present volume of rRNA
              sequence data l  approximately 3500 sequences) and  the estimated future level 
              (tens of thousands of sequences, or more), the RDP has  essential roles to play
              in biological, medical and  environmental research in the future. To fill these
              roles,  it is necessary to update its design without interfering  with current
              services. This proposal addresses this need.
