Title       : Molecular Analysis of the Brome Mosaic Virus RNA-dependent RNA Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1998    
File        : a9507344

Award Number: 9507344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258974             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Cheng Kao ckao@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507344  Kao  Viruses with genomes of (+)-stranded RNAs make up a diverse group
              that include economically important pathogens of animals and plants. The
              mechanism of replication of these RNA genomes is not understood well, and what
              roles host proteins play are just beginning to be determined. The overall goal
              of this research is to understand the mechanism by which the model (+)-strand
              RNA virus, brome mosaic virus (BMV), replicates its genome. Experiments will
              focus on two key areas, the identification and characterization of host factors
              involved in viral RNA replication, and the interaction of viral proteins within
              the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The anticipated results are important because
              they will elucidate fundamental aspects of viral RNA replication, including the
              role of host proteins and the interaction of viral proteins. Many, if not all,
              of these mechanistic details should prove to be common among viral pathogens
              with (+)-strand RNA genomes. Advances in our understanding of RNA replication
              will provide the basis for the development of new strategies for the inhibition
              of viral infection.  %%%  Viruses with genomes of (+)-stranded RNAs make up a
              diverse group that include economically important pathogens of animals and
              plants. The mechanism of replication of these RNA genomes is not understood
              well, and what roles host proteins play are just beginning to be determined.
              The overall goal of this research is to understand the mechanism by which the
              model (+)-strand RNA virus, brome mosaic virus (BMV), replicates its genome.
              The anticipated results are important because they will elucidate fundamental
              aspects of viral RNA replication, including the role of host proteins and the
              interaction of viral proteins. Many, if not all, of these mechanistic details
              should prove to be common among viral pathogens with (+)-strand RNA genomes.
              Advances in our understanding of RNA replication will provide the basis for the
              development of new strategies for the inhibition of viral infection.  ***
