Title       : Microtubule-Based Motors in Chromosome Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1995 
File        : a9507008

Award Number: 9507008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Saunders wsaund@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507008  Saunders    Recent results have indicated that spindle function in 
              various eukaryotes is controlled by a relative balance  between inwardly and
              outwardly-directed spindle motors.  The  outwardly-directed motors have
              recently been identified.  The experiments outlined in this proposal are
              designed to  identify the rest of the "inwardly-directed " force  generating
              proteins and to examine the function of these  motors in chromosome
              segregation.  Library induced  suppression of the kar 3 ts phenotype and the
              identification  of mutants whose spindles do not collapse are used to  identify
              novel members of this group.  Mutational analysis  and genetic combinations are
              used to determine if these  newly identified motors act antagonistically to the
              known  outwardly-directed motors.  New mutants of inwardly-directed  motors
              will be combined with a kar3 disruption allele to  determine the "synthetic"
              phenotype of loss-of-function of  all members of this group of mitotic motors. 
              The goal of  these mutational analysis experiments will be to determine  the
              functional role of these inwardly-directed motors.  The  suggested role of
              these proteins as kinetochore motors an/or  inhibitors of spindle elongation is
              investigated by  examination of the effect of loss-of-function on chromosome 
              segregation and the timing and rate of spindle elongation.  For this analysis
              both traditional fixed cell  immunocytochemistry and newly-developing real-time
              analysis  of live cells with chromatin and green fluorescent protein-  labeled
              tubulin staining is used.  %%%  All organisms are composed of microscopic
              components called  cells, analogous to the bricks in a brick building.  When 
              the organism grows, or following injury, the mass of  organism in most cases is
              increased not by expansion of the  size of existing cells, but by creation of
              new cells.  New  cells are created by division of existing cells.  The newly 
              dividing cells can grow in size until a second round of  division can occur
              creating four cells where  one existed  originally.  In many unicellular
              organisms this process will  continue indefinitely until limited by
              availability of  nutrients and space.  In larger multicellular organisms this 
              process is carefully controlled to prevent the excess  proliferation associated
              with cancer and other growth  abnormalities.  When cells divide, it is
              necessary that each  daughter cell contain all the components required for 
              survival.  Many of the cell components are apparently  randomly partitioned,
              but some of the components are unique  and both of the daughter cells requires
              a certain number of  each type.  The most well-known example of these unique 
              components are the chromosomes.  Each chromosome contains  the information to
              produce proteins, the building blocks of  the cell.  The amount of each protein
              made is generally  proportional to the number of chromosomes present. 
              Therefore it is critical to that organism that the cells get  the right number
              of each type of chromosome.  To achieve  this, eukaryotic (non-bacterial) cells
              utilize a complex and  transitory structure called the spindle.  The spindle is
               made of fibers that assemble during cell division.   The  chromosomes attach
              to the spindle fibers and are moved to  the daughter cells at division in an
              exquisitely timed and  orchestrated process.  Recently, this laboratory and
              others  have identified small molecular motors that act within the  cell to
              separate the chromosomes to the daughter cells.  The  motors are related to
              other motors discovered previously to  move other cellular components.  Three
              different types of  motors were identified that can separate the chromosomes, 
              and each can perform the task fairly well by itself.  Surprisingly, a second
              type of motor was identified that  acts in an opposite manner to pull
              chromosomes together.  The role of this motor is unknown but it may act to
              delay  the activity of the chromosome separating motors until the  appropriate
              time for cell division. This project identifies  and examines thes e motors
              which pull the chromosomes  together.  When all of the motors are identified,
              then their  precise role in cell division is determined.  This is done  by
              inactivating the motors and asking what the cell is  unable to do. 
              Specifically, spindle assembly and stability  and chromosome separation are
              carefully scrutinized.  If the  cell is unable to perform these function or
              performs in an  abnormal manner, it will suggest when and where the motors 
              work.  Understanding the timing and activity of these motors  allows a basic
              understanding of how the cell divides.  ***
