Title       : Research in Classical and Quantum Gravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1999   
File        : a9507065

Award Number: 9507065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $943696             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Hartle hartle@cosmic.physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary T. Horowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Semiclassical quantum gravity is a bridge between the  classical theory of
              Einstein and a full quantum theory of  gravity whose exact nature is not yet
              known.  It therefore  applies to phenomena that are both close to the classical
               theory of gravity, but have implications for the search for  a quantum theory
              of gravity.  Several investigations into  semiclassical quantum gravity will be
              carried out.  These  include an investigation into the pair production of
              charged  black holes.  Investigations into the nature of the full  theory of
              quantum gravity will also be carried out.  A  problem of particular importance
              is the status in quantum  gravity of the singularities which limit the
              predictive  power of the classical theory.  This will be investigated  using
              the techniques of string theory.  The objective is to  establish whether
              singularities are smoothed out or removed  at this fundamental level.    A
              central issue of modern cosmology is the problem of  providing a theory of the
              initial condition of the universe  which will make testable predictions for
              observations today.  Since gravitation is the dominant force governing the 
              structure of the universe on the largest scales of space and  time, and since
              the early universe is likely to be quantum  mechanical in an essential way, the
              search for this initial  condition is carried out in that branch of quantum
              gravity  called quantum cosmology.  A broad based research program  will be
              carried out into the nature of this initial  condition, the generalizations of
              quantum mechanics which  may be needed for its interpretation, and the models
              which  allow for comparison of its predictions with observations.  The
              objective of this research is to encapsulate the  simplicity of the early
              universe as revealed by observation,  together with the features which arise
              out of this  simplicity, in one physical law.
