Title       : Transient EPR Spectroscopy and Mechanical Transients in Muscle Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9507477

Award Number: 9507477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr G. Fajer fajer@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The muscle is a prototype of a biological engine; the burning of its chemical
              fuel, ATP, results in the generation of the mechanical force.  How this happens
              is not very well understood.  It is known that molecules involved (myosin and
              actin) form long inter-digitating filaments (similar to overlapping combs)
              which are bridged by the portion of the myosin molecule.  According to a
              popular model, the bridge between the filaments burns ATP which causes pivoting
              rotation of the bridge, thus creating the strain between the filaments.  The
              strain can be relieved by the sliding of the filaments with respect to each
              other shortening the muscle length.  However, the evidence for such a pivoting
              of the bridge is missing.  Dr. Fajer proposes to use electron paramagnetic
              resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, a technique sensitive to the orientational and
              dynamic chanees of the molecules.  Since the muscle does not have an EPR
              signal, Dr. Fajer intends to bind a paramagnetic probe to the bridge portion of
              the myosin which does not perturb muscle function but will report specifically
              the behavior of the bridge.  He will stimulate muscle to produce force and the
              same time record orientational and dynamic changes of the bridge.  Such an
              approach will directly correlate the structural changes and the function of
              muscle.
