Title       : Protein Phosphorylation as a Biophysical Switch: NMR Determination of Structural
               and Dynamic Responses to Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1995    
File        : a9507144

Award Number: 9507144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Nicholson lkn2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the biophysical basis of protein regulation by
              reversible phosphorylation.  High resolution multidimensional nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) techniques will be employed to elucidate the structural and
              dynamic aspects of protein phosphorylation in a model system.  Two protein
              fragments derived from chicken c-Src (Src) that contain key regulatory domains
              will be studied to investigate the biophysical mechanisms responsible for
              control in this  system.  Determination of the structure and dynamics of the
              first fragment, composed of the Src- homology 3 (SH3) and Src-homology 2 (SH2)
              domains, will serve a dual purpose: a) it will provide a foundation on which to
              build more adva nced studies of larger fragments of Src, and b) it will
              enableidentification of intramolecular interactions that may contribute to the
              recently established role of the SH3 domain in stabilizing SH2/phosphopeptide
              interactions. The second and larger fragment, which has an additional 80
              residues that comprise the unique N-terminal region of Src, will be utilized to
              investigate the structural and dynamic response of the protein to
              phosphorylation. This fragment contains specific phosphorylation sites that are
              known to regulate the tyrosine kinase activity of Src.  The structure and
              dynamics of this protein fragment in phosphorylated and unphosphorylated states
              will be pursued using the now-standard multidimensional techniques.  These
              studies will reveal interactions that are disrupted and those that are formed
              by phosphorylation, and will provide an atomic level view of the changes
              induced in these common regulatory modules by this important covalent
              modification.  %%%   Protein phosphorylation is known to be involved in the
              control of a diverse array of biological processes, including metabolism, cell
              proliferation and differentiation, membrane transport, gene expression,
              locomotion, memory, and learning.  However, the biophysical basis of regulation
              by phosphorylation is clearly established for only two proteins, both of which
              exhibit different mechanisms of control.  Hence, high resolution structure
              determinations of a model system in phosphorylated and unphosphorylated states
              will provide much needed information that will aid in understanding of the
              atomic level events responsible for this ubiquitous protein regulatory switch.
              Relatively small, conserved protein domains, typified by the Src-homology 2
              (SH2) and Src-homology 3 (SH3) domains, are found in a large number of
              signaling proteins and have been shown to function as modular binding domains
              that can mediate both inter-and intramolecular interactions.  The Src protein,
              a cellular proto-oncoprotein and a paradigm protein-tyrosine kinase, con tains
              both SH3 and SH2 domains as well as several different regulatory
              phosphorylation sites.  In Src, SH2 interactions have been shown to be mediated
              by nearby SH3 domains and by phosphorylation of specific Ser and The residues
              remotely located in the primary sequence.  The proposed research involves
              structural and dynamics studies of the Src regulatory apparatus in
              phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms, and will employ recently developed
              high resolution multidimensional NMR spectroscopic techniques.  Overall, these
              studies will enable relationships between structure, dynamics and function in a
              protein regulated by phosphoylation to be established, and will have broad
              implications for numerous other proteins that utilize phosphorylation as a
              biophysical switch.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
