Title       : Mechanisms of Fungal Pathogenesis: Analysis of a Meiotically Unstable,
               Dispensable Chromosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9507263

Award Number: 9507263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah F. Covert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507263  Covert  Certain isolates of Nectria haematococca, a fungal pathogen of
              plants, contain a chromosome that is often rearranged, partially deleted or
              completely lost during meiosis. Changes in the structure of the chromosome can
              be visualized, and the sizes of the resulting chromosome derivatives measured
              on pulsed field gels. The pattern of chromosomal alterations suggests that this
              chromosome contains sites that are particularly susceptible to breakage and
              reunion. The first goal of this proposal is to determine if this chromosome
              contains hotspots for meiotic breakage and reunion, and if so, to map the
              position of these sites on the chromosome. The unstable chromosome in N.
              haematococca is of further interest because it contains a gene, Makl, believed
              to be essential for pathogenicity on chickpea. The product of Makl detoxifies
              an antimicrobial compound produced by chickpea in response to infection.
              Genetic analysis of Makl indicated that it is either linked to genes for, or is
              itself responsible for high virulence on chickpea. Makl has been cloned and
              sequenced. The second goal of this research proposal is to directly test the
              importance of Makl in pathogenicity by disrupting it and assaying the resulting
              mutants for their ability to cause disease symptoms on chickpea. If the gene
              disruption experiment indicates that Makl is not essential for high virulence
              on chickpea, it will imply that additional genes involved in chickpea
              pathogenicity are on the same chromosome as Makl. In this case, the third goal
              of this proposal, mapping novel genes for chickpea pathogenicity on the 1.6 Meg
              abase Makl chromosome, will be pursued.  %%%  This research proposal focuses on
              a fungal pathogen of plants, Nectria haematococca. Two aspects of N.
              haematococca's biology are particularly interesting: (1) it has an unusual
              chromosome that is unstable during meiosis as well as dispensable for
              saprophytic growth, and (2) according to genetic evidence, genes on this
              chromosome are responsible for high virulenc e of N. haematococca on chickpea
              (Cicer arietinum). Because the unstable chromosome is present in field
              populations, it appears to confer a significant adaptive advantage to the
              isolates that contain it. Its instability may be a mechanism for shedding it in
              habitats in which it is extraneous. This research into chromosomal instability
              and plant pathogenicity will contribute to scientific knowledge on a number of
              fronts. The role of unstable, dispensable chromosomes in fungal-plant
              interactions will be clarified, the genetic machinery underlying pathogenicity
              in a model fungus will be characterized further, and perhaps most
              significantly, scholarship on the general mechanisms of chromosome instability
              will be advanced.  ***
