Title       : Ecological Significance of Individual Variation in Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9507529

Award Number: 9507529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry B. John-Alder henry@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9507488  Dumont      The  organization  of  enamel in mammalian  teeth  can 
              vary  between   simple   parallel   arrangement   of   crystallite 
              (nonprismatic    enamel)    to   complicated    non-parallel  arrangements
              (prismatic enamel).  Prismatic enamel increases  the  strength  of  the tooth,
              but we know relatively  little  about the function of non-prismatic enamel.  In
              humans, non-  prismatic enamel is more resistant to erosive destruction by 
              dietary  acids  and  sugar by-products  than  is  underlying  prismatic 
              enamel. This research examines  tooth  structure,  diet diversity, and salivary
              chemistry in an array of mammal  species.   It  will  test  the hypothesis 
              that  exaggerated  superficial  layers  of nonprismatic tooth  are  adaptations
               that  permit  dietary  emphases on  acidic  or  sugary  food  sources.  For
              each species, food hardness, sugar content and  acidity  of  natural  diets 
              are  measured,  together   with  salivary  pH  and  buffering capacity.   The 
              proportion  of  nonprismatic  enamel  in  molar  teeth  is  measured   using 
              scanning electron microscopy.  Mammals with high proportions  of  nonprismatic
              enamel are predicted to consume foods  that  are  more  sugary, acidic, and
              softer than  those  eaten  by  species  that exhibit relatively little
              nonprismatic enamel.  Salivary  pH  and  buffering capacity are  predicted  to 
              be  relatively   lower   among  species   that   exhibit   large  proportions
              of nonprismatic enamel. This study will  provide  evidence   of   the  
              interactions  between   tooth   enamel  morphology, oral physiology and feeding
              behavior that  limit  the diversity of foods that mammals select.  It will lead
              to  better  understanding of the relationships between  anatomy,  physiology 
              and behavior that influence the  ways  in  which  animals share food plant
              resources.  It will provide insight  into  the  diets  of extinct or poorly
              known  species.   The  results of this study may also yield insights into the 
              role  of human nonprismatic e namel in resisting dental erosion and  the
              initiation of tooth decay.
