Title       : The Evolution of Primate Enamel Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9507674

Award Number: 9507674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54649              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Maas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The teeth of primates, both living and fossil, represent the most complete
              evidence of the  evolution, ecology, life history, and taxonomy of this
              important group.  The microscopic structure  of tooth enamel, a previously
              neglected aspect of tooth morphology, holds great promise for  increasing our
              understanding of primate dental function and phylogenetic relationships.  This 
              research will document enamel variation in a broad taxonomic sample of living
              and fossil  primates, and use these data to test specific functional hypotheses
              and to assess the  phylogenetic utility of enamel characters.  It represents an
              important step forward in the  comprehensive study of these rare biological and
              fossil specimens.  The research design consists of two components: 1) analysis
              of intraspecific and interspecific  variation in enamel in a broad sample of
              living primates and 2) analysis of enamel evolution,  based on comprehensive
              sampling of molar tooth enamel of fossil primates.  Analyses will be  based on
              scanning electron microscopy of histological specimens of mature enamel.  The 
              objectives of the study are:  1) To test the hypothesis that differences in
              occlusal enamel among  functionally distinct areas of molar teeth are linked to
              differential resistance to wear.  2) To test  the hypothesis of linkage between
              some enamel features and body size. 3) To test hypotheses of  functional
              constraints on enamel structure among developmentally and functionally distinct
              parts  of the dentition (e.g., incisors, canines, premolars, molars). 4) To
              explore the links between  enamel structure and diet using comparative study of
              closely related primates that differ in diet,  and statistical methods of
              matrix correlation analysis.  5) To assess the phyletic utility of enamel 
              characters among living primates, and, using phylogenetically reliable enamel
              characters, to test  hypotheses of relationships among fossil primates.  This
              research will be the most comprehensive study of primate enamel structure to
              date.  By  study of mechanically important enamel characters it will contribute
              to a broader understanding of  dental function and evolution in Primates. 
              Moreover, it will go a long way towards establishing  how enamel structure can
              and cannot be used to resolve questions of phylogeny and  systematics.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
