Title       : 1995 Molecular Genetics of Phage Conference, Cold Spring Harbor, NY August
               22-27, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1995     
File        : a9507079

Award Number: 9507079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507079  Grodzicker  The meeting on the Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phage
              is a central forum for the presentation of new results in the general area of
              prokaryotic molecular biology and genetics.  Some 300 participants,
              representing more than 200 laboratories (both in the United States and abroad)
              attend; the vast majority present either short talks or posters.  It is an
              important venue for the cross fertilization of the discipline; it is also, for
              many graduate students and postdoctoral fellow, the firs large meeting at which
              they have an opportunity to speak.  The abstracts cover a wide range and
              include fundamental work on transcription, recombination, DNA synthesis,
              translation, pathogenesis, and other areas.  Although the specific subjects are
              wide ranging, the commonality of approaches means that new conceptual and
              technical advances rapidly become disseminated through the attending
              laboratories.  The 1995 meeting is special in that it includes a session
              dealing with the E. coli genome project.  This will be the perfect venue for a
              summary report of the genome sequencing projects and analyses of how the
              sequence information can be used in genome structure/function studies.  More
              importantly, this meeting will provide an ideal opportunity to stimulate the
              use of this information by the relevant scientific community.  The meeting will
              also include a session in which some of the scientist who founded the field of
              molecular biology will discuss the intellectual roots of the field in the
              context of the then available technology.  %%%  The field of biotechnology is
              founded on research with bacteria and their viruses.  The Cold Spring Harbor
              Laboratory has been the principal location where the latest information on
              bacterial genetics is disseminated.  This meeting will provide a summary of
              where the field has come from as well as the latest progress in microbial
              genetics.  ***
