Title       : Dietary Tracing of Amino Acids in Bone Collagen by Stable Isotope Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9507662

Award Number: 9507662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaas J. van der Merwe vanderme@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. M. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              van der Merwe    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Nikolaas van der 
              Merwe will analyze bone, muscle and hair tissue from pigs which  have been
              raised on 14 different controlled diets. These  materials will be obtained from
              animals raised at the USDA  Agricultural Research Service in Beltsville
              Maryland and Dr. van  der Merwe will analyze the carbon and nitrogen isotopic
              ratios in  amino acids in both dietary items and pig tissue. The goal of the 
              research is to study biochemical routing from dietary components  to consumer
              tissues at the amino acid level. The diets are  designed to identify the
              dietary components used in the synthesis  of pig protein tissues, particularly
              where more than one protein  source (animal and/or plant) is available. Dietary
              items have  been chosen for their characteristic stable carbon isotope 
              characteristics, depending on whether the plant foods have a C3  or C4
              photosynthesis or the animal proteins are derived from such  plants. The food
              items and pig tissues will be separated into  constituent amino acids and their
              isotope ratios measured to  model the relevant biochemical pathways.    The
              long-term goal of the study is to reconstruct past human  diets through the
              isotopic analysis of archaeological human  skeletons. This procedure has been
              in use for more than fifteen  years and has had a major impact on the
              understanding of past  human subsistence and processes. However contradictions
              between  isotope data and other evidence suggest that the relationship  between
              the dietary importance of a food and the isotopic signal  in consumer bone
              tissue is not linear. It appears for example  that protein dominates in the
              construction of consumer collagen,  while bone carbonate averages the carbon
              from the total diet. The  work on pigs will help to refine this biochemical
              model and allow  improved  application to archaeological materials.    This
              research is significant for a number of reasons. It will  help to refine a
              technique which is widely used in archaeo logical  research and which has
              potentially wide application in  nutritional and metabolic studies as well. The
              work will increase  our understanding of how past populations made use of their
               environment.
