Title       : Chemical Ecology of Jasmonates as Signals for an Inducible Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9507180

Award Number: 9507180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian T. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507180  Baldwin  Leaf damage by herbivores in Nicotiana sylvestris 
              (Solanaceae) produces a damage signal which dramatically  increases de novo
              nicotine synthesis in the roots.  The  increased synthesis leads to increases
              in whole-plant  nicotine pools, which in turn make plants more resistant to 
              further herbivore attack.  Because signal production and the  response to the
              signal occur in widely separated tissues,  this whole-plant induced defense
              represents an ideal system  in which to study the signal transduction cascade
              and how  the biotic and abiotic environment influence this induced  defense. 
              It has been demonstrated that the damage signal  has the characteristics of a
              slow-moving phloem-transported  chemical cue and that jasmonic acid (JA), an
              octadecanoid-  derived cyclopentanone, is an important component of the  damage
              signal transduction pathway in this induced defense.  In this project Dr.
              Baldwin will critically examine the  hypothesis that wounding increases shoot
              JA pools which  either directly through transport or indirectly through a 
              systemin-like signal increase root JA pools, which, in turn  stimulate root
              nicotine synthesis and increase whole-plant  nicotine pools.  To achieve this
              objective Dr. Baldwin will  determine the chirality of the induced jasmonate
              pools in  shoot and roots, examine the plant's nicotine responses to 
              intermediates in the octadecanoid pathway and synthesize  jasmonates in the
              native stereoconfigurations.  By  understanding the processes responsible for
              signal  generation and transport it may be possible to understand  how
              herbivores consume plants "stealthily" and apparently  lessen the induced
              defenses activated by their feeding.
