Title       : Research on Quantum Fluctuation Phenomena and Gravitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9507351

Award Number: 9507351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Ford lford@pearl.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will involve theoretical research on various  aspects of quantum
              field theory and its relationship to  gravitational theory and cosmology.  The
              research will  especially focus upon issues relating to quantum  fluctuations,
              either in gravitational systems or in other  contexts (such as boundary
              effects) which are analogous to  gravity.  One line of investigation will study
              the vacuum  fluctuations of the electromagnetic field in flat spacetime.  New
              physical effects which may be testable by experiment  will be sought.  A
              closely related line of investigation  will study the effects of fluctuations
              of the gravitational  field itself.    When quantum matter fields act as the
              source of the  gravitational field, there will often be large fluctuations  in
              the energy density and pressure of the source which will  translate into large
              fluctuations in the gravitational  field.  The effects of these fluctuations
              will be  investigated.  There are also fluctuations due to the  quantum nature
              of the gravitational field itself.  These  will be studied in the context of a
              model where a background  bath of gravitons causes the lightcone to be slightly
               smeared out.  This smearing may produce effects upon other  quantum fields
              which will lead to insights about the quantum  nature of gravity and possibly
              even observable effects.  In  the latter case, one would also gain important
              information  about the origin and evolution of the universe through the 
              background of relic gravitons.
