Title       : T-DNA Export From Agrobacterium to Plant Cells: Biochemical,Cell Biological and
               Genetic Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9507782

Award Number: 9507782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia C. Zambryski zambrysk@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507782  Zambryski  The Agrobacterium Ti plasmid virulence (vir) and T-DNA
              regions are the major players in plant cell transformation.  Following
              activation of vir gene expression, Agrobacterium synthesizes a single stranded
              (ss) copy of the T-DNA region, the T-strand.  This T-strand then travels
              through several barriers, the bacterial inner and outer membranes and wall, the
              plant cell membrane and wall, and the plant nuclear membrane.  To protect and
              facilitate its travels, the T-strand  is proposed to travel as a ssDNA-protein
              complex, the T-complex.  VirD2 protein binds to the 5' end of the T-strand, and
              the non-sequence specific ssDNA binding protein, VirE2, coats the T-strand
              along, its length to produce an unfolded and thin structure.  The protein
              components of the T-complex likely serve as a source of amino acid sequences
              that act as signals for specific subcellular localization during T-strand
              transport.  In support of this, VirD2 and VirE2 proteins have been established
              to contain consensus type bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS)
              sequences, that cause their efficient nuclear uptake.      The proposal has
              four aims: 1) to directly demonstrate nuclear uptake of single stranded DNA
              complexes mediated by VirD2 and VirE2; 2) to develope an in vitro assay to
              monitor T-strand integration into plant nuclear DNA;  3) to investigate the
              structure and function of the VirB membrane complex, proposed to form a channel
              for T-complex export from the bacterial cell; and , 4) to identify plant cell
              components involved in Agrobacterium infection. The results will provide
              information critical to understand why Agrobacterium is reluctant to transform
              the important monocotyledonous crop plants, and will determine effective
              modified strategies for their transformation.
