Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Mechanisms of Low Temperature Tolerance in Chaparral
               Shrubs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9507532

Award Number: 9507532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507532    Chaparral vegetation in southern California neighbors one of  the 
              largest  metropolitan areas in the  United  States  and  occupies  invaluable
              watershed land.  Chaparral deters  soil  erosion,  maintains  slope stability,
              furnishes  browse  and  cover  for wildlife, and provides aesthetic and
              recreational  value.   While  research  has  previously  focused  on   the 
              response  of  chaparral to fire and water stress,  there  is  growing  evidence
               that  low  temperature  tolerance  is  an  important  factor  underlying 
              chaparral  distribution   and  abundance.  Based on frequency, subzero
              temperature episodes  may  be  as important to chaparral communities as fires 
              and  drought.   Loss in productivity, injury, and in  some  cases  death  of 
              native  plants has been observed  after  freezing  events.   Seedlings  may be
              particularly vulnerable  as  the  reduction  of  plant  cover after fire can 
              expose  them  to  potentially   lethal  radiation  freezes  at  night.    This 
              research will examine the hypotheqes that seedlings are more  vulnerable to low
              temperature damage than adults,  freezing-  induced embolism (air blockage) of
              the stem xylem (wood) can  cause  shoot  death,  and  the  amount  of 
              freezing-induced  embolism is related to both wood structure and rate of thaw. 
              The  combination of a steep gradient in minimum temperatures  from  the coast
              inland and recently burned sites in southern  California  provide an excellent
              model system.  The  results  will  have  implications for land use  management,
               such  as  mitigation of fire-burned areas in southern California;  for 
              revegetation  projects;  and  for  the  use  of  temperature  sensitive species
              of chaparral as climate indicators.
