Title       : Information Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9507418

Award Number: 9507418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Tomasello   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory Univ Yerkes Reg Pri
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                  NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY                                  IBN
              95-07418    PI: Tomasello                          Information Transfer        
                                            In nature, different groups of chimpanzees behave
               differently, leading to what some have called "cultural  traditions." 
              Tomasello's research will investigate the  social processes of information
              transfer that underlie these  traditions.  In the domain of  tool use, one
              individual from  each of two social groups will be removed and taught a 
              different way to use the same tool to crack nuts.  Each  trained animal will
              then be returned to its group, and  opportunities for the group to observe the
              "trainee" and to  use the tool themselves will be provided.  The subsequent 
              pattern of tool use in the two groups will then be compared  to see if the
              different models of tool use made a  difference.  In the area of gestural
              communication, the  gestural signals of a group of chimpanzees at the Yerkes 
              Field Station will be documented.  As this is the same group  that has been
              studied previously, longitudinal comparisons  of gestural signals among the
              groups will be possible.  This  will provide experimental data on how the
              gestures are  learned socially.  Concerning cooperation, pairs of  chimpanzees
              will be presented with tasks in which  cooperation is required.  This will
              permit observations of  how the animals communicate about the task or otherwise
               transmit information so as to coordinate their actions.  Determining precisely
              how chimpanzees transfer information  socially in these three behavioral
              domains is important  because it will help to elucidate the nature of the 
              mechanisms by means of which this species takes advantage of  the knowledge of
              groupmates.
