Title       : The Democratic Parliaments of Central Europe: Collection and Dissemination of
               Documents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9507486

Award Number: 9507486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Olson dmolson@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice D. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Crowther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,5915,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507486  Olson    With partial funding from the National Science Foundation, the
               University of North Carolina, Greensboro, will establish a  Central European
              Parliamentary Documents Center that will work  with institutional counterparts
              and legislative scholars in  eleven countries of Central and Eastern Europe to
              create a  repository of archival materials issued by the newly democratized 
              parliaments of these countries.  This effort will be headed by  Dr. David Olson
              along with co-investigators, Dr. William Crowther  and Dr. Maurice Simon.  The
              rationale for creating this Center is  based on the premise that: 1) Such
              parliaments can serve as  valuable cases for studying cross-national processes
              of  democratization and 2) the essential documentary records of these 
              institutions are resources that otherwise may not be preserved,  even by the
              parliaments that publish them.    The Greensboro Center's total collection will
              be made available  for future use by researchers and scholars interested in the
               post-Communist era of legislative institution building in Central  and Eastern
              Europe.  The materials to be collected at the Center  feature membership
              directories, sessional statistical reports,  roll call reports, election
              statistical reports, and related  private publications and newspaper articles. 
              By drawing upon  well established contacts in each country, the Center will 
              continue its collection and archiving of new working documents as  they are
              issued.  Overall, the Center's collection is expected to  serve as a key
              national resource for research on newly  democratized parliaments, their
              institutionalization, and other  relevant aspects of the transition processes
              they affect.    Creation of this repository for archival data at the University
               of North Carolina, Greensboro, complements the program objective  of advancing
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in  the United States and
              Eastern Europe to combine talents and pool  research resources in area of
              strong mutual interest a nd  competence.   ***
