Title       : Early Events in Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9507280

Award Number: 9507280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony L. Fink enzyme@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507280  Fink  The goal of this research is to measure the rate at which an
              unfolded protein becomes compact, when placed under native conditions, and by
              comparison with the rates of secondary and tertiary structure formation, to
              develop a more complete picture of the folding process.  Protein folding is
              currently believed to be a process in which the unfolded protein initially
              collapses rapidly to a species with unstable secondary structure, followed by
              transformation into intermediates with stable secondary structure and
              ultimately the tightly-packed native state.  The specific questions we plan to
              answer are:  How fast does the unfolded protein initially become compact, and
              how does the compactness change as folding progresses from the initial
              intermediates to the native state?  We will measure the rate at which an
              unfolded protein becomes compact during the refolding process using two
              techniques:  small-angle x-ray scattering and fluorescence energy transfer;
              these are among the few techniques available for the measurement of the size of
              proteins in solution.  Recent technical improvements in small-angle X-ray
              scattering instrumentatimn have now made it feasible to carry out the proposed
              experiments.  The proteins to be investigated initially are cytochrome c,
              staphylococcal nuclease and DnaK.  Clearly, knowledge of the rate at which the
              protein collapses is very important and will help distinguish competing models
              for folding, and should significantly increase our understanding of the process
              of protein folding and thus benefit many fields involving proteins.  %%%  The
              question of now proteins fold into their native three-dimensional structures is
              an important one from may perspectives.  This research is aimed at answering
              one aspect  of the overall protein folding problem, namely, how fast does the
              protein become compact, and how does the rate of collapse compare to the other
              structural events occurring?  We propose to use small-angle X-ray scattering
              and fluorescence energy transfer to mo nitor the size of a folding protein as a
              function of time using stopped-flow rapid mixing.     Small-angle X-ray
              scattering provides information about the overall size and shape of the
              molecule; in particular, we will use mostly the radius of gyration to monitor
              the size changes.  The fluorescence energy transfer will involve donor and
              acceptor groups in distant regions of the protein sequence, so that in the
              unfolded sate they are far apart and little energy transfer occurs, whereas as
              the molecule becomes more compact during folding, they become closer together
              and the fluorescence energy transfer efficiency increases.  The proteins to be
              investigated initially are cytochrome c, staphylococcal nuclease and DnaK.  ***
