Title       : Plastid RNA Polymerase Sigma Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9507329

Award Number: 9507329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Troxler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507329  Troxler  RNA polymerase is a key component of the transcriptional
              apparatus in plastids and is responsible for expression of about 130 genes for 
              rRNAs, tRNAs and proteins required for transcription, translation and
              photosynthesis.  Genes for 4 RNA polymerase subunits have significant homology
              to genes coding for the core subunits of RNA polymerase in bacteria.  Plastid
              genomes do not contain genes for proteins with recognizable homology to RNA
              polymerase sigma factors in bacteria.  This is surprising because many plastid
              genes contain promoter-like elements that resemble the -10 (TATAAT) and -35
              (TTGACA) consensus promoters in genes recognized by sigma 70 -type sigma
              factors I RNA polymerase holoenzymes from bacteria.  Lack of knowledge of sigma
              factor components in plastid RNA polymerase is a major gap in understanding how
              plastids recognize their genes.  The investigator has isolate the gene for a
              sigma factor from the unicellular rhodophyte, Cyanidium caldarium,  by
              screening a genomic sublibrary with a degenerate oligonucleotide coding for a
              highly conserved region called the "rpoD box" in sigma 70 of Escherichia coli
              and sigma 43 of Bacillus subtilis.  The deduced amino acid sequence of the
              putative sigma factor contains highly conserved domains for promoter
              recognition, DNA melting and core binding found in sigma factors from bacteria.
               The mRNa for the putative sigma factor is a 2.2 kb polyadenylated transcript
              expressed only in illuminated cells suggesting that this protein is encoded in
              a nuclear photogene.  Genomic DNA digested with restriction enzymes contained
              4-5 restriction fragments that hybridized to the rpoD box oligonucleotide
              suggesting that there is a family of plastid RNA polymerase sigma factors in C.
              caldarium.  These studies are the first to identify a plastid RNA polymerase
              sigma factor in a photosynthetic eukaryote and provide the "missing link" for
              investigating mechanisms of plastid gene recognition.  The specific aims of its
              project are to (1) isolate and c haracterize clones for the two principal sigma
              factors in plastid RNA polymerase from C. caldarium, and (2) examine the
              expression patterns of sigma factor mRNAs and proteins in dark and light.  %%% 
              RNA polymerase is a key component of the transcriptional apparatus in plastid
              intracellular organelles such as chloroplasts and is responsible for expression
              of about 130 genes.  The investigator has recently reported the first
              identification of a gene for the plastid polymerase subunit which confess upon
              the enzyme specificity for different classes of genes.  Such specificity
              enables cells to tailor their metabolism to changes in their environments.  The
              investigator's study of this subunit should help fill a major gap in the
              understanding of plastid biology.   ***
