Title       : Regulation of Oviduct-Lineage Myogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9507409

Award Number: 9507409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Bucher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9507409  Bucher    The long term goal of this pilot project is to understand
              the  genetic mechanisms of muscle cell specification in a developing  organism.
              In vitro studies of vertebrate muscle gene regulation  have revealed a
              complexity of transcription factors involved in  muscle cell differentiation
              and determination. The analysis of  muscle gene regulation in vivo should
              extend these studies to  understand genetic pathways and to define regulatory
              factors that  can only be discovered in vivo. This pilot project undertakes one
               aim, comprised of transgenic studies, to investigate the in vivo  sequence
              requirements for temporal and oviduct lineage specific  expression of the C.
              elegans troponin T (CeTnT) muscle gene. C.  elegans is an organism having well
              established genetic and  molecular transgenic approaches and the C. elegans
              oviduct is an  ideal tissue to undertake these studies: the oviduct is
              comprised  of only 10 muscle cells that arise through a simple stereotyped 
              series of cell divisions. Furthermore, similar to some vertebrate  muscle
              types, the oviduct dose not express the CeMyoD transcription  factor and thus
              other factors may be revealed. The CeTnT gene  structure is simple and provides
              an ideal molecular target to study  gene expression. Different CeTnT genomic
              sequences will be cloned  upstream of reporter genes. Reporter gene expression
              will then be  assayed in individual cells of transgenic worms to characterize
              the  in vivo requirements for oviduct specific expression. Dr. Bucher  will
              test the hypothesis that MEF2 and E-box consensus sequences  are required for
              oviduct expression. She will also test the  hypothesis that novel consensus
              sequences are required for oviduct  expression. Identification of new cis
              sequences elements that  direct oviduct expression will provide the basis for
              future  experiments involving the cloning of new transcription factors  using
              molecular/biochemical approaches and by genetic suppression  strategies. The
              expectation is that these appro aches will  ultimately elucidate in vivo
              genetic pathways and define new genes  involved in extracellular and
              intracellular signalling, as well as  transcriptional regulators of the
              myogenic regulatory pathway.  ***
