Title       : The Molecular Organization of Chromosome I: Control of Meiotic Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1997     
File        : a9507786

Award Number: 9507786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Kaback kaback@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507786  Kaback  During meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair, undergo
              recombination and then segregate from each other. Reciprocal recombination
              (crossing over) is required for proper pairing and segregation. However, the
              mechanisms that control recombination and insure that all homologues crossover
              with each other are not understood. Chromosome I is the smallest Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae chromosome and contains a DNA molecule that is only 231 kb. This
              chromosome has been studied extensively and much is known about its meiotic
              behavior. Recombination rates were mapped over its entire length and were found
              to be 3-4 fold lower within 20 kb of the centromere and both telomeres.  In
              addition, several recombination "hot spots" were found to correspond to meiotic
              double-strand break sites believed to be involved in initiating meiotic
              recombination. Most important, these studies revealed that small yeast
              chromosomes had higher reciprocal recombination rates than large yeast
              chromosomes, an observation that appears to be true in other organisms
              including humans. High recombination rates were found over most of the physical
              length of these small chromosomes and appear to be necessary to insure that
              small chromosomes crossover during meiosis.  The investigator discovered that
              high rates of recombination on small chromosomes were due to a global control
              mechanism that regulated recombination rates by responding directly to
              chromosome size.  This mechanism was investigated and found to be closely
              linked to chiasma (crossover) interference. Indeed, the level of chiasma
              interference was proportional to a function of the chromosome size. Chiasma
              interference is believed to regulate reciprocal recombination by inhibiting
              further crossing over in regions that have already recombined. Its mechanism is
              unknown but may involve the synaptonemal complex. To better understand the
              mechanisms that control recombination and insure that all chromosomes crossover
              with their homologues, the investigator will study how chias ma interference
              responds directly to chromosome size.  He has proposed a model for this control
              and experiments to test the model. The model predicts that, on average, large
              chromosomes crossover earlier. As a result, more time is available for
              interference to occur. Accordingly, on average, single crossovers will affect
              more DNA on larger chromosomes. This prediction will be tested by measuring the
              average length of interference tracts on well-marked constructs containing
              small and large copies of chromosome I.  Finally, he will continue two studies
              on cis acting elements that control recombination.  A 50 kb functional
              chromosome I fragment that segregates from its homologue with a high degree of
              fidelity has been isolated. This minichromosome recombines at very high rates
              and is believed to contain only a single meiotic double-strand break site.  He
              will investigate this construct and use it to critically test the hypothesis
              that meiotic double-strand break sites are required for proper meiotic pairing
              and recombination. He will also complete studies that appear to show that
              telomeres inhibit recombination in subtelomeric regions.  The zone of telomeric
              inhibition will be measured.  He will also determine if the SIR3 gene, which is
              involved in telomeric repression of gene expression, is also involved in
              suppressing meiotic recombination. In total, these studies will further our
              understanding of how recombination is controlled so that homologous chromosomes
              pair and segregate properly during meiosis.  %%%  For sexual reproduction,
              cells which have two copies of each chromosome (diploid cells) must give rise
              to cells which have only one copy of each chromosome (haploid cells).  This
              process is called meiosis.  During meiosis a diploid nucleus normally undergoes
              replication and then two divisions, meiosis I and meiosis II, producing four
              haploid nuclei.  At meiosis I homologous chromosomes pair and exchange genetic
              material (recombine).  Reciprocal recombination between homologues is believed
              to  be essential for proper pairing and segregation of chromosomes.  The
              mechanisms that control meiotic recombination so each chromosome recombines
              with its homologue are not fully understood.  The scientist will investigate
              these mechanisms.  ***
