Title       : Specialization of the Right and Left Cerebral Hemispheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9507924

Award Number: 9507924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Hellige   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507924  HELLIGE    The goal of cognitive neuroscience is to understand how it
              is  that our brains produce our thoughts, our emotions and our  actions.  A
              pervasive characteristic of the human brain is what  has been termed cerebral
              hemisphere asymmetry.  The cerebral  cortex (or outside surface) of the brain
              is divided into two  hemispheres, the right and the left.  Although their gross
               appearance is very similar, there are subtle differences in the  anatomical
              structure of the two hemispheres and in their  information processing abilities
              and propensities.  This research  will investigate the consequences of this
              hemispheric  specialization for information processing in neurologically 
              normal individuals in several specific areas of functioning.  One  set of
              studies will increase our understanding of hemispheric  specialization for
              processing spatial relationships by  investigating visual mechanisms that
              underlie the tendency of the  two hemispheres to make different contributions
              to processing  what have been called categorical (e.g., above/ below, 
              left/right, etc.) and coordinate (e.g., distance between two  objects) aspects
              of spatial location.  A second set of studies  will determine the extent to
              which the same visual mechanisms  also contribute to hemispheric differences in
              the identification  of visual stimuli, including letters, words and other
              multipart  objects (e.g., an airplane).  In order to understand how it is  that
              the two hemispheres make complementary contributions to  perception, cognition
              and action, it is important to understand  the ways in which the two
              hemispheres interact with each other to  coordinate their activities and
              produce unified effects on  behavior.  For this reason, a third set of studies
              will examine  interhemispheric interaction for the processing of both verbal 
              and nonverbal information, with an emphasis on tasks that are  known to be
              performed in qualitatively different ways by the left  and right hemispheres.
              It is also impossible to understand the   role that hemispheric asymmetry plays
              in normal cognitive  processing without understanding the role that such
              asymmetry  plays in individual variation.  With this in mind, a fourth set  of
              studies will focus on differences from person to person in the  pattern of
              hemispheric asymmetry and in the nature and efficiency  of interhemispheric
              interaction.  Some of these studies will also  determine the relationship
              between various functional or  behavioral asymmetries and anatomical/structural
              brain  asymmetries as determined by brain imaging procedures.  Each set  of
              studies will address basic issues in cognitive neuroscience.   At the same
              time, the outcomes will have implications for a  variety of more applied
              questions.  For example, it has been  hypothesized that a variety of disorders
              (e.g., dyslexia,) result  from unusual patterns of hemispheric asymmetry or
              from difficulty  in coordinating the activities of the two hemispheres. 
              Testing  such hypotheses requires detailed information about the normal 
              patterns of operation of the two hemispheres, separately and in  concert.  ***
