Title       : Musculoskeletal Design, Muscle Activity and Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9507479

Award Number: 9507479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kiisa C. Nishikawa kiisa.nishikawa@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507479    Coordinated  movement  requires  both  a  neural  plan   and 
              information about the biomechanics of muscles and  skeleton.  The
              implementation of the plan is a pattern of activation of  motor  neurons and
              muscles that produces the movement.   The  goal  of this research is to
              understand the construction  of  implementation patterns that control complex 
              movement,  and  the  biomechanical constraints under which they  work.   The 
              model system is prey capture by frogs.  Prey capture is easy  to  stimulate  in
              the laboratory, and is a complex  movement  that  requires  rapid  coordination
               of  several  pairs   of  antagonistic  muscles. The research uses a
              multidisciplinary  approach   combining   biomechanics  and   neurobiology   to
               determine  how  the  design  of the  musculoskeletal  system  interacts   with
                muscle  activity  to  produce   movement.  Comparisons within and between
              species that differ  in  size  will  show  how  muscle activity and movement 
              patterns  are  related  to  body size among animals of similar  shape.  The 
              morphology   of   the  feeding  apparatus,   the   movements  associated with
              feeding behavior, and the pattern of  muscle  activation  will be analyzed
              simultaneously.  These  studies  will  provide insight into how muscle
              activation  strategies  change  with  body  size.  A second  approach  will 
              compare  musculoskeletal  design, muscle activity, movement  patterns  and 
              feeding performance among species that differ in shape.  This   will  show  how
               musculoskeletal  design  and  muscle  activity   patterns  have  evolved  to 
              produce   particular  movement  patterns  and  performance  characteristics  
              like  speed,  accuracy,  and  efficiency.  The  results  of   this  research
              will have broad implications for understanding  the  neural control of movement
              and its evolution.
