Title       : Stopped-Flow and 18O Exchange Studies of Partial Reactions in Sodium Pump
               Catalysis and Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9507018

Award Number: 9507018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147581             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Faller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507018  Faller    Active, or primary, transport is arguably one of the most
              important unsolved problems remaining in biology.  In active transport, an
              enzyme couples the catalyzed release of energy from a storage molecule to the
              movement of ions across a membrane against a concentration gradient. In mammals
              the storage molecule is usually adenosine 5'-triphosphate ATP. Release of the
              energy iq accelerated by transferring a phosphate group from ATP to the enzyme
              before transferring it to water, so pumps of this type are called P-type ion
              motive ATPases. The three principle members of the group are named for the ion
              they transport. The  proton pump acidifies the stomach as part of the digestive
              process, and its malfunction is one immediate cause of ulcers. The calcium pump
              relaxes muscles by removing calcium ions from the space around the contractile
              apparatus in muscle cells. The sodium pump maintains osmotic balance by pumping
              sodium ions out of cells in exchange for potassium ions and is found in nearly
              all cells. The sodium gradient generated by the primary transporter is then
              used by secondary transporters to move metabolites like sugar into cells. The
              sodium gradient is also used to excite nerve and muscle cells. The sodium pump
              is the target of the drug digitalis, a primary therapy in congestive heart
              failure.  The basic research problem is to explain how the energy released by
              splitting ATP is used to pump ions and how the ions are physically
              translocated. The working hypothesis in the active transport field is that the
              enzyme undergoes a cycle of conformational changes. What is not known are the
              molecular details of these changes in three dimensional shape. For example, how
              do transported ions trigger the molecular rearrangement and how extensive is
              it?  The conformational change il unphosphorylated sodium pump can be observed
              directly by attaching fluorescent reporter groups. The reaction is fast, so it
              must be initiated by mechanically mixing labeled pump with ions within a few
              millise conds in what is called a stopped-flow machine. In the preceding grant
              period it was shown that two potassium ions must bind to the pump before, the
              conformational change occurs. The hypothesis to be tested in this grant period
              is that the transported ions control the conformational change by randomly
              binding to identical and independent sites instead of anticooperatively to an
              ion well. A second objective is to learn how big the change in shape is by
              measuring how much the distance between two points on the molecule changes.
              This will be done by simultaneously attaching two reporter groups to the pump
              and measuring the transfer of fluorescence energy between them. A third
              objective is to test theories about the number of intermediate conformations of
              phosphorylated enzyme and their role in catalysis and transport. This will be
              done by synthesizing ATP and inorganic phosphate containing a stable isotope of
              oxygen. When the phosphoenzyme is formed and hydrolyzed, the stable isotope is
              replaced by oxygen atoms from water. The rate of isotope exchange and the
              distribution of stable isotope in the product can be measured by mass
              spectrometry. The isotopomer distribution depends on the relative probability
              of two reaction steps occurring, so if it changes with sodium concentration,
              for example, it means that sodium changes the mechanism of the reaction. A
              fourth objective is to exploit the greater sensitivity and information content
              of isotope exchange measurements to learn how changing individual amino acids
              in the pump by genetic engineering affects the molecule's function. 
              Conformational changes in proteins are dynamic events that cannot be completely
              understood by even the most sensitive static methods for structural
              determination. How much can be learned from genetically engineering proteins
              depends on the sensitivity of assays available to assess the effect of amino
              acid substitutions on function. Therefore, the research that is proposed will
              also advance studies of other biological molecules  that function by changing
              their shape. It will provide postdoctoral students with training in rapid
              mixing and stable isotope exchange techniques.  %%%  The sodium pump maintains
              osmotic balance by pumping sodium ions out of cells in exchange for potassium
              ions and is found in nearly all mammalian cells. The sodium gradient is then
              used by secondary transporters to move metabolites into cells. The basic
              research problem is to explain how the energy released by splitting an energy
              storage molecule is used to pump ions and how ions are physically translocated.
              The working hypothesis is that the enzyme undergoes a cycle of conformational
              changes. What is not known are the molecular details. One hypothesis to be
              tested by rapid reaction methods is that the transported ions control the
              conformational change by randomly binding to identical and independent sites. 
              A second objective is to learn how big the change in shape is by fluorescence
              energy transfer measurements of the distance change between two points on the
              molecule. A third objective is to test theories about the number of
              intermediate conformations of phosphorylated enzyme by measuring stable oxygen
              isotope exchange. A fourth objective is to exploit the greater sensitivity and
              information content of isotope exchange measurements to learn how changing
              individual amino acids in the pump by genetic engineering affects the
              molecule's function.    ***
