Title       : Cooperation, Altruism, and Self-control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9507668

Award Number: 9507668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216057             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Stephens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                     Non-technical Summary:    Cooperation, Altruism and
              Self-Control    P.I.  David W. Stephens  IBN- 9507668    Cooperation  is  a 
              key  component of  human  and  animal  social  behavior.   Scientists  who
              study animal behavior  have  borrowed  ideas  from  economic  game theory  to
              study  the  evolution  and  maintenance  of  animal cooperation.  The  simplest
               category  of  games studied by game theorists is "Two-player, 2-by-2 games" 
              in  which   each of two participants must choose one of  two actions.  This 
              study  uses 2-by-2 games as an experimental and theoretical  tool to understand
              the economic and evolutionary underpinnings of  animal cooperation.    By 
              restricting this study to 2-by-2 games, the investigator  can  simplify  and 
              categorize  the range  of  possible  "cooperative"  situations.    Cooperation 
              may be either  "selfish,"   the  best  action  in the short-term for both
              participants, or "altruistic,"  a  good  long-term  action  that  sacrifices 
              short-terms  gains.  Altruism is considered a central problem in evolutionary 
              studies  of  behavior, because the process of natural selection is thought  to 
              be  fundamentally competitive. Experimental  studies  suggest  that  animals 
              seldom cooperate altruistically.   One  hypothesis  explaining  this  fact  is
              that animals  have  strong  and  well-  documented  preferences for immediate
              reward.   In  psychological  jargon,  they  often fail to show the required
              "self-control"  to  wait for a good but delayed reward.    This  study  is 
              composed a series of experiments  in  which  the  investigator  will 
              manipulate the costs and  benefits  of  well-  defined  actions.   One
              experiment will compare  the  cooperative  abilities of three specis of bird,
              the pinon jay, a highly social  member of the crow group, the bluejay, a
              non-social member of the  crow  group  ,and the european starling, an unrelated
               gregarious  bird.  In  a  parallel study the investigator  will  measure  the 
              strength  of each species'  preferences for imediate reward.   The 
              investigator  will then ask whether the species differ  in  their  tendencies  
              to   cooperation,  and  whether  these   differences  correlate with their 
              measured preferences  for immediacy.    A  second  experiment  will test a
              basic  claim  of  mathematical  models  of  altruistic  cooperaion. 
              Mathematical  modelers  have  argued that the combination of repetition of a
              2-by-2 game, and a  strategy   of   "reciprocal  cooperation"  can  make  
              altruistic  cooperation  a good short-term action.   A third experiment  will 
              test  the  investigator's hypothesis that strong preferences  for  immediacy 
              explain the observed failure of animals  to  cooperate  altruistically in
              laboratory situations.
