Title       : The Myosin Family of Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9507376

Award Number: 9507376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Titus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB  9507376  Margaret Titus   The myosin family is rapidly expanding and
              currently consists of nine distinct classes, based on phylogenetic comparisons.
               This variety of myosins has raised interesting questions about the nature and
              extent of the actin-based motors utilized by the cell to generate movements. 
              The best known classes of myosins, myosins I, II and V have been the subject of
              intense study, however information regarding the in vivo role of other types of
              myosins is lacking.  The structural diversity in the myosin family suggests
              that each class of myosin generates a unique form of actin-based motility.  A
              systematic approach to assessing the role of individual classes of myosins in
              generating actin-based movements is required to explore this possibility.   The
              goal of our work is to explore the in vivo function of the different classes of
              myosin in a single cell by gene targeting. Dictyostelium is the subject of our
              investigations as undergoes a simple, yet elegant developmental program and
              exhibits chemotaxis and motility similar to that observed in higher eukaryotic
              cells.  It is amenable to molecular genetic manipulation and cell biological
              investigations.  Five unconventional myosins have been previously identified in
              this organism.  A novel screen that combines physical mapping techniques with
              low stringency hybridization has identified at least seven additional myosin
              (myo) genes. Two of these, myoH and myoJ, appear to encode members of a new
              class of unconventional myosin, based on preliminary phylogenetic analyses. 
              These myosins are expressed through the developmental cycle of Dictyostelium,
              suggesting that they play roles in morphogenesis and development.  The in vivo
              role of the myo H and myoJ gene products, will be investigated using a combined
              approach that encompasses both cell biological and molecular genetic
              techniques.  The genes will be fully cloned, sequenced, and used to generate
              fusion proteins.  The fusion proteins will then be used to obtain specific
              antibodies  for immunolocalization.  Gene targeting studies will be carried out
              to generate strains that do not express either myoH or myoJ, and the mutants
              carefully analyzed for defects in various aspects of motility and development.
              Together, these experiments will provide insights into the role of  this
              potentially new myosin family in generating different types of actin-based
              cellular movements that are carried out during the Dictyostelium life cycle. 
              Understanding the role of myoH and myoJ gene products in movement carried out
              during development will provide important information about how cells use their
              actomyosin cytoskeleton to generate various movements. These potentially
              include, but are not limited to, organelle movement, the anchoring of
              organelles, or cellular translocation.  %%%  This project examine a class of
              molecules referred to as nonconventional myosins.  These molecules have only
              recently been discovered, and they do a variety of types of work within the
              cell.  They are essential for life and act in cell motility and the movement of
              components within cells.  This project will result in a better understanding of
              these essential molecules.  ***
