Title       : The Role of Rab GTPases and V-H+ ATPases in Membrane Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1995  
File        : a9507494

Award Number: 9507494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179610             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Cardelli jcarde@nomvs.lsumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71105    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507494  Cardelli    The long term goal of the project is to define the
              molecular  mechanisms which regulate the biosynthesis and function of 
              lysosomes, organelles that function to degrade extracellular  and intracellular
              material and that play an important role  in cellular metabolism.  In previous
              studies the  biosynthesis, processing and targeting mechanisms for  lysosomal
              hydrolases have been characterized in the simple  eukaryote, Dictyostelium
              discoideum, an organism well suited  for these studies because of the ease in
              which it can be  manipulated genetically and biochemically. As part of the 
              aims of this proposal, some of  the proteins that are  enriched in lysosomes
              will be characterized.  One of the  identified proteins is a subunit of an
              enzyme (V-H+-ATPase)  responsible for acidifying the lumens of lysosomes and 
              endosomes.  The other protein, Rab4, is a member of a large  family of small
              GTPases involved in vesicular trafficking.  Rab4 and the proton pump are also
              highly enriched in the  contractile vacuole (CV) complex and preliminary data 
              suggest that these proteins regulate the function of this  organelle and the
              endosomal pathway.  In the present  application, molecular genetic techniques
              will be used (gene  disruption, overexpression and antisense RNA expression) to
               create cell lines that either do not express these proteins  or express mutant
              versions of these proteins.  These cell  lines will be analyzed biochemically
              to determine how the  lysosomal/endosomal and CV system functions under
              conditions  where acidification is suppressed and vesicular trafficking  may be
              altered.  Our functional tests will include  measuring; 1) the rate of
              processing and transport of  lysosomal hydrolases, 2) the percentage of newly
              synthesized  precursors that are appropriately targeted, 3) the rate of 
              endocytosis, phagocytosis, and secretion and 4) if the CV is  altered in
              function.  Together these approaches will provide  relevant new information on
              the regulation of  endosomal/lysosomal  and CV function.  %%%  This is a
              project dealing with the definition of the  molecular mechanisms regulating the
              formation of endosomes  and lysosomes; organelles that function to degrade 
              extracellular and intracellular biological material.  Very  little is now known
              concerning how lysosomes are formed and  much remains to be learned concerning
              how they function to  regulate a wide variety of cellular processes.  These 
              studies are conducted in a simple eukaryotic system,  Dictyostelium discoideum,
              because sophisticated genetic and  biochemical approaches can be applied.  In
              earlier studies,  two proteins have been identified that are associated with 
              lysosomes and endosomes; these proteins may play an  important role in the
              structure and function of these  organelles.  One of the proteins, Rab4,
              functions in  mammalian cells to regulate the trafficking of membranes  along
              the endosomal pathway (the route extracellular  material takes to reach
              lysosomes) while the other protein,  the proton pump ATPase, functions to
              acidify lysosomes and  endosomes.  Interestingly, in this organism, both of
              these  proteins are also associated with the membrane system termed  the
              contractile vacuole.  This organelle is responsible for  pumping out water and
              functions at the cellular level much  like a kidney functions in humans.  This
              is a proposal to  use genetic and biochemical approaches to define the role of 
              the proton pump and Rab4 in the assembly and function of  endo-lysosomes and
              the contractile vacuole.  Together, these  approaches using this simple
              eukaryotic cell will provide  relevant new and important information on the
              regulation of  cellular organelles critical for normal cell function.  ***
