Title       : Evolution of Complex Colony Structure in Social Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9507377

Award Number: 9507377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Herbers herbers@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Non-technical Summary, Herbers, J.  IBN-9507377      Evolution of Complex Colony
              Structure in Social Insects      Social behavior is the outgrowth of
              interactions among  individuals. Social systems are complexes of behavioral 
              traits that have evolved within a species in response to  certain environmental
              conditions. The goal of this project  is to understand how particular
              environmental conditions  affect social systems in insects.    The PI has
              previously studied two populations of the forest  ant Myrmica punctiventris.
              One population near Burlington  Vermont, has ant colonies that contain a single
              queen and  all her daughter workers. Within those colonies the queen  lays her
              eggs, and the workers care for them, forage for  food, keep the nest clean, and
              so on. A second population  near Albany, New York is vastly different in its
              social  system from the Vermont population. There, a colony can  contain a
              family of queens and a separate family of workers.  Two completely different
              families share living quarters,  with one family dominating the egg-laying and
              the second  family doing the work.    The goal of the present project is to
              understand the  environmental conditions that have driven the Vermont and  New
              York populations in two such different directions. The  researchers will
              manipulate food availability and  availability of nesting sites in a large
              field experiment.  By charting occupancy of nests and reproductive biology 
              throughout the three-year experiment, they should be able to  determine if and
              how these two environmental factors affect  social systems.    The PI will also
              will continue detailed genetic work on this  species.  She will clone DNA to
              find   suitable markers to  use in genetic experiments. These DNA markers will
              yield  information on who is the mother and who is the father of  workers and
              reproductives in ant nests. With these data, it  will be possible to measure
              the importance of genetic  determinants of social systems as well.
