Title       : Regulation of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus benzoate degradation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9507393

Award Number: 9507393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Neidle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507393  Neidle  Benzoate degradation by the soil bacterium Acinetobacter
              calcoaceticus provides an ideal system for investigating the regulation of
              aromatic compound degradation. An understanding of the factors controlling the
              degradation of the vast number of aromatic compounds in the environment is
              central to the success of bioremediation, since many pollutants are structural
              analogs of aromatic compounds that are readily degraded by bacteria. Toxic
              pollutants similar in structure to benzoate include chlorinated benzoates,
              benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylenes. In nature, bacteria funnel many
              substrates through a limited number of catabolic pathways, and, therefore,
              generalizations can be drawn from in-depth studies of several representative
              pathways. The best-characterized of these representative pathways is the
              B-ketoadipate pathway, the route by which benzoate as well as many diverse
              aromatic compounds can be degraded by A. calcoaceticus.  These studies are
              characterizing a novel regulatory circuit governing the expression of at least
              14 A. calcoaceticus ben and cat genes needed for the conversion of benzoate to
              tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates. BenM and CatM are both LysR-type
              transcriptional activators that respond to the inducer cis,cis-muconate, an
              intermediate in the degradation of benzoate. In addition, BenM, but not CatM,
              can respond to benzoate as an inducer even though this compound is structurally
              unlike muconate. The distinctive aspect of this system is the ability of each
              activator to control the expression of two unlinked genes, catA and catB, each
              in response to muconate. The BenM/CatM system is unique: there are no other
              examples of two homologous LysR-type proteins regulating the same genes in
              response to the same inducer.  By determining the distinct and interactive
              roles of CatM and BenM, the novel features of this system can be used to gain
              insights into more general aspects of LysR-type transcriptional activation, one
              of the most common and important means o f bacterial gene regulation. The
              objectives of this work are to determine how BenM and CatM both control catA
              and catB expression, and to test the hypothesis that BenM, but not CatM,
              regulates the ben genes in response to benzoate. In order to meet these
              objectives, the CatM and BenM proteins will be purified and used in studies of
              protein-DNA binding interactions and protein-inducer interactions. Analyses of
              the ben and cat transcripts, as well as reporter-gene fusions will be used to
              characterize transcriptional controls and to determine inducer specificities. A
              third objective is to characterize the simultaneous metabolism of multiple
              aromatic compounds. The use of novel Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
              techniques, in collaboration with Dr. George Gaines (Isogenetics inc., Chicago,
              IL) led to the discovery that muconate is involved in the preferential
              degradation of specific compounds when multiple aromatic carbon sources are
              present. These NMR techniques will be used to characterize this phenomenon, and
              the specific roles of muconate, CatM and BenM in preferential carbon source
              utilization will be clarified.  %%%  In the environment, where multiple carbon
              sources are always present, factors controlling degradative preferences are
              critical in determining which compounds will be naturally degraded and which
              will remain as pollutants. The regulatory controls of A. calcoaceticus should
              be representative of those used by soil bacteria in general. Strains of A.
              calcoaceticus which can degrade a wide variety of compounds have been isolated
              from most natural and polluted environments. They are closely related to
              pseudomonads and other Gram-negative members of the gamma subdivision of the
              Proteobacteria which are largely responsible for the aerobic degradation of
              aromatic compounds. The laboratory strains to be used in these studies are
              naturally competent for transformation by DNA, thereby facilitating genetic
              investigations. Genetic "tools" have been well-developed for A. calcoaceticus
              studies, and  these systems have contributed to a significant amount of
              information on the biochemistry, physiology and genetic organization of the
              B-ketoadipate pathway. Previous studies provide the necessary background for
              these investigations of the ben and cat genes which will contribute both to a
              better understanding of bacterial regulatory mechanisms and to a rational
              approach towards bioremediation.  ***
