Title       : Polymer Solutions, Coil-Globule and Other Phase Transitions, US-Turkey
               Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9507751

Award Number: 9507751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43275              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Karasz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports collaboration by Dr. Frank  Karasz,
              Professor of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of
              Massachusetts, and two Turkish scientists: Dr. Bahattin Baysal, Director,
              Research Institute of Basic Sciences at the Marmara Research Centre (MRC),
              Gebze, Turkey and Dr. E. Elif Hamurcu, a Reserach Assistant at Bogazici
              University in Istanbul and also a  Research Specialist  in the Polymer Research
              Project at the MRC.   The research deals with the transition of a polymer chain
              in dilute solution from an expanded coil in a good solvent to a collapsed,
              compact globular structure in a poor solvent.  A comprehensive and quantitative
              understanding of chain collapse has not yet been achieved through experimental
              or theoretical means.  The phenomena is intimately related to certain
              biological processes, including DNA folding and protein denaturation and
              tertiary structure formation.  In this project the two scientists will use
              experimental techniques, including dynamic light scattering and viscometry, in
              detailed studies of coil collapse in near theta conditions for polar
              macromolecules in binary and ternary systems.  Volume-phase transitions in
              network systems will also be investigated.  Scope:   This project brings
              together two scientists with excellent experiences and strong capabilities in
              research in the field of polymers.  Dr. Karasz has investigated the helix-coil
              transition of polypeptides with calorimetric and scattering methods, and the
              conformational variation of linear and star, flexible and semiflexible
              macromolecules in solution as functions of molecular weight, concentration,
              architecture, ionic strength and confining geometry.  Dr. Baysal has studied
              chain characteristics in dilute solution including coil-to-globule transition
              with theoretical analysis and viscometric and dielectric experiments. These
              complementary expertise provide for a logical combination of their research
              interests.  A postdoctorate from MRC also will participate in the research at
              the U. of Massachusetts.  The project meets the objectives of the Division of
              International Programs.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
