Title       : A Dynamic Phase Behavior Model of Thermal Adaptation in Biological Membranes of
               Poikilotherms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9507226

Award Number: 9507226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Hazel j.hazel@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507226  Hazel    The goal of the proposed research is to test the validity of a
              newly developed model of thermal adaptation in biological membranes of
              cold-blooded or poikilothermic animals that emphasizes the adaptive
              significance of conserving the dynamic phase behavior of a membrane, i.e., the
              ability to maintain and regulate such dynamic membrane properties as rates of
              endocytosis and fusion.  Regulation of membrane fusion is a process fundamental
              to virtually all types of intracellular membrane traffic.  The predictions of
              this model will be tested by studying several aspects of membrane structure and
              function in isolated plasma membranes of temperature-acclimated aquatic
              poikilotherms adapted to both cold (rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss,
              acclimated to 5 and 20 C) and warm (Tilapia mossambica, an African cichlid,
              acclimated to 20 and 35 C) waters and by comparing responses in these
              poikilotherms with comparable data collected from the homeothermic rat (body
              temperature of 37 C).  The first objective of the proposed research is to
              determine the extent to which lipid phase boundaries are conserved at different
              body temperatures.  The second objective is to determine the temperature
              sensitivity of dynamic membrane traffic in animals acclimated and adapted to
              different temperatures.  Specifically, the temperature dependence of rates of
              both fluid- phase and receptor-mediated endocytosis, in addition to the rate of
              cholesterol transport from its site of synthesis in the ER to the plasma
              membrane, will be determined in isolated hepatocytes of trout, Tilapia and rat.
               The third objective is to determine the extent to which temperature
              acclimation/adaptation alters the fusogenic capacity of hepatic plasma membrane
              lipids.  The significance of the proposed work lies in providing a better
              definition of those fundamental properties of a membrane that must be conserved
              in order for membrane function to be maintained at extremes of environmental
              temperature.  ***
