Title       : A Molecular Genetic Analysis of Meiotic Chromosome Nondisjunction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9507089

Award Number: 9507089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Dresser dresserm@omrf.ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael N. Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Okla Medical Res Found
	      825 N.E. 13th Street
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73104    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507089  Dresser    The long-range goal of this work is to understand how 
              meiosis-specific structures, such as synaptonemal complexes and recombination
              nodules, are organized and function in meiotic chromosome repair, recombination
              and segregation.  It has been shown that alterations in the stoichiometry of
              subunits in multicomponent structures can perturb the function of those
              structures. As a novel first step toward identifying the components of the
              meiosis-specific structures in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, cells have
              been challenged with wild-type yeast DNA carried on plasmids that replicate to
              100 or more copies per cell. A sensitive assay for meiotic chromosome
              nondisjunction has made it possible to identify plasmids carrying  inserts that
              specifically cause errors in meiotic chromosome segregation or prevent the
              completion of meiosis.    Forty-one such plasmids carrying different inserts
              have been found.  Preliminary results indicate that some of the plasmids
              contain meiotic genes previously identified from recessive mutant hunts; other
              plasmids contain novel genes, some of which are likely to have been missed in
              previous searches due to functional overlaps with other genes. Identification
              of genes in the latter class is particularly timely given the impending
              completion of the yeast genome sequence, which will greatly facilitate analysis
              of the functions of families of genes.  The work proposed here is (1) to
              conduct secondary screens on the plasmid collection to identify genes most
              likely to be directly involved in meiotic chromosome segregation, and (2) to
              perform immunocytological studies on a subset to identify gene products that
              are components of meiotic chromosome structures.  %%%  By identifying and
              analyzing novel genes and functions required for chromosome repair,
              recombination and segregation in meiosis, these studies in the yeast model
              system will contribute to an understanding of how cells in eukaryotes,
              including humans, keep their  genomes intact during this critica l period in
              the reproductive cycle of sexual organisms.  Errors in meiosis can result in
              cells of the next generation having an abnormal number of chromosomes or in
              cell death.  ***
