Title       : Poly-3-Hydroxybutyrate/Polyphosphate Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9507282

Award Number: 9507282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosetta N. Reusch RNREUSCH@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                o9                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                       o9    
               o9        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                       +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                Abstract
              9507282 Reusch   Polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate are polymers found in
              all biological cells, yet their functions are largely unknown.  This
              investigator has isolated an ion channel from bacterial membranes which is
              composed of polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate.  The polymers combine to
              form a calcium-selective ion channel with many of the same properties as the
              protein calcium channels found in plant and animal cell membranes.  The
              capacity of polyhydroxybutryate and polyphosphate to form ion channels derives
              from the ability of the polyhydroxybutryate to dissolve salts,  and that of
              polyphosphate to bind some cations more strongly than others.  The
              ion-selective properties of  polyphosphates have led to their use in
              water-softening, and the solvent properties of polyhydroxybutyrate are very
              similar to those of the polyethers used in lithium batteries, suggesting that
              polyhydroxybutryate can be used to prepare ion-conducting materials.  In this
              research  the effects of temperature, pH and salts on the conductance and
              selectivity of the polyhydroxybutryate/polyphosphate ion channel s  extracted
              from E. coli  as well as complexes reconstituted from their components uill be
              determined.  These complexes will be incorporated into planar lipid bilayers
              and studied with voltage clamp techniques.  Computer molecular mechanics and
              molecular dynamics computations will  determine the most likely conformations
              of the polymers in the channel complexes and elucidate blocking mechanisms.    
               %%%  These studies on these polymers in channel complexes will provide new
              insights into the mechanisms of ion-conduction in biological ion channels and
              bulk phase polymer electrolytes, and suggest new applications in material
              science. ***                         ;                                       Oh
                  +'  0                                       $       H       l              
                                              D       h                                      
                          R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              Abstract                            Barbara Zain                        Barbara
              Zain                @    q    S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n              
                          (                                                   *              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           1                 
                      @                                   @      ?o9                         
                                                                                      @    F
              #                                    Microsoft Word 6.0                        
                                           2                                                 
                                                   ;                                         
                                                                                             
                              e =       e                                                    
                                        l       l   l       l       l       l       l        
                                                                            D   1            
                                                                                             
                #                   &       u   T       4   D                       l        
                                                                              D              
              l       l                                                                      
              l               l                                                       l      
              l       l       l                           7                                  
                                                                            Abstract 9507282
              Reusch   Polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate are polymers found in all
              biological cells, yet their functions are largely unknown.  This investigator
              has isolated an ion channel from bacterial membranes which is composed of
              polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate.  The polymers combine to form a
              calcium-selective ion channel with many of the same properties as the protein
              calcium channels found in plant and animal cell membranes.  The capacity of
              polyhydroxybutryate and polyphosphate to form ion channels derives from the
              ability of the polyhydroxybutryate to dissolve salts,  and that of
              polyphosphate to bind some cations more strongly than others.  The
              ion-selective properties of  polyphosphates have led to their use in
              water-softening, and the solvent properties of polyhydroxybutyrate are very
              similar to those of the polyethers used in lithium batteries, suggesting that
              polyhydroxybutryate can be used to prepare ion-conducting materials.  In this
              research  the effects of temperature, pH and salts on the conductance and
              selectivity of the polyhydroxybut
