Title       : Experimental Evolutionary Studies of Temperate Adaptation: The Evolution of
               Bioenergetic and Growth Rate Responses of a Mesophilic Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9507416

Award Number: 9507416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert F. Bennett abennett@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Lenski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1306,9169,9181,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507416    Changes in temperature have significant effects on the rates  of
              biochemical reactions.  We know how short term changes in  temperature affect
              the growth rate, respiration  and  growth  efficiency of microbes, but we know
              relatively little  about  how  these factors change during evolutionary
              adaptation  to  change  in  temperature.  This research  will  contrast  the 
              effects of temperature on energetics and growth of ancestral  strains of the
              bacterium Escherichia coli with changes  that  occur   during  evolutionary 
              adaptation  of  the  bacteria.  Multiple lines of bacteria derived from a
              common stock  will  be  cultured  in  new thermal environments, including 
              high,  low,  and variable temperature. For each line, growth  rate, 
              respiration rate, and the efficiency with which the bacteria  convert  food
              into new bacterial tissue will be  determined.  The  research will determine
              how adaptation to a  particular  thermal  regime alters the ability of the
              bacteria  to  grow  and  compete in other thermal environments.  Replication 
              of  selection  experiments with multiple lines of bacteria  will  reveal  the
              range of variation in genetic responses  to  new  thermal  environments.   This
               research  will  increase  our  ability  to  predict the long term response of 
              bacteria  to  environmental variation, which is important because microbes  are
               important  energy consumers and nutrient  recyclers  in  natural  ecosystems. 
              It will identify  traits  that  confer  adaptive   advantages   at   different 
               temperatures,   and  demonstrate    the   impact   of   those   adaptations   
              on  bioenergetics.  The identification of traits  that  increase  growth 
              efficiency  at  different temperatures  will  be  of  potential value in
              commercial culture operations.
