Title       : The Role of 54CP in Chloroplast Protein Targeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9507745

Award Number: 9507745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Hoffman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9507745  Hoffman    One  of  the  major  unresolved problems of  chloroplast
               protein transport is the mechanism by which proteins are  integrated  into
              chloroplast  membranes. As most of the  proteins that function  in the  light 
              reactions  of  photosynthesis  are  embedded  in  the thylakoid  membrane,  the
              process by which proteins  are  inserted into this  membrane is of great
              importance. The investigators have  recently discovered that a chloroplast
              protein, 54CP,is  essential for  the integration of the major light harvesting 
              protein (LHCP) into  thylakoid  membranes in vitro. The main  objective  of 
              the present  proposal  is to test the  hypothesis that  54CP  plays  a
              fundamental   role  in  intrachloroplast  protein  targeting                   
                by  examining the function of the protein in vivo. To accomplish  this
              objective,  plants  are being created that are  reduced  in  54CP content  or 
              that  express mutant forms of  54CP  that  confer  a dominant  negative 
              phenotype.  Such  plants  will   allow        the  investigators to study the
              role of 54CP in protein  targeting  in vivo.  Defects in protein targeting will
              be  assessed by measuring leaf  chlorophyll content, analyzing  the polypeptide
               composition of  the  chloroplast  membranes, determining  the  expression  of
              chloroplast  heat shock proteins, and by conducting  a  sensitive  transport 
              assay. Leaves will be in vivo labelled with   35S -Met and  the  distribution
              of specific thylakoid  proteins in  soluble and membrane fractions will be 
              determined by immunoprecipitation. These experiments should  reveal whether the
              targeting of LHCP  is strictly  dependent  on  a  54CP   pathway  and  whether 
               other  chloroplast   proteins   require  54CP   for   targeting.  These
              experiments   might  also  reveal  whether  alternate   transport  pathways can
              compensate for defects in the 54CP pathway. A  second objective  is  to 
              elucidate details of the GTP  hydrolysis  cycle required  for  54CP  function.
              Several  types of   experiments  are planned  in this regard. First,  mature
              54CP and forms mutated  in the  guanine nucleotide  binding domain will be
              purified  and  the nucleotide  binding and hydrolysis activities  measured. 
              Second, these  proteins will be preloaded into isolated chloroplasts  and  used
               to  study  LHCP trafficking in organello. If  the  proteins inhibit 
              transport, further biochemical studies  will be conducted to  ascertain the
              site of action. The  mutant forms of the protein might  form  stable complexes 
              with other components of  the  54CP dependent  targeting  pathway and
              facilitate their isolation.  The proposed  studies should advance our knowledge
              of the  biogenesis of  thylakoid membranes. A protein related to 54CP is found
              in  the cytoplasm  of  all  eukaryotes and  plays  a  role  in  directing
              proteins to the secretory system. Similar proteins  have also been found  in 
              prokaryotes  though a function has  not  been  clearly established. Thus the
              proposed studies  should reveal insight into the  ways  in  which 54p has 
              evolved and functions  in  different organisms and  organelles.  %%%  Plants
              contain chloroplasts, a highly compartmentalized  organelle having  an internal
              membrane called the thylakoid  which  converts the  energy  of sunlight into
              the chemical  energy stored  in  our foodstuffs.  Most  of  the proteins  that
              function  in  the  light reactions of photosynthesis  are embedded in this
              membrane. One of the major unresolved  problems of chloroplast protein
              transport is the mechanism  by which proteins are integrated into the thylakoid
               membrane. The investigators have recently obtained evidence  from a cell free
              system that a chloroplast protein, 54CP, is  essential for  the integration of
              the major light harvesting  protein (LHCP) into  thylakoid membranes. The
              investigators  now propose to  test the   hypothesis   that   54CP  plays  a 
              fundamental                                          role   in 
              intrachloroplast protein targeting by examining the  function  of the   protein
               in vivo.  To accomplish this  objective,  transgenic plants  are  being
              created that are  reduced in  54CP  content  or  express  mutant  forms of the
              protein that  will  interfere  with endogenous   54CP   function.  Such  
              plants   will  allow     the  investigators to study the role of 54CP in
              protein  targeting  in vivo.  These  experiments should reveal  whether the
              targeting  of LHCP  is  strictly dependent on a  54CP pathway and whether 
              other chloroplast   proteins  require  54CP   for   targeting.   These
              experiments   might  also  reveal  whether  alternate  transport  pathways  can
               compensate for defects in the  54CP  pathway.  The proposed  studies should
              advance our knowledge of the  biogenesis of thylakoid membranes. A protein
              related to 54CP  is found in the cytoplasm  of  all  eukaryotes and  plays  a 
              role  in  directing proteins to the secretory system.  Similar proteins have
              also been found  in  prokaryotes  though a function has  not  been  clearly
              established..  Thus  the proposed studies should  reveal  insight into  the 
              ways in which 54p fits into the accurate and efficient  mechanisms which have
              evolved for delivering proteins to  specific intracellular  destinations. 
              Protein  sorting  is  an  essential process;  abnormalities lead to cell death.
              In  addition  to  the fundamental importance of protein  targeting in
              sustaining life, a basic   understanding  of  the  process  has  relevant 
              practical applications.  For  example,  it is  now  possible  to  introduce
              foreign genes  into many organisms. By understanding how organisms control 
              protein  sorting, it will be  possible  to  control  the  precise localization
              of the proteins expressed from these  foreign genes.  In  plants, such
              applications include the  production  of gene  products  that confer increased 
              resistance  to  disease  or stress,  lead  to  improvements  in productivity 
              and  nutritional characteristics, or enable  the synthesis of bioproducts  such
               as pharmaceuticals and  raw materials f or the chemical industry. ***
