Title       : p35, The Neural-specific Regulatory Subunit of the cdk5 Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9507109

Award Number: 9507109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li-Huei Tsai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507109  Tsai          The cell division cycle is mainly regulated by a cascade
              of protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events.  In higher eukaryotes,
              a family of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) are known to participate in the
              protein phosphorylation cascade that is required for the progression of cells
              through the cell division cycle.  A common feature of these kinases is their
              requirement for a positive regulatory subunit named cyclin.  One of these
              kinases, cdk5, shares a high degree of sequence homology to cdc2 and cdk2,
              however, its putative cell cycle function has yet to be determined.  In search
              for a function of cdk5 we and others have isolated a regulatory partner of cdk5
              known as p35.  The primary sequence of p35 shares no homology to other isolated
              proteins including cyclins.  During embryonic development, p35 is only
              expressed in post-mitotic neuronal cells of the central nervous system (CNS)
              but not in proliferating cells.  Thus, p35 represents a novel cdk regulator
              that renders cdk5 active only in post-mitotic neurons,  Appearance of the
              cdk5/p35 kinase activity correlates with the advancing differentiated phenotype
              of neurons in developing rodent neocortex and primary cell cultures derived
              from the embryonic forebrain.  In adult animals, p35 is expressed at a high
              level only in certain regions of the forebrain including CA1 and CA3 of the
              hippocampus, the dentate gyrus and amygdala.  These observations suggest a role
              of the cdk5/p35 kinase in neuronal differentiation/development and possibly for
              normal functioning of neurons in certain regions of the adult brain.  The aim
              of this research proposal is to understand the regulation of the cdk5/p35
              kinase and to get better insight into the biology of the p35 molecule.  It has
              been shown that p35 is the only element required for activation of cdk5 kinase
              activity, therefore, the cdk5/p35 kinase activity may be regulated by the
              synthesis and degradation of p35.  Alternatively, a negative regulator may be
              required to monitor the  activity of the cdk5/p35 kinase.  Preliminary results
              indicated the presence of an inhibitory activity in cell lysates.  Thus,
              conventional protein purification procedures will be used to identify this
              activity.  Primary cultures from embryonic as well as newborn rat cerebral
              cortices will be used to study the regulation of the p35 subunit in vivo. 
              These cultures have been shown to express p35 and display active cdk5/p35
              kinase. Thus, the half-life and the subcellular localization of p35 will be
              analyzed in these cells.  Immunoprecipitations from the cortical cultures using
              p35 antibodies indicated the existence of multiple cellular proteins associated
              with p35.  These proteins will be purified via their affinity for p35 and
              protein microsequencing will be used to determine their identify.  This will
              help elucidating the in vivo function of p35.  While the regulation of cell
              division has been explored extensively at the molecular level, the mechanism of
              cell differentiation is relatively less understood.  To date, the cdk protein
              kinase family is known for their roles in cell cycle regulation, this research
              proposal will add another dimension to our understanding of the role of the
              cdks in a different biological aspect, namely cell differentiation.  Studying
              the biology of the cdk5/p35 kinase might also help learning the differentiation
              process of neurons and possibly, how the cell fate between cell proliferation
              and differentiation might be determined by the interplay among different cdks
              and their regulators.  %%%  This project examines a protein which appears only
              in differentiating nerve cells.  The protein interacts with a cell cycle
              regulatory protein which normally stimulates cell division.  However, this
              protein appears in large quantities only in forming nerve cells.  Its
              appearance suggests that it may play an important role inhibiting the cell
              cycle as nerve cells form.  Investigation of this novel protein is likely to
              shed light on the function of this unique cell cycle protein.  * **
