Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Catalytic Decomposition of Nitric Oxide with
               Metal-Containing Molecular Sieves and Pillared Clays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9507962

Award Number: 9507962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Kevan Kevan@UH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9507962  Kevan    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Larry Kevan,
              Department of Chemistry, University  of Houston, to pursue with Professor Chong
              Shik Chin, Department of Chemistry, Sogang  University, Korea, for 36 months, a
              program of cooperative research on the catalytic  decomposition of nitric oxide
              (NO) with improved metal-containing molecular sieves and  pillared clays.  The
              initial objective is to synthesize, characterize, and catalytically evaluate 
              zeolite-based catalysts with incorporated metal ions for use in the catalytic
              decomposition of  NO.  The de-NOx catalytic activity then will be assessed as a
              function of different methods of  metal ion introduction, including
              impregnation, ion-exchange in aqueous solution, ion-  exchange by solid state
              reaction, and chemical vapor deposition.  The third objective is to 
              incorporate metal ions of copper, rhodium, iridium, and others into
              alumina-pillared hectorite  clays and to evaluate these materials for de-NOx
              activity.    Zeolites are aluminosilicates so bonded as to form molecular-sized
              cages and channels which  give rise to the term "molecular sieves."  The
              aluminosilicate framework has a net negative  charge which is balanced by
              exchangeable cations.  Zeolites are used extensively for various  catalytic
              reactions such as cracking, hydrocracking, and isomerization.  The PI and his 
              Korean collaborator will investigate the effectiveness of various zeolites and
              smectic clays in  removing from automobile exhaust nitrogen oxides, major
              contributors to air pollution and  acid rain.  If successful, their
              zeolite-based and smectic clay-based catalysts might replace the  expensive
              platinum, rhodium, and palladium catalysts presently in use.  The PI and his 
              Korean collaborator are highly respected researchers who have made a number of
              significant  contributions in the field of this proposal.  This project is
              relevant to the objectives of the  U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation  bet ween U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of scientific  information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual  benefit. 
              Korean participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and 
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  This project adds an international cooperative
              dimension  to the PI's ongoing research under NSF Grant No. CHE-9420766 and
              provides an  international research experience to a U.S. graduate student.  ***
