Title       : Archaeological Reconnaissance at Chau Hiix: Agricultural, Settlement and
               Political Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9507204

Award Number: 9507204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161850             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Anne Pyburn APYBURN@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Anne Pyburn will conduct three
              seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the Mayan site of Chau Hiix located in
              Belize. The site was discovered in 1990 and is of special interest because it
              is located between the well documented sites of Lamanai and Altun Ha,
              themselves only 40 km apart. Chau Hiix contains about 25 large structures
              located on and around its central platform, the largest of which is 20 meters
              in height. The outlying settlement area contains a continuous scatter of
              platform groups and small mounds interrupted in at least 4 places by clusters
              of larger buildings on platforms. Dr. Pyburn and her collaborators will map the
              distribution of ancient features in and around Chau Hiix during three seasons
              combining mapping and test excavation of the settlement area with excavation in
              the central precinct. The methodology is designed to investigate: 1. Chau
              Hiix's sustaining area and satellite populations; 2. agricultural features; 3.
              late period settlement and civic center. Settlement data will be collected by
              mapping, testpitting, and surface collection. A contour map of the settlement
              will be constructed. and a sample of 10 to 20% of the structures in the
              settlement area will be excavated. Throughout the project excavators will
              recover pollen samples, human and non-human bone, carbon, soil, flotation
              samples and lithic debitage. The ecofacts will permit reconstruction of the
              prehistoric environment and provide insight into Mayan use of it. 
              Archaeologists have focused on the prehistory of the Mayan peoples because
              these groups, spread over large portions of lowland tropical Middle America,
              created a civilization which supported and incorporated large numbers of
              individuals in regions which are today inhabited only by small numbers of
              people. Evidence indicates that following a high point during the Classic
              period, levels of population density and social integration declined rapidly
              and that writing ceased and no new monumental architecture was constructed.
              Chau Hiix was occupied during both the Mayan climax and following decline and
              through careful examination, Dr. Pyburn will gain insight into both aspects of
              this process. She hypothesizes that Mayan farmers were organized into
              smallholder groups which were effective productive units and that state
              interference with them provided the impetus for the disintegration of Mayan
              society.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data
              of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light into human -
              environment interaction in tropical lowland regions and into the rise and
              decline of complex societies.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
