Title       : Functional Group Interactions in DNA-Protein Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9507040

Award Number: 9507040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. McLaughlin larry.mclaughlin@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507040  McLaughlin  Recognition events involving enzymes, proteins or even
              simple ligands and sequences of single or double-stranded DNA are, in the
              simplest analysis, the result of specific ionic, hydrogen bonding and
              hydrophobic interactions present at the macromolecular interface.  In order to
              determine the nature and the contribution of such intermolecular interactions
              to the observed high-affinity binding in such complexes, we will probe
              individual functional group contacts.  To accomplish this study, incremental
              changes will be made in the functional group character (or array) present in a
              given nucleic acid recognition site; the effects of such incremental changes
              upon binding affinity, catalytic activity or simple structural parameters will
              be determined.  Isosteric nucleoside analogues will be employed to introduce
              the incremental changes, by what amounts to "atomic mutagenesis" in functional
              group character.  The simplest analogues involve the "deletion modification" of
              a native nucleoside in which a specific functional group- amino, carbonyl,
              imino or methyl - is excised and replaced with a hydrogen atom.  The most
              useful analogues are those which do not otherwise alter native inter-strand
              hydrogen bonding or other helix-stabilizing effects.  We will expand the
              current repertoire of analogues available to probe macromolecular recognition
              processes by developing analogues to probe contacts to functional groups
              present in the minor groove of a B-form DNA duplex as well as those to the
              internucleotide phosphodiester residues.  These analogues will also permit the
              study of critical structural parameters such as the importance of the minor
              groove spine of hydration for the stability of B-form DNA duplexes, and the
              relation of this spine of hydration to the DNA curvature effect present in
              oligo A-T sequence.  Three sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid complexes
              will be examined during the course of this project:  the trp repressor-operator
              complex, the pre-initiation TBP-TATA box complex  that is critically important
              for eukaryotic transcription, and the Gene-4 proteins responsible for the RNA
              primase activity in bacteriophage T7.  These studies will help to further the
              understanding of DNA structure as well as sequence-specific protein-nucleic
              acid and ligand-nucleic acid interactions by elucidating the location and
              relative importance of functional group interactions that contribute to overall
              specificity and affinity in such complexes.  %%%  Recognition events involving
              enzymes, proteins or even simple ligands and sequences of single or
              double-stranded DNA are, in the simplest analysis, the result of specific
              ionic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions present at the
              macromolecular interface.  In order to determine the nature and the
              contribution of such intermolecular interactions to the observed high-affinity
              binding in such complexes, we will probe individual functional group contacts. 
              These studies will help to further the understanding of DNA structure as well
              as sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic acid interactions
              by elucidating the location and relative importance of functional group
              interactions that contribute to overall specificity and affinity in such
              complexes.  ***
