Title       : Continued Development of a Software Framework to Maintain and Query Features of
               Biological Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1996   
File        : a9507625

Award Number: 9507625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Bourne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Calton Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ilya N. Shindyalov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks to maintain and further develop an  object oriented software
              framework to represent and access  macromolecular structure data of proteins,
              DNA, RNA. and  their complexes. In this context a software framework  implies a
              set of reusable software components that encompass  the storage, intuitive,
              efficient retrieval and processing  of macromolecular structure-based
              information leading to a  better understanding of structure-function
              relationships. A  continuing major design goal is the ability to quickly 
              combine and apply these components in hitherto unthought of  ways. An approach
              of particular value to the fast evolving  domain of structural biology where
              the amount of data, our  knowledge about that data, and presumably the new
              questions  that data raises, continues to grow at a near exponential  rate. The
              existing framework, based on PDBlib, a ~++ class  library for representing a
              macromolecular structure, already  interfaces to a variety of backend storage
              formats including  Protein Data Bank (PDB) ASCII files. Object Oriented PDB 
              (OOPDB - a persistent version of PDBlib) and a Derived  Features DataBase
              (DFDB). Query of all backend storage  formats is available through
              MacroMolecular Query Language  (MMQL), a domain specific non-formal query
              methodology. More  limited query of OOPDB and DFDB and reports generated from 
              these databases are available globally through the  Macromolecular Object
              Oriented Search Engine (MOOSE), a  World Wide Web (WWW) server. This proposal
              seeks to maintain  and expand all facets of the framework. The specific goals 
              of this proposal are as follows:         Maintain and make available through
              the resources of       the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) the existing  
                  and evolving framework. This implies: providing access       to current
              native and derived data, database       maintenance, software maintenance,
              software       distribution, and limited assistance to the community       of
              users.         Extend the framework to:               1. Support a broader
              range of information on       biological macromolecules through               
              extensions to PDBlib. Namely, functional       classification of
              macromolecules,                primary sequence where no 3-D structure      
              exists, NMR ensemble d~ta, and                experimental data including that
              from sources       other than X-ray and NMR.              2. Provide new query
              methods (predominantly for       comparative analysis) to               
              effectively use existing and new data by       extensions to MMQL.             
              3. Provide the ability to store and subsequently       operate on the results
              of previous                queries as specialized databases.         Optimize
              the storage and query methodology used by the  framework.         Continue
              in-house research using the framework to       explore correlations between
              various structural       parameters found in protein structures.    While it is
              far from proven that the community will use and  further develop software
              frameworks such as the one proposed  here, the rationale behind it would seem
              sound in a time  when the falling cost of hardware has not been matched by a 
              significantly decreased cost in software development.
