Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Mechanisms of Pluton Emplacement; Study of East
               China and North America Batholiths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9507687

Award Number: 9507687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian Teyssier teyssier@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507687  Teyssier    This award supports collaboration between Christian 
              Teyssier, University of Minnesota, and Wen TianFang, China  University of
              Geosciences on Mechanisms of pluton  emplacement.  The PI's core research is
              focused on testing  the hypothesis that granitoid plutons are emplaced in the 
              upper crust in tensional bridges between crustal-scale  fractures.  This
              research is presently being conducted in  the Sierra Nevada batholith, a major
              continental arc in the  Circum-Pacific.  The aim of the proposed project is to 
              extend the analysis of pluton-emplacement mechanism to East  China in areas
              that underwent similar tectonic processes as  the Sierra Nevada.  The methods
              used in the Sierra Nevada  involve structural analysis in the field and in the 
              laboratory, and the analysis of anisotropy of magnetic  susceptibility of
              granitoid rocks in order to retrieve  information about magma flow during
              emplacement.  In East  China, it will be possible to add a new component to
              this  project, the gravity-anomaly analysis of plutons, in order  to define
              their three-dimensional shape.  This technique is  difficult to apply
              successfully within the Sierra Nevada  because the rugged topography induces
              large errors.  In  contrast, the plutons of East China are exposed in areas of 
              smooth topography, ensuring that this analysis will provide  a useful signal
              above the background noise.  Defining the  three-dimensional shape of plutons,
              and particularly the  root zones of plutons, is a key element in the hypothesis
              to  be tested.    The Chinese group, led by Professor Wan, has corresponded 
              with the PI regularly in the past two years on the methods  of pluton
              emplacement analysis.  The two study areas in  Eastern China were carefully
              chosen - in terms of tectonic  similarity to the Sierra Nevada, good field
              exposure, and  gentle topography - to insure meaningful results from the 
              analyses and thereby test different models of granitoid  emplacement
              effectively.  The Chinese group brings their  knowledge  of the regional
              geology and their experience in  the field.  The American group brings
              techniques of rock  magnetism and gravimetry applied to plutons.  All stages of
               the work, from field analysis to laboratory measurements,  will be conducted
              jointly, and the results will be written  collaboratively.
