Title       : U.S.-South Africa Workshop on Imaging Cellular Dynamics During Development &
               Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1995      
File        : a9507615

Award Number: 9507615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald P. Schatten   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Langford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This laboratory-based workshop and international symposium is jointly
              organized by Prof. Gerald Schatten of the Dept. of  Zoology, University of
              Wisconsin at Madison, and Prof. Barry Fabian, of the Dept. of  Zoology,
              University of Witwatersrand, in Johannesburg, South Africa. The event, to take
              place January 5-24, 1996, at the U. of Witwatersrand, has manifold objectives: 
              to enhance the level of cell and developmental biology teaching and research;
              to encourage and give visibility to the work of scientists who are members of
              under-represented groups; to strengthen Africa regional networking through the
              formation of the African Society of Cell and Developmental Biology; and to
              stimulate collaborative research projects between US and African scientists.
              The organizers have marshalled the loan of demonstration advanced imaging
              equipment and personnel from an international array of manufacturers.  By
              bringing advanced instrumentation and expertise to a central location, the
              workshop will enable some two dozen qualified young investigators from various
              parts of Africa to perform experiments themselves, become familiar with the
              techniques and capabilities of the technology, and, it is hoped, inspire them
              to pass on these tools to their own trainees.  NSF is supporting the
              participation of five scientist-instructors (four from the U.S. and one from
              Kenya), plus five African trainee-participants, at the pre-doctoral,
              post-doctoral and young-investigator level, from throughout Africa.  This
              activity will strengthen the capacity of young researchers in Africa to use
              advanced techniques; promote experimentation in novel animal and plant species;
              and stimulate beneficial networking between a center of excellence in South
              Africa and institutions in other African countries.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
