Title       : Emergence of Money as a Medium of Exchange: An Experimental Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9507968

Award Number: 9507968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108054             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Duffy jduffy@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Ochs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507968  Duffy  One of the most important conventions a society develops is the
              acceptance of at least one object as a "medium of exchange".  An object becomes
              a medium of exchange in a community when many agents who have no interest in
              that object for their own consumption or use in production nevertheless accept
              the object in trade with the rational expectation that they will be able to
              trade it for goods which are of intrinsic value to themselves.  The challenge
              to monetary theorists is to identify the factors that determine which object(s)
              will acquire the status of a medium of exchange.  The objective of this project
              is to construct an experiment analysis of the Kiyotaki-Wright model, the only
              model of money that can explain without relying on legal restrictions why
              certain goods that have relatively high storage costs or are dominated in rate
              of return can nevertheless serve as media of exchange.  Kiyotaki and Wright
              only provide a characterization of the stationary equilibria of their model. 
              They do not provide any account of how a commodity emerges as a medium of
              exchange.  One purpose of this experiment, therefore, is to test whether
              individuals placed in the Kiyotaki-Wright environment learn over time to adopt
              the same commodities as exchange media as the model implies will be so used in
              equilibrium.  In this way the experiment will be a test of the robustness of
              the equilibrium predictions to dynamics created by out-of-equilibrium play.   
              There is a large class of important economic models that share with the
              Kiyotaki-Wright model the properties that they are dynamic games with strategic
              complementarities.  A second goal of the experiment is to provide a body of
              empirical observations on the evolution of play in a simple game having these
              properties so that we will have an empirical basis for modeling the learning
              dynamics evoked by such environments.  Such models of learning dynamics can
              then be compared with models based upon the study of games with strategic
              complementarities tha t do not have an explicitly dynamic payoff structure.
