Title       : Comparative Experimental Studies in Avian Flight: Mechanical Power Output,
               Neuromuscular Control, 3-D Flight Kinematics, and Field Flight Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9507503

Award Number: 9507503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Dial kdial@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507503  Dial      Flight is the most common form of animal locomotion and birds
              represent one of nature's finest locomotor experiments.  Recent studies are
              providing new insights into the intricacies of the biomechanics, neuromuscular
              control, and the range of behaviors associated with aerial locomotion.  To
              interpret more clearly internal and external mechanisms associated with avian
              wing and tail movements during different modes of flight, Dr. Dial will employ
              several recently developed techniques (e.g., sonomicrometry, miniature tendon
              force-buckle recording, and 3-D infra-red, high-speed video motion analysis)
              along with well-established methods (e.g., electromyography, strain gauge
              implantation, high-speed 16mm cinematography) as birds fly within a
              variable-speed wind tunnel and flight obstacle course.  A number of separate
              projects are planned.  1) To determine how force production from the principal
              locomotor muscle (m. pectoralis) scales with body size, four species of birds
              (House sparrows, Black-billed magpies, Common ravens, and Canada geese),
              spanning a wide range of body sizes (25g to 4000g), will be implanted with
              strain gauges and recorded during different modes of flight.  Data from the two
              species will be augmented with in vivo sonomicrometric recordings to obtain
              more reliable measurements of pectoralis length changes during each wingbeat
              cycle, thus permitting more accurate estimates of mechanical work generated by
              the wings.  2) Tendon force buckle and electromyographic analyses will more
              accurately evaluate force production and activity patterns of key flight
              muscles within the wings of crows.  3) Strain records from wing skeletal
              elements and flight feathers of pigeons will significantly improve the
              understanding of wing kinematics as well as measure aerodynamic forces imposed
              on the flight apparatus.  4) Infra-red, high-speed motion analyses will produce
              the first 3-dimensional records of wings and tails of pigeons during
              maneuvering (asymmetrical) flight and of magpies d uring wind tunnel
              (symmetrical) flight over a wide range of speeds.  ***
