Title       : The Pathway Through Inositol is the Pathway to Stress Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9507375

Award Number: 9507375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Jensen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans J. Bohnert  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507375  Bohnert  This research focuses on the genes and proteins in plants 
              catalyzing an essential pathway in all organisms, the  biosynthesis of
              myo-inositol, MI.  The enzyme MI-IP synthase  converts glucose 6-phosphate to
              myo-inositol 1-phosphate and  a phosphatase produces MI.  The two products of
              the pathway  play a central and essential role in providing signalling 
              molecules, in membrane biogenesis and - in plants -  phosphate storage, the
              production of oligosaccharides,  vegetative carbohydrate storage, and the
              production of gums  and mucilages.       An extension of the pathway beyond MI
              is the inositol  methylation pathway which produces a number of mono- or di- 
              methylated inositols.  The methylated inositols may have a  function in osmotic
              adjustment with the methyl groups  provided follwing an increase in
              photorespiration under  stress conditions.  Methylated inositols are found in 
              species that tolerate high salinity or drought conditions.  Families with
              predominantly or exclusively glycophytic  species that are not drought tolerant
              seem to lack gense  that lead to an extension from MI to, for example, D- 
              pinitol.       To address this point, Drs. Bohnert and Jensen propose  a
              comparative molecular, biochemical and physiological  analysis of MI
              biosynthesis and the extension of the pathway  to D-pinitol.  First, the
              biochemical characteristics of the  pathway enzymes, flux and flux control for
              carbon  partitioning from glucose 6-phosphate will be anlyzed in the 
              glycophyte, rice, and in a halophyte, ice plant.       MI biosynthesis is
              localized to the cytosol and  chlorophlasts.  Thus, one analysis will be to
              gauge the  control of relative fluxes through either pathway, and,  also, on
              the stability or sensitivity of MI biosynthesis to  external factors in each
              pathway under stress conditions.       Additionally, there are questions about
              the genetics  and genes of the pathway.  What is the genetic makeup of the 
              pathway?  How many - different - gense are there for the  enzymes in  each
              pathway, and how is the pathway controlled  during development and in which
              tissues and cells?  Is there  a difference in control distinguishing the
              glycophyte and  the halophyte during stress-free growth and under stress?
