Title       : Photoionization and Spectroscopy of Atoms and Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9507573

Award Number: 9507573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hari Saha hps1@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1241      ATOMIC & MOLECULAR PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal area of activity will be on the study of  electron dynamics in the
              halogen atoms, both the core and  the valence electrons.  The halogen atom,
              with one missing  electron in the outer p-shell, is a prototype open-shell 
              element, and an understanding of the electron dynamics in  these atoms is
              fundamental to the characterization of  electron motion at the multiplet level.
               The experiments  which will be carried out are made possible through  advances
              in synchrotron radiation sources and atomic target  sources which allow for the
              elucidation of the details of  electron dynamics at an unprecedented degree of 
              differentiation. Isolation of decay processes at the LS  multiplet level are a
              routine feature of the experiments,  and isolation at the J fine-structure
              level, where  experiments reveal the presence of significant effects due  to
              spin-orbit coupling, will be stressed.    This research program has the general
              theme of studying the  details of electron correlation as it is manifest in the
               dynamics of electron motion in open-shell and doubly  excited atoms.  The main
              thrust of the program is toward  the study of those elements in which the
              influence of the  anisotropic potential on the motion of the electrons has  yet
              to be probed at the detailed level appropriate to an  open-shell structure. 
              The proposed experiments constitute  the first indepth examination of the
              predictions of  existing theories for these complex many-body systems and  are
              aimed at giving impetus to the development of more  advanced theoretical
              models.  An accompanying set of  measurements on the double excitations in
              helium, the  prototype three-body system, will supplement the principal 
              effort, and the detailed examination of dynamics of excited-  state metastable
              atoms will set the stage for the future  direction for the research.
