Title       : Probing the Mechanism of Translocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9507126

Award Number: 9507126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek Wower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               EbA      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    ^ DbA   ^
              DbA                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       jack cohen 
                                      jack cohen                  @     jSj6                 
                      @         e =       e                                                  
                                          j       j   j       j       j       j       j      
                                                                              4   1          
                                                                                             
                                              e   T       (   4                       j      
                                                                                4            
                j       j                                                                    
                j               j                                       ~               j    
                j       j       j                           .                                
                                                                              9507126 Wower
              Translation in Escherichia coli follows a universal mechanism. Proteins are
              synthesized on the ribosome according to the information encoded in messenger
              RNA (mRNA). Transfer RNA (tRNA) acts as an adaptor molecule that supplies
              activated amino acids and decodes mRNA. Formation of the peptide bond is
              followed by translocation, a process that shifts mRNA by one codon, displaces
              peptidyl tRNA from the A site to the P site and transfers deacylated tRNA from
              the P site to the E site. An ordered series of interactions between ribosomes,
              tRNA, mRNA and translational factors is required during this process. Our
              knowledge about the ways translational apparatus work is still limited, because
              the nature of the interacti ons in the translocation process is not well
              understood. The molecular mechanism of translocation of tRNA mRNA complexes
              through the ribosome is evolutionarily conserved. In Escherichia coli, this
              process is mediated by elongation factor G (EF G) while in eukaryotes,
              translocation is catalyzed by elongation factor 2 (EF 2). Recently EF 2 has
              been linked to cancer and aging process based on levels of EF 2 in normal and
              cancerous cells. Both EF G and EF 2 are thought to act as molecular switches
              regulated by their ribosome dependent GTP hydrolysis activities. Evidence
              gathered during the last two decades strongly suggest that EF G interactions
              with 23S rRNA and tRNA play an important role in translocation. While EF G 23S
              rRNA interactions have been extensively studied, nearly nothing is known about
              potential EF G tRNA interactions.  The main questions which will be addressed
              in this proposal are: (1) How are EF G and tRNA arranged on the ribosome at
              different stages of translocation ? (2) Which structural determinants within
              tRNA are recognized by EF-G ? To begin answering these questions, thereby
              broadening our understanding of translocation, the following experiments will
              be performed: (1) Transfer RNA derivatives containing photoreactive nucleotides
              will be constructed using recently developed recombinant RNA techniques.
              Photoreactive tRNA species will be cross linked to EF G at various stages of
              translocation. As photolysis of photoreactive nucleotides generates 'zero
              length' cross links, photoaffinity labeling experiments will be used to
              identify the components of EF G and tRNA that are in contact. (2) Cross linking
              experiments will be followed by chemical footprinting of variants of native and
              unmodified tRNAs to determine which structural features of tRNA are required
              for its recognition by EF G. Data derived from the cross linking and chemical
              footprinting studies will be used to initiate in vitro mutagenesis of EF G.
              This line of investigation will build a foundation for future studies on  amino
              acids in EF G which contribute to EF G tRNA interaction.  Data derived from
              cross linking studies, when incorporated into the recently solved three
              dimensional structure of EF G, will provide the first information on the mutual
              arrangement of EF G and tRNA on the Escherichia coli ribosome during the
              elongation cycle of protein synthesis. Identification of nucleotides and, in
              the future, amino acids involved in EF G tRNA interactions will also further
              our insight into the mechanism of translocation during protein synthesis in
              Escherichia coli. Given the considerable conservation of the translational
              apparatus throughout evolution, this information should lay the groundwork for
              better understanding of ribosomal translocation in other organisms. %%% The
              molecular mechanism of translocation of transfer RNA (tRNA) and messenger RNA
              (mRNA) through the ribosome is evolutionarily conserved. In Escherichia coli,
              this process is promoted by elongation factor G (EF-G) while in eukaryotes,
              translocation is catalyzed by elongation factor 2 (EF-2). Recently EF-2 has
              been linked to cancer and the aging process.  Evidence gathered during the last
              two decades strongly indicate that EF-G interactions with ribosomal RNA (23S
              rRNA) and tRNA play an important role in translocation. While EF-G 23S rRNA
              interactions have been extensively studied, nearly nothing is known about
              EF-G:tRNA interactions. Recombinant RNA technology, cross-linking and genetic
              approaches will be used to answer two questions: (1) How are EF-G and tRNA
              arranged on the ribosome? (2) Which structural determinants within tRNA are
              recognized by EF-G?  Results of these studies will be used to initiate in vitro
              mutagenesis experiments designed to identify amino acids which contribute to
              EF-G tRNA interactions.  Data derived from the proposed studies will provide
              the first information on the mutual arrangement of EF-G and t
