Title       : Accumulation, Inequality, and Commodity Prices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9507809

Award Number: 9507809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angus S. Deaton deaton@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christina H. Paxson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research will contribute to our understanding of two  economic phenomena,
              neither of which has been satisfactorily  explained to date.  The first is why
              the prices of primary  commodities such as rice, tin, copper, etc. have trended
              slowly  downward over time, in spite of vast increases in demand.  For  many of
              these goods, it is thought that supply disturbances are  the most important
              determinants of price; the coffee harvest  fails in Brazil, or there is a
              miners' strike in Zaire or Chile.  If so, it is hard to explain why it is that
              booms and slumps in  prices last so long, instead of coming and going with the 
              fluctuations in weather or political events that cause them.  Another widely
              canvassed explanation looks to the behavior of  speculators whichy can prolong
              slumps and booms.  However,  previous research has shown that speculative
              activity, even in  conjunction with supply shocks, cannot explain what is
              observed.   This project will focus on wage trends in developing countries as 
              a possible explanation for falling commodity prices and  industrial demand as
              an explanation for shorter-term  fluctuations.  If these explanations are
              correct, it will switch  attention away from speculators and storage as the
              main source of  commodity price fluctuations.    The second topic analyzes
              saving and wealth accumulation, with a  particular focus on explaining
              disparities between people in  their living standards and wealth.  Many
              industrialized economies  have experienced sharp increases in inequality during
              the 1980s.   There are many potential explanations for this increase including 
              technological shifts, demographic changes, and increasing  competition from
              developing countries, but the dynamics of  inequality remain mysterious. 
              Recent research has drawn a link  between asset accumulation, time, and
              inequality.  Because  different people are differentially lucky in their
              earnings and  income, and because differences in luck cumulate over time, 
              inequality in living standards is likely t o increase with time  for any given
              group of people.  This appears to be true for the  United States, with much
              greater earning and consumption  inequality among older than younger Americans.
               This research  will look at whether this is also true for wealth, and whether,
               as the theory suggests, wealth inequality increases particularly  rapidly over
              time.  More generally, the links between earnings  inequality and wealth
              inequality and the role played by saving  will be analyzed.
