Title       : RUI: Memory in the Immune Response to Fluorescein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9507010

Award Number: 9507010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Owen jowen@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               Y4E                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       L       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      Y4E    
              Y4E        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                           4   5   6   7   8 
               9   :   ;   <   =   >                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                INDOWPOS   GETWINDOWTASK  
              GETDOUBLECLICKTIME   ISCHARALPHA   BEAR3062  DLGDIRSELECTc  LOCKWINDOWUPDATE& 
              SETCOMMEVENTMASK   SETPROP   GETDLGCTRLID   POSTMESSAGEn  EQUALRECT  
              DEFFRAMEPROC   SETTIMER   LSTRCMP   LOADDIBCURSORHANDLERd  INSENDMESSAGE  
              SETMEAbstract 9507010 Owen    This proposal is studying the differences in
              lymphocytes responding to a foreign body for the first time (primary response)
              and those lymphocytes responding after having had prior exposure to that
              antigen (memory response).  Long term cultures of B cells derived from primary
              and memory mice immunized with fluoresceinated macromolecules (as the antigen)
              will be generated by fusion with myeloma cells.   The density of the
              fluorescein on the carrier as well as the nature of the carrier used for
              immunization , will be varied to alter the extent of T cell help in the
              development of the antibody response.  The DNA sequences of IgM
              anti-fluorescein antibodies from primary and memory mice will be compared to
              determine whether there is  evidence for a unique population of secondary B
              cells expressing an antibody repertoire different from that secreted by animals
              recognizing the antigen for the first time.  Sequence comparisons will also be
              made between antibodies derived from animals in which T cell help has been
              optimized or minimized. Cytotoxic T cells from memory and primary mice  differ
              in their abilities to recognize and respond to cells with low densities of
              surface antigens, but the biological mechanisms for these differences are not
              understood.  This proposal will test whether immunization with
              fluorescein-coupled cells increases the frequency of fluorescein-response
              cytotoxic T cell precursors, whether different populations of cytotoxic T cells
              respond after the animal is antigenically experienced, or whether each type of
              cytotoxic T cells responds after the animal becomes antigenically experienced,
              or whether each individual cytotoxic T cell proliferates more efficiently and
              or binds more effectively to its target cells once it had prior antigenic
              exposure.   Cytotoxic T cells will be generated from primary and memory mice,
              fused with long-lived tumor cells and their receptor genes analyzed by DNA
              sequencing.  Cell surface density of the receptor and its associated molecules
              will be measured by flow cytometry, and the frequencies of  cytotoxic T cell
              precursors measured by limiting dilution analyses. %%%  These studies looking
              at differences in cells of the immune system during primary and secondary
              immune responses will increase our understanding of the basis of immunological
              memory.  ***                                              Oh     +'  0         
                                           $       H       l                                 
                           D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       Abstract   
                                      Barbara   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n          
                              (                                                   3          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               Zain          
                           Shirley Parker              @     W1 8                          @ 
                                               @      J4E                                    
                                                                           @    F #          
                                       Microsoft Word 6.0                                    
                               3                                                             
                                       ;                                                     
                                 e =       e               4   L                   4         
                                           l       l   l       l       l       l       l     
                                                                                   1         
                                                                       3       5       5     
               5       S               s           T       6                           l     
                                                                                             
                 l       l                                                                   
                 l               l               3                                       l   
                 l       l       l               3                                           
                                                                               Abstract
              9507010 Owen    This proposal is studying the differences in lymphocytes
              responding to a foreign body for the first time (primary response) and those
              lymphocytes responding after having had prior exposure to that antigen (memory
              response).  Long term cultures of B cells derived from primary and memory mice
              immunized with fluoresceinated macromolecules (as the antigen) will be
              generated by fusion with myeloma cells.   The density of the fluorescein on the
              carrier as well as the nature of the carrier used for immunization , will be
              varied to alter the extent o
