Title       : Interaction of Plant Cell Surface Macromolecules and Controlof Cell Expansion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9507191

Award Number: 9507191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Kang Zhu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507191  Zhu  The long-term objectives of this research are to determine the
              functions of plant cell surface proteins in cell differentiation and plant
              morphogenesis, and to study the underlying molecular and cell biological basis
              of such functions.  Plasma membrane arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) are a
              family of abundant proteoglycans that are thought to interact with both the
              cytoskeleton and cell wall.  Arabidopsis plants treated with Beta-D-glucosyl
              Yariv antigen (a small ligand that selectively binds AGPs), phenocopy the reb
              (root epidermal bulger) mutants which display root epidermal cell bulging,
              reduced root growth and sharp root bending.  This observation strongly suggests
              for the first time a role of cell surface AGPs in the control of direction of
              cell expansion and root development, and predicts that the reb mutants contain
              defective AGPs in the root.  To test this hypothesis, studies will be carried
              out to further examine the effect of Yariv antigen treatment on Arabidopsis
              root development.  AGPs in reb mutants will be analyzed using crossed
              electrophoresis and immuno- histochemistry.  To understand the underlying
              mechanisms of AGP function, several novel approaches will be employed to
              characterize the interactions between AGPs and other cell surface
              macromolecules.  Furthermore, Beta-D-glucosyl Yariv antigen-insensitive
              Arabidopsis mutants will be isolated and characterized.  The mutants will be
              useful in identifying loci that control the interaction between AGPs and their
              cell surface ligands.  This integrated biochemical, molecular, and genetic
              approach will enable us to firmly establish a role for cell surface AGPs in the
              control of cell expansion and root development, and allow a better
              understanding of the underlying molecular and cell biological mechanisms for
              such a function.
