Title       : Molecular Analysis of Pattern Refinement in Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9507406

Award Number: 9507406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Jaynes J_JAYNES@lac.jci.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tadaatsu Goto  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                IBN-9507406  Tadaatsu Goto  Thomas Jefferson University    Pattern formation
              is the process by which embryonic cells form  ordered spatial arrangements of
              cells.  This process and the  differentiation of embryonic cells make ordered
              development of  embryos possible.  An effective system to study pattern
              formation  in development is segmentation in Drosophila, controlled by a 
              hierarchically organized set of genes encoding transcription  factors. 
              Molecular events underlying the formation of segments can  be considered as a
              progressive refinement of positional  information, reflected in the expression
              patterns of these genes.   Maternal mRNAs for segmentation genes first activate
              downstream  genes in a series of broad, overlapping domains along the anterior-
               posterior axis; these in turn activate the "pair-rule genes"  expressed in 7
              regularly spaced stripes, which then activate  subordinate genes in 14 stripes.
               This leads to the formation of 14  repetitive metameres, or segments.  One
              pair-rule gene critical to  this cascade is even-skipped (eve).  The initial
              broad stripes of  eve expression, that span 4-6 nuclei, become narrow and
              sharply  defined, 1-2 cells in width, as time progresses.  This refinement  of
              the pattern apparently enables eve to play a series of roles in  regulating
              other genes with increasing precision.  These  investigators will explore the
              mechanisms and function of this  refinement.  They have already identified a
              cis-regulatory region  call the "late element" in the eve locus that controls
              the  expression of refined stripes; this element seems to be activated  by
              products of other pair-rule genes.  The investigators will  identify pair-rule
              gene products that interact with the late  element directly.  First, they will
              locate and analyze cis-  regulatory sites within the late element critical for
              interactions,  employing a novel transgenic strategy they have developed. 
              Second,  they will perform detailed biochemical studies of protein-DNA 
              interactions at these sites.   These studies will allow the  investigators
              better understand how eve and other pair-rule genes  combine their regulatory
              effects, contributing to understanding the  molecular mechanisms of embryonic
              development.    ***
