Title       : Membrane Dynamics as a Control of Chemical Processes in Bacterial Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9507189

Award Number: 9507189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rawle I. Hollingsworth rih@argus.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507189    Bacteria and other microorganisms are surrounded by  a  thin 
              molecular  skin or membrane across which they interact  with  the  external
              environment.  The molecular structure of  this  membrane adapts dynamically to
              allow the organism to survive  in   the  particular  environment.  Information 
              about   the  organism's environment is transmitted via components of this 
              membrane  known  as  lipids.  These  lipids  are  constantly  changing  in 
              structure  in  response  to  the  environment.  Understanding this capacity for
              dynamic adaptive change  and  the  nature of the actual changes themselves
              constitute  the  central  foci of this research. The structural modifications 
              that  occur  in  the  membrane during  adaptive  change  are  directed  by
              enzymes that, in addition to functioning  under  extremely  adverse 
              conditions,  have  activities  that  are  regulated   by   the  actual 
              conditions  themselves.   This  constitutes an important molecular feed-back
              phenomenon that  is critical to our understanding of adaptation. The research 
              will  use  spectroscopic and chromatographic  techniques  to  determine  the
              changes in fatty acid structure and molecular  cross-linking  that  occur  in 
              bacterial  membranes  during  adaptation  to extreme conditions.  The ability
              of  bacteria  to  adapt to extremes of temperature, pressure, acidity  and  the
               presence of organic solvents and other chemical species  is   important 
              because  of  their  potential   utility   as  biocatalysts, bioremediation
              agents or to fix gases such  as  nitrogen  or  carbon dioxide.  Better
              understanding  of  the  critical  features  that  determine this  adaptability 
              will  improve our ability to use it to human advantage.
