Title       : Post-transcriptional Control of Immunoglobulin Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9507513

Award Number: 9507513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha L. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507513  Peterson  Regulated transcriptional termination and RNA processing of
              the immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain ( gene will be examined during B cell
              development. The long-term goal of this research is to better understand the
              general mechanisms governing these events as well as to determine the basis for
              the developmentally regulated changes that occur during B cell maturation. The
              regulated alternative processing of a  ( precursor RNA to form (s and (m mRNA
              does not require any Ig gene-specific sequences. Instead, the important feature
              of this gene is that it contains signals for competing splice and
              cleavage-polyadenylation reactions. Thus, the amount or activity of a general
              factor(s) involved in these two processes must be altered during B cell
              maturation. It will be determined whether splicing is regulated during B cell
              maturation by analyzing alternative splice choices made in the absence of a
              poly(A) site in B cells as compared to plasma cells. An in vitro
              splicing/polyadenylation system that will mimic in vivo ( gene characteristics
              will be examined. Successfully establishing an in vitro system to study (
              regulation would provide the basis for many future experiments. The expression
              of the known general RNA processing regulators in B cells and plasma cells will
              be examined to identify factors that potentially mediate the regulation; any
              whose expression correlates with ( processing changes will be studied further
              by over-expression in B cells and/or plasma cells. These experiments, taken
              together, will provide a more complete picture of ( processing regulation and
              should begin to identify the trans-acting RNA processing components that are
              altered during B cell maturation. To investigate transcriptional termination
              and its regulation, the transcription of intact and modified ( genes, stably
              introduced into plasma cell and B cell lines, will be analyzed by nuclear
              run-on experiments to identify their termination regions. Gene modifications
              will be designed to determine the contributio n that the two ( poly(A) sites,
              the poly(A) site strength, and the downstream sequences within the termination
              region make to the overall termination process. This study, by comparing normal
              and modified genes in a single cell type will provide information about the
              general process of termination and, by comparing the modified genes in both B
              cells and plasma cells, will examine the basis for regulatory changes in this
              process.  %%%  Regulated transcriptional termination and RNA processing of the
              immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain ( gene will be examined during B cell
              development. The long-term goal of this research is to better understand the
              general mechanisms governing these events as well as to determine the basis for
              the developmentally regulated changes that occur during B cell maturation.  
              ***
