Title       : Protein DNA Interactions Probed by UV Resonance Raman Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9507241

Award Number: 9507241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ishita Mukerji IMUKERJI@WESLEYAN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507241  Mukerji  This research addresses molecular recognition and specificity
              in  genetic regulatory processes which are mediated by protein binding,  using
              a combination of spectroscopic and biochemical approaches.   An understanding
              of these processes is gained by directly studying  the molecular contacts
              defining the protein-nucleotide interface,  using UV resonance Raman (UVRR)
              spectroscopy.  This spectroscopic  technique investigates the sequence
              specificity of the protein-DNA  interaction by monitoring the H-bond pairings
              of nucleotide  exocyclic amino and carbonyl groups.  Additionally, the Raman 
              effect is enhanced by tuning into an absorption band; therefore,  different
              regions of the binary complex can be probed by varying  the excitation
              wavelength. Thus, in addition to identifying the  contacts which confer
              specificity to the binding site, UVRR  spectroscopy also monitors
              conformational changes in both the  protein and DNA.  Investigations are
              conducted on two proteins, HU and Integration  Host Factor(IHF), both members
              of a class of prokaryotic histone-  like proteins. These proteins facilitate
              the binding and action of  regulatory proteins by binding to the minor groove
              and bending the  DNA.  The majority of previously characterized protein-nucleic
              acid  interactions have typically involved direct contact between the  protein 
              -helix and the major groove.  In HU and IHF, binding and  recognition occurs
              between  -strands and the minor groove,  representative of a different class of
              interaction.  To date very  few crystal structures exist for this type of
              protein-DNA  interaction and this research provides a mechanism for identifying
               the factors which confer specificity and stability to the  nucleosome complex.
                   %%%  Understanding the growth and development of cells centers on an 
              understanding of the factors that regulate growth.  At the most  basic level
              this involves knowing how genes work and the factors  that cause them to "turn
              on or turn off."  In this research the  mec hanism of regulation is studied by
              examining the interface  between genetic regulatory proteins and the gene or
              the DNA.  These  proteins bind to the gene and either promote or repress its 
              function.  To understand how these proteins function, it is  important to know
              in detail how they interact with DNA.  A laser  spectroscopic technique, UV
              resonance Raman spectroscopy, is used  to investigate the interface between the
              proteins and the DNA.   This method monitors the internal vibrations of
              molecules, which  are a sensitive measure of the structure and bonding of a
              molecule.   Using this technique, different parts of the protein or the DNA can
               be selectively examined, thereby allowing direct investigation of  the
              important regions and contact points.  These experiments probe  the complex
              formed between regulatory proteins and genes and  contribute towards
              understanding how genetic function is regulated  in the cell.    ***
