Title       : Similarities and Differences Between the Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase and Acyl-CoA
               Oxidase Catalyzed Reactions: Kinetic and Structural-Functional Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9507292

Award Number: 9507292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. K. Srivastava dk.srivastava@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             'qRp:                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       !       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    'qRp:  
              'qRp:        4 @                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    Esc to end Archive
              folder:  Bulletin Board:  Folder:  Message cannot be read.  Message Contents 
              From:  Forwarded by:  To mailing list:  Receipt Requested  To bulletin board: 
              cc:  cc mailing list:  bcc:  To folder:  To:  Subject:  Subject:  Unknown
              recip9507292 Srivastava The similarities and differences between the acyl CoA
              dehydrogenase and acyl CoA oxidase catalyzed reactions will be studied.
              Although these enzymes appear to be structurally different, they are known to
              catalyze the same chemical transformation reaction, albeit by utilizing
              (physiologically) different types of electron acceptors (i.e., electron
              transferring flavoprotein, ETF, versus O2. How similar and/or different are
              these enzymes as regards to their overall catalytic mechanisms? The P.I. will
              to undertake a comparative mechanistic and structural functional studies of
              these enzymes by employing kinetic and other physical techniques. (1) By
              utilizing a variety of chromogenic/chromophoric substrate/product pairs, they
              will ascertain the influence of the enzyme site environments on the electronic
              structures of these species during the ligand binding and/or catalysis. They
              will examine the molecular basis of the diverse spectral changes of both FAD
              and chromophoric enoyl CoA's within the enzyme enoyl CoA complexes. (2) They
              will investigate whether the changes in the bond structure s of these
              substrates and/or products are directly coupled to the changes in the protein
              structures of these enzymes. The extent to which the protein conformational
              changes influence the ligand binding and/or catalysis will be ascertained. (3)
              They will undertake a detailed comparative investigation of the "reductive" and
              "oxidative" half reactions of these enzymes under a variety of experimental
              conditions. Particular emphasis will be made to discern whether the acyl CoA
              oxidase catalyzed "reductive" half reaction also involves formation of a
              metastable intermediary species? How different are the microscopic pathways of
              the oxidative half  reactions of these enzymes? (4) The influence of pH and
              deuterium isotopes on the transient and steady state kinetic profiles of these
              enzymes will be examined. Based on these experiments, the nature of the
              transition states during the conversion of acyl CoA's to the corresponding
              enoyl CoA's by these enzymes will be deduced. The experimental results derived
              from these studies will be rationalized in the light of the known three
              dimensional structure of medium chain fatty acyl CoA dehydrogenase and by
              computer graphic model building studies. %%% This is an investigation of the
              similarity and differences between the acyl CoA dehydrogenase and acyl CoA
              oxidase catalyzed reactions. Although these enzymes appear to be structurally
              different, they are known to catalyze the same chemical transformation
              reaction, albeit by utilizing (physiologically) different types of electron
              acceptors (i.e., electron transferring flavoprotein, ETF, versus O2)  How
              similar and/or different are these enzymes as regards to their overall
              catalytic mechanisms? A comparative mechanistic and structural-functional
              studies of these enzymes will be performed using kinetic and other physical
              techniques The experimental results derived from these studies will be
              rationalized in the light of the known three dimensional structure of medium
              chain fatty acyl CoA dehydrogenase and by the computer  graphic model  building
              studies. ***         @     @   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n             
                           (                                                   @             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            Oh     +'  0                                       $       H     
               l                                               D       h                     
                                           R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                     
                               marcia steinberg                    Rhonda Young              
               @    U   9                          @                                   @   
              'qRp:                                                                          
                                     @    J 6                                    Microsoft
              Word 6.0                                                      4                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  e =       e               p
                !                   p                                       j       j   j    
                j       j       j       j                                                    
                                l   1                                                        
                                                        .
