Title       : RUI: Quantitative Relationships for Water and Solute Transport in Plant Tissue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9507240

Award Number: 9507240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph K. E. Ortega jortega@carbon.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9198,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507240  Ortega  The overall goal of Dr. Ortega's  previous theoretical and
              experimental research was the development of quantitative relationships that
              describe growth (enlargement) and water uptake of single fungal and plant
              cells.  These inestigations have produced three simultaneous and interrelated
              governing equations (Augmented Growth Equations)  that describe  the behavior
              of cell wall extension, water uptake, and turgor pressure.  The overall
              objective of the proposed research is to extend (modify, adapt, and/or 
              augment) the previously established Augmented Growth Equations to study cell
              wall extension, water transport, and solute transport in plant tissue.  Some
              long-term objectives are (a) to establish governing equations that describe
              wall extension behavior, water transport behavior, and solute transport
              behavior for growing plant tissue, plant organs, and whole plants, (b) to
              determine the magnitude and behvior of the inclusive biomechanical and
              biophysical parameters, and (c) to elucidate the biological mechanisms used to
              control the magnitude and behavior of these parameters.      The volumetric
              elastic modulus, E, is an important biomechanical parameter that controls the
              amount of elastic cell wall extension that occurs when the turgor pressure
              changes, and participates in the regulation of water transport in plant cells
              and plant tissue during dynamic conditions such as growth, day/night cycles
              (diel patterns), and periods of water stress.  Importantly, E is a function of
              the turgor pressure, E(P).  It follows that comprehensive models of water
              trnasport, growth, and plant responses to diel patterns and water deficits,
              must employ accurate values for E and account for its dependence on turgor
              pressure.  It has been difficult to obtain accurate extimates of Estat, and to
              determine its dependence on pressure, using the pressure chamber because the
              pressure is not measured directly by the pressure chamber method.  Recently,
              Dr. Ortega has developed a new pressure probe method (whi ch measures the
              turgor pressure directly) to determine Estat and its dependence on turgor
              pressure, Estat(P).  Investigations are proposed to use this new pressure probe
              method to measure Estat(P) for dehydrating and rehydrating pea stems (Pisum
              sativum L.).  The results obtained from dehydration and rehydration experiments
              will be compared to determine whether there is significant hysteresis in the
              pressure-volume relation for cells in pea stem tissue.  Also, it is not known
              how Estat(P) compares with Einst(P).  Investigations are proposed to determine
              Estat(P) and Einst(P) for the same cells and tissue, to elucidate the
              relationship between the two values.
