Title       : RUI: Normal Cellular Process During Heat Shock: Secretory Protein mRNA Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9507328

Award Number: 9507328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Brodl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9507318  Brodl     To study the cell biology of higher plants' responses to
              environmental stress, a model system for   investigation is the heat shock
              response of barley aleurone cells. Normally aleurone cells are   dedicated to
              protein secretion; however, heat shock dramatically redirects their cellular
              activities.   Heat shock abruptly arrests secretory protein synthesis, yet
              nonsecretory protein synthesis   continues. This is accomplished by the
              selective destabilization of otherwise stable secretory   protein mRNAs. Heat
              shock also causes the loss of the stacked cistemal ER lamellae upon which  
              secretory protein mRNAs are translated; only short, single tubular ER remain.
              Ribosome density   decreases by 50%. This may provide the discriminatory
              mechanism or selectively stopping the   synthesis of secretory proteins;
              nonseeretory protein mRNAs are translated by "free" ribosomes.   The principal
              distinction between secretory and nonsecretory protein mRNAs is a region
              encoding   an amino terminal signal sequence that directs secretory protein
              mRNA translation to take place at   the ER surface. This proposal investigates
              the mechanisms that operate during heat shock to   selectively destabilize
              secretory protein mRNA. There are two central objectives in this work: 1)   To
              determine whether the signal sequence is an important factor in selectively
              targeting secretory   protein mRNA for destabilization. Using PCR the coding
              region for the signal sequence (ss) of the   secretory protein a-amylase will
              be fused in-frame to the coding region of b-glucuronidase (GUS).   Constructs
              will also be made that include either or both the 5' and 3' untranslated
              regions (UTRs)   of a-amyase such that they flank GUS or ss-GUS. Transcription
              will be driven by the tetracycline-  regulated Top l0 promoter. The constructs
              will be microprojectile bombarded into intact aleurone   layers. The levels of
              the GUS reporter transcript will be monitored by GUS selected PCR  
              amplification at set intervals following tetrac ycline-induced transcription
              arrest. 2) To understand   something of the fate of secretory protein mRNAs
              upon heat shock. For this objective two types of   experiments will be
              performed: a) The levels of secretory protein mRNAs in free and ER-bound  
              polysomes before and at selected intervals during heat shock will be monitored
              in order to learn   whether secretory protein mRNAs remain attached to the ER
              during heat shock. b) UV   cross-linking experiments with radiolabeled
              a-amylase mRNA (including the UTRs) and cell   lysates will be performed to
              investigate whether heat shock induces the binding of RNA binding   proteins
              that may play a role in the destabilization of secretory protein mRNAs.  %%% 
              Plants respond to higher-than-normal, non-lethal temperatures by synthesizing
              heat shock proteins   and by transiently shutting down the synthesis of other
              proteins necessary for normal growth and   development. My laboratory works to
              understand how the shut down is controlled.  Our model   system for study is
              aleurone, an outer layer of cells surrounding the cereal grain whose function
              is   to start the breakdown of starch reserves during germination. If the
              aleurone layer is briefly   exposed to higher-than-normal temperature (heat
              shock), the synthesis of proteins involved this   breakdown, including the
              starch-digesting enzyme, amylase, is shut down. The synthesis of other  
              proteins, those not released (secreted) from the aleurone,  continues unabated.
               Early experiments   have determined the cause of this selective cessation of
              protein synthesis.  Messenger RNAs   (mRNAs) (transcripts of genetic
              information encoded by DNA) encoding the secreted proteins are   destabilized,
              but nonsecretory protein mRNAs remain stable. To determine why, focus is
              brought   to bear on another difference between mRNAs for secretory and
              non-secretory proteins. Secretory   proteins frequently have additional amino
              acids tacked onto one end which are cleaved from the   mature protein, but
              function to target the prote in to the secretory system and are encoded by
              their   mRNA.  This sequence of amino acids is called the "signal sequence". 
              Does the signal sequence   contribute to the instability of mRNAs encoding
              secreted proteins?  To answer that question,   genetic engineering will be used
              to fuse the signal sequence coded by amylase mRNA to the mRNA   encoding an
              easily assayed (reporter) protein (b-glucuronidase) that is not normally
              secreted.  The   stability of the reporter protein mRNA with and without the
              signal sequence will be monitored   during heat shock.  If the hypothesis that
              the signal sequence confers sensitivity to heat is correct,   then the proteins
              which cause destabilization by binding to the signal sequence-containing mRNA  
              during heat shock will be identified. These experiments to deepen our
              understanding of the plant   cellular and genetic response to environmental
              extremes are of importance to agriculture in both   temperate and tropical
              climates.  They are also important because they reveal part of the basic  
              mechanism of cellular adaptation to changes in temperature.  ***
