Title       : Career: Heterogeneity and the Macroeconomy: Research and Teaching in the
               Intersection of Industrial Organization and Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9507978

Award Number: 9507978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95604              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T K. Horvath   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9146,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9507978  Horvath    The objective of this CAREER grant is to strengthen the link
              between two strands of economics: industrial organization and macroeconomics. 
              The field of industrial organization has recently been successful in
              illuminating several key behavioral characteristics of firms.  For example,
              almost regardless of industry definition, small and young firms have been shown
              to have much more variable growth rates and higher rates of failure than large
              and old firms.  Little attempt has been made to determine the implications of
              these findings for the behavior of the macroeconomy, nor has much emphasis been
              placed on macroeconomic forces that may be shaping these findings at the
              industry level.  This research project would explore the interrelation between
              the microeconomic decision-making at the firm level and the macroeconomy.  The
              emphasis will be on understanding how macroeconomic forces such as fiscal and
              monetary policy, as well as aggregate demand and supply shocks affect the
              distribution of operating firm types in a broad selection of industries, and
              how the changing distribution of firm types influences fluctuations in
              aggregate variables such as productivity, job creation, employment, and output.
                   The education plan entails the development of course sequences for
              undergraduate and graduate student son desegregated aspects of the
              macroeconomy.  The discipline of economias has tended to overemphasize the
              division between micro and macroeconomics to the point where students feel it
              necessary to choose early in their studies which subfield to embrace.  This
              often works to the detriment of both the students and the entire field.  The
              merit of the research proposal hinges on the ability of microeconomic,
              firm-level behavior to indicate something meaningful about macroeconomic
              behavior and vice-versa.  Clearly, if the results provide insightful, then the
              distinction between microeconomics and macroeconomics from the perspective of
              how these subfields are taught is perhaps needlessl y stringent.  The proposed
              courses would detail the results of the proposed research but would also
              explore other topics.
