Title       : Signalling in Plant Development Conference, September 27th-October 1, 1995 New
               York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9507339

Award Number: 9507339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkatesan Sundaresan   (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9507339  Sundaresan    The meeting on Signalling in Plant Development will
              be held at the  Cold Spring Harbor laboratory from September 27 to October 1,
              1995.  It will be an open international meeting that will be devoted to  recent
              advances and discoveries at the interface of two swiftly  progressing fields -
              signal transduction mechanisms in plants, and  the molecular biology of plant
              development. The development of a  higher plant is regulated by a multitude of
              signals from within and  without, that evoke both generalized and specific
              biological  responses, and elucidation of the mechanisms of signalling is vital
               to understanding plant development. The emphasis of the forthcoming  meeting
              is on interpreting and integrating new finding on the  mechanisms of signal
              transduction within the context of plant  development. The need for such a
              meeting is evidenced by the rapid  advances during the last few years, e.g.
              cloning of regulators of  photomorphogenesis, elucidation of the roles of
              calcium and cGMP in  the developmental response to light, cloning of regulators
              of  pollen-stigma interactions, cloning of genes that control flowering  time,
              and cloning of genes involved in pathogen recognition. The  meeting will allow
              presentation of recent results and methodologies  in these different topics
              within a common framework, in an  atmosphere of face to face contact. In
              keeping with the traditional  format of Cold Spring Harbor meetings, the oral
              presentations will  be primarily on new unpublished finding. and particular 
              encouragement will be given to presentations by younger scientists.  The areas
              to be covered by the meeting are: 1) Germination, 2)  Photomorphogenesis, 3)
              Vegetative growth, 4) Flowering, 5)  Pollination and fertilization, 5) Fruit
              development and  embryogenesis, 6) Altered developmental programs-
              environmental  effectors and 7) Altered developmental programs- biological 
              effectors.  ***
