Title       : Hierarchical versus Simple Persuasive Messages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9507628

Award Number: 9507628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Mackie mackie@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Hierarchical persuasive messages advocate two strategies for coping with a
              stated problem, the primary recommendation touted as the best strategy and a
              secondary recommendation advocated as a contingency ("Don't have sex -- but if
              you do, use a condom"). Despite their increasing popularity in public health
              campaigns, little is known of the actual persuasive or behavioral impact of 
              hierarchical messages.  The specific aims of the proposed experiments are to
              assess the shortterm and longterm processing,   persuasive, judgmental, and
              behavioral intention consequences of hierarchical compared to simple
              (containing only one recommendation) persuasive messages.  The impact of
              receiving hierarchical and simple messages will be assessed as regards the
              general issue (for example, preventing sun-induced skin cancer), as well as the
              primary and secondary recommendations made, with particular concern for whether
              heirarchical messages strengthen or weaken the persuasive effetciveness of the
              primary (most effective) recommendation.       The spiraling cost of health
              care in this country is an issue of  both social and economic concern.  One
              simple fact is widely agreed upon: preventive behavioral change (changes that
              people make to increase the healthiness of their lifestyles) probably
              constitutes the most effective cost-cutting measure available. Behavioral
              scientists contribute to increases in preventive care by evaluating the
              effectiveness of health-related persuasive techniques designed to improve the
              general population's mental and physical health.  This program of research
              evaluates the effectiveness of hierarchical persuasive messages, which advocate
              two strategies for coping with a stated problem, the primary recommendation
              (touted as the best strategy) and a secondary recommendation (advocated as a
              contingency if the best strategy can't be achieved.  For example, the
              hierarchical message "The best way to prevent skin cancer is to avoid exposing
              your skin to the sun.  If you must go out in the s un, use sunblock" offers two
              solutions to avoidng skin cancer.  Despite their increasing popularity in
              public health campaigns, little is known of the actual persuasive or behavioral
              effectiveness of hierarchical messages.  The specific aims of the proposed
              experiments are to assess the shortterm and longterm persuasive impact of
              hierarchical messages on health-related attitudes and behavior, with particular
              concern for whether heirarchical messages strengthen or weaken the persuasive
              effectiveness of the primary (most effective) recommendation and thus
              unwittingly undermine public health.
