Title       : RUI: A Proposal to Study the Significance of Fracture- Induced Anisotropy on
               Recharge into an Alluvial Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9507991

Award Number: 9507991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Gillespie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey D. Thyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St Univ-Bakersfld Fdn
	      9001 Stockdale Highway
	      Bakersfield, CA  933111022    661/664-2252

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9189,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507991  Gillespie       This study will examine the significance of
              fracture-directed  flow on recharge patterns in an arid, alluvial aquifer. 
              Alluvial  basin aquifers in the western U.S. are dependent on recharge  derived
              from adjacent mountain ranges.  A significant amount of  this recharge may be
              transported in the subsurface via fractures  within the bedrock aquifers and
              along basin-bounding faults.  We  propose to determine the extent to which
              fracture systems within  the southern Sierra Nevada Range and the Owens Valley
              Fault Zone  redistribute recharge from the Sierras into the western part of the
               Indian Wells Valley alluvial aquifer.  The proposed research is a  logical
              extension of the investigators' interest in the  architecture and
              hydrogeochemistry of alluvial aquifers and  petroleum reservoirs.  It may have
              a broader significance in the  development of improved conceptual models of
              recharge patterns in  arid alluvial aquifers and lead to the discovery of
              ground water  resources in areas normally considered poor candidates for ground
               water development.       Our methods will include remote sensing, surface and 
              subsurface field studies to determine the location of phreatic  divides, the
              orientation of fracture patterns, the hydraulic  gradient along the fractures
              and gradients within the alluvial  aquifer.  Chemical and isotopic analyses,
              including age-dating  along the major flow paths, will be used to delineate
              flow systems,  assess the role of fractures as barriers or conduits and
              constrain  the relative contribution of fracture-directed flow versus surface 
              recharge.  Finally, geologic and hydrologic data will be  incorporated into
              existing numerical flow models and the amount and  distribution of subsurface
              recharge to the alluvial aquifer  quantified.  The investigators will employ
              undergraduate and  graduate students and provide training in the qualitative
              and  quantitative techniques of classis field geology, hydrogeology and 
              hydrochemistry.  The students will play an ac tive role in the  dissemination
              of the information via abstracts, poster sessions,  presentations and travel to
              regional professional society meetings.
