Title       : Effect of Nerves on Kidney Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9507444

Award Number: 9507444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Rouch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucia H. Kudo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University-
	      1111 West 17th Street
	      Tulsa, OK  74107    918/561-8334

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507444  Rouch      On a long-term basis, the most important organ in the body
              for controlling blood pressure is the kidney.  Although many people believe
              that only the heart is important for regulating blood pressure, it is the
              function of the kidney which assures that the body maintains the correct amount
              of blood for the heart to pump.  The kidney also functions to maintain an
              adequate supply of total body fluid so that all bodily organs including the
              brain, stomach, liver, intestines, muscles, etc., are surrounded by the proper
              amount of water, electrolytes, and nutrients to function properly.  For the
              kidney to adequately perform these critically important responsibilities,
              nerves send signals to the kidney and these signals, in effect, tell the kidney
              what to do with respect to water, electrolytes, and other substances.  The
              physiological mechanism of nerve action on the kidney is not well-understood,
              and innovative research is required to uncover the mysteries of the interaction
              between nerves and kidneys.  The proposed research project is designed to study
              this important interaction by measuring various properties related to salt and
              water transport in the rat kidney in response to nerve action.  The rat kidney
              has been studied quite extensively in the past and thus, provides an excellent
              experimental model for the proposed research study.  Specifically, this project
              will be an investigation of how nerve receptors in the kidney function to
              control the renal handling of salt and water which is very important in the
              maintenance of normal blood pressure.  The information gained from this study
              will add significantly to body of knowledge involved with the how the kidney
              controls blood pressure and what role the nerves play in this very important
              function.  ***
