Title       : Studies in Gravitational Waves and Neutron Star Ocean Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9507686

Award Number: 9507686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhay Ashtekar ashtekar@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Curt Cutler  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jorge A. Pullin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Of the several gravitational wave sources that could  potentially be seen by
              LIGO and VIRGO, the most promising  candidate appears to be mergers of neutron
              stars or black  holes in tight binaries.  For the so-called `Advanced' 
              versions of these detectors, anticipated event rates from  mergers are ~102/yr.
               Naturally, one will want to glean as  much astronomical information as
              possible from these  detections:  one will want to determine the angular
              position  and distance to the binary, whether the bodies are neutron  stars or
              black holes, the masses of the two bodies,  et cetera.  Prof. Cutler will
              initiate a program of research  to determine how accurately LIGO/VIRGO can
              measure these  quantities.  In extracting this information from the 
              gravitational wave signal, there are two kinds of errors:  measurement errors
              due to detector noise, and theoretical  errors due to limitations on the
              ability of relativists to  accurately calculate the inspiral waveform for a
              given set  of binary parameters.  Cutler is investigating both kinds of  error,
              using a mixture of Monte Carlo and analytic  techniques.  The analysis is made
              difficult by the fact that  much of the interesting information is encoded in
              small,  post-Newtonian pieces of the waveform.    There are three principal
              motivations for the above  research.  First, it provides guidance to
              experimentalists  as to which elements of the detector design are most crucial 
              for doing astronomy.  Second, it provides theorists a guide  to the level of
              accuracy they must `shoot for' in solving  the two-body problem.  Third, the
              results allow one to judge  the feasibility of potential astronomical
              applications of  binary coalescences, such as using them as standard candles 
              to determine the Hubble constant.
