Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Microstructural Develop- ment and
               Characterization of Cyclic Fatique Crack Behavior of In Situ Toughened
               Monolithic SiC Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9507653

Award Number: 9507653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert O. Ritchie roritchie@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5942,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9507653  Ritchie    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Robert O.
              Ritchie, Department of  Materials Science and Mineral Engineering, University
              of California,  Berkeley, to pursue with Dr. Do Kyung Kim, Department of
              Ceramic Science  and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
              Technology  (KAIST), for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on
              microstructural  development and characterization of cyclic fatigue crack
              behavior of in situ  toughened monolithic silicon carbide (SiC) ceramics.  The
              joint research will  focus on the microstructural development of SiC ceramics
              sintered with oxide  additives in order to promote optimal mechanical
              properties, especially, fatigue  crack-growth behavior at elevated
              temperatures.  The Korean collaborator will  work primarily on the processing
              of recently developed in situ toughened SiC  (including microstructural
              control), characterization of the microstructure, and  determination of the
              role of additives on sintering behavior and mechanical  properties, including
              toughness and flexural strength.  SiC materials prepared  at KAIST will be sent
              to the PI's laboratory where cyclic fatigue behavior will  be characterized. 
              Fatigue-crack propagation behavior will be evaluated over  temperatures ranging
              from ambient to 1,800 C.  This phase of the work will  involve both macroscopic
              growth-rate measurements and characterization of  microstructural damage
              mechanisms.    Monolithic SiC-based ceramics are promising candidate materials
              for ultra-high  temperature structural components in heat engines, heat
              exchangers, and many  other devices because of their excellent oxidation
              resistance, strength retention  at high temperatures, high wear resistance,
              good thermal conductivity, and  relatively low coefficient of thermal
              expansion.  Considerable expertise has  been developed at KAIST in the
              production of these monolithic ceramics with  improved microstructures.  The
              PI's research group has developed  considerable expertise in the characteriza
              tion of such ceramics at ambient and  elevated temperatures.  The PI and his
              Korean collaborator are highly  respected researchers in the field of this
              proposal.  This project is relevant to  the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative Science Program which seeks to  increase the level of cooperation
              between U.S. and Korean scientists and  engineers through the exchange of
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and  techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This  project is related to the
              PI's research supported under  NSF Grant No. DMR-  9123279 and provides an
              international research experience for a U.S. graduate  student.  ***
