Title       : RUI: Expression and Regulation of a Novel Xenopus FGF-Receptor mRNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9507049

Award Number: 9507049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Servetnick servetni@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9507049  Servetnick    Mesoderm induction in Xenopus laevis embryos is
              mediated by a  number of diffusible signals, including members of the
              fibroblast  growth factor (FGF) family of signalling molecules. Members of the 
              FGF family show mesoderm inducing activity in vitro, FGF's are  expressed at
              the appropriate time and place in embryonic  development, and inactivation of
              FGF receptors leads to defects in  mesoderm formation in vivo. The FGF
              signalling pathway interacts  with other signalling pathways that are thought
              to operate in  mesoderm induction (including members of the TGF-beta
              superfamily),  though the nature of these interactions is poorly understood.
              The  proposed project focuses on a cDNA clone encoding a novel FGF  receptor,
              termed F37, from early Xenopus embryos. Preliminary data  show that F37 mRNA is
              present in the unfertilized egg, and remains  present through early
              development, consistent with a role for its  cognate FGF receptor in mesoderm
              induction. Because experiments to  date have characterized only a single FGF
              receptor present in the  Xenopus embryo during the period of mesoderm
              induction, the  presence of this second FGF receptor mRNA suggests that binding
              of  FGF's to different FGF receptors, or the interactions between  different
              FGF receptors, may play a role in the induction or  patterning of mesoderm. A
              full length F37 clone will be isolated,  sequenced, and its embryonic
              expression pattern will be  characterized both temporally and spatially, using
              RNA blots and  whole mount is situ hybridization. To determine whether the 
              regulation of F37 expression is similar to, or different from,  previously
              characterized Xenopus FGF receptors, the expression of  all the Xenopus FGF
              receptor mRNAs will be analyzed in several  ways. Using RNA blots, 1) the
              expression pattern of the FGF  receptor mRNAs in isolated animal caps will be
              determined; and 2)  the timing of polyadenylation (and presumably translation)
              of the  various FGF receptor mRNAs during development will be  determined. 
              Finally, experiments will be performed to test the hypothesis that  over
              expression of FGF receptors can extend the period of  competence to respond to
              mesoderm induction.  ***
