Title       : DNA Replication, Bacterial, Cell Cycle, and Cell Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1999   
File        : a9507209

Award Number: 9507209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith W. Zyskind   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507209  Zyskind  The rate of DNA replication is controlled by the frequency of
              replication fork assembly at origins of replication and not by the rate of
              chain elongation in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. It follows that the
              coupling of DNA replication to cell growth requires that the frequency of
              initiation of DNA replication from origins be a function of growth rate.
              Because the determinants of the rate of DNA replication are only involved in
              the initiation step, an understanding of how these determinants control
              initiation will provide an explanation for how the rate of DNA replication is
              regulated. In bacteria, the concentration of the initiator protein, DnaA, is a
              critical factor in determining when initiation of DNA replication occurs, and
              this proposal concentrates on the mechanisms that control the rate and timing
              of DnaA protein synthesis. The regulatory mechanisms that provide sufficient
              DnaA protein for the correct frequency and spacing of initiation events
              depending on growth rate, growth phase, stage in the cell cycle, and starvation
              conditions will be deciphered. A recent discovery suggests that the synthesis
              of DnaA may be controlled by another protein, Fis. Fis is itself growth phase
              regulated; thus, it may act as a sensor of the growth conditions of the cell.
              The objectives of this proposal are to delineate the Fis binding sites in the
              dnaA promoter region; determine whether Fis and DnaA proteins exclude the other
              from binding to their sites in the dnaA promoter region; examine the
              possibility that Fis prolongs hemimethylation of the dnaA promoter region
              during the eclipse phase by testing the ability of Fis to bind to unmethylated,
              hemimethylated, and fully methylated DNA; discover whether Fis activates or
              represses DnaA expression; determine if DnaA is an activator, repressor, or
              inhibitor of Fis activation of the dnaAP2 promoter; identify cis-acting
              elements in the dnaA promoter region required for growth rate regulation,
              growth phase regulation, and inhibition by th e alarmone, ppGpp; characterize
              the growth rate regulation of DnaA protein; and search for other regulators of
              DnaA expression. The methods to be employed and their uses include DNaseI and
              hydroxyl radical footprinting for defining protein binding sites, gel
              retardation for examining protein-DNA interactions, directed and random
              mutagenesis of nucleotide sequences to identify cis and trans-acting elements,
              two-dimensional gel electrophoresis for characterizing growth rate regulated
              proteins, vector expression systems for inducing the synthesis of ppGpp or
              DnaA, the lambda bacteriophage integration system for moving fusions to the
              bacterial chromosome at unique locations, and assays of chitobiase activity for
              reporter gene function in fusion studies with the dnaA promoter region.  %%% 
              This research includes novel approaches for studying the regulation of a
              required gene that can be applied to studies of other required genes. Results
              from this study will provide an explanation for how the bacterial cell is able
              to adjust its concentration of the initiator protein, DnaA, in response to
              changes in the environment, thereby ensuring that initiation of DNA replication
              occurs once and only once in the bacterial cell cycle.  ***
