Title       : Role of the Mevalonate Biosynthetic Pathway in Cell Cycle Progression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9507318

Award Number: 9507318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine I. Swenson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              Mb'>      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     Mb'>   
              Mb'>        4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                    *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 Abstract
              Swenson 9507318      A growing body of evidence indicates  that cell cycle
              progression requires a functioning mevalonate biosynthetic pathway.  Using
              oocytes and synchronous cultures of early embryos from the surf clam, a
              functioning mevalonate biosynthetic pathway has been found to be required for
              the passage through discrete stages of the cell cycle.  This pathway is
              required for activation, when the quiescent oocyte re-enters the cell division
              cycle, and for passage through the metaphase/anaphase transition of meiotically
              dividing embryos.  In these embryos where the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway
              is non-functional, cyclin proteolysis, which normally occurs at the end of
              metaphase and is required for the exit from metaphase, is blocked.  The goals
              of the experiments that are proposed fall into two categories.  One set of
              experiments is focused on determining the specific metabolites from the
              mevalonate biosynthetic pathway that regulate cell cycle progression in clams
              at the time of activation and for passage through meiotic metaphase.  These
              studies will be done using cells as well as  extracts, which undergo meiosis in
              vitro.  The second set of experiments are focused on characterizing the
              contribution of the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway to specific cellular
              processes known to be required for activation (the influx of Ca++ through
              voltage-gated channels) and those required for passage through metaphase of the
              cell cycle in early embryos (cyclin specific proteolysis). %%%  The results of
              these studies may provide insights regarding the role of the mevalonate
              biosynthetic pathway in specific cellular processes necessary for cell division
              in all proliferative cells. ***                                                
              Oh     +'  0                                       $       H       l           
                                                 D       h                                   
                             R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                   
                 Abstract                            Barbara Zain                       
              Barbara Zain                @    q ?'>                          @              
                                    S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                      
                  (                                                   )                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  @    q ?'>                 
                                                                                             
              @                                           Microsoft Word 6.0                 
                                                  1                                          
                                                          ;                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     e =       e                                                             
                               l       l   l       l       l       l       l                 
                                                                   E   1                     
                                                                                       #     
                           '       v   T       4   E                       l                 
                                                                     E               l      
              l                                                                       l      
                      l                                                       l       l      
              l       l                           8                                          
                                                                    Abstract Swenson 9507318 
                  A growing body of evidence indicates  that cell cycle progression requires
              a functioning mevalonate biosynthetic pathway.  Using oocytes and synchronous
              cultures of early embryos from the surf clam, a functioning mevalonate
              biosynthetic pathway has been found to be required for the passage through
              discrete stages of the cell cycle.  This pathway is required for activation,
              when the quiescent oocyte re-enters the cell division cycle, and for passage
              through the metaphase/anaphase transition of meiotically dividing embryos.  In
              these embryos where the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway is non-functional,
              cyclin proteolysis, which normally occurs at the end of metaphase and is
              required for the exit from metaphase, is blocked.  The goals of the experiments
              that are proposed fall into two categories.  One set of experiments is focused
              on determining the specific metabolites from the mevalonate biosynthetic
              pathway that regulate cell cycle progression in clams at the time of activation
              and for passage through meiotic metaphase.  These studies will
