Title       : The Biochemistry and Metabolic Networking of Leucine Catabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9507549

Award Number: 9507549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve S. Wurtele mash@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Basil J. Nikolau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507549  Wurtele  The maintenance of a balance between anabolism and  catabolism
              is crucial to the net biosynthesis of  phytochemicals.  This metabolic balance
              is particularly  evident during seedling development when large quantities of 
              seed reserve (lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates) are  catabolized.  The
              resultant intermediates are then utilized  as substrates for the biosynthesis
              of new phytochemicals, or  they are respired to generate ATP, which supports
              the  biosynthetic reactions.  These metabolic interconversions  require the
              coordinate action and regulation of many  antagonistic processes.    This award
              will study the catabolism of leucine and  subsequent utilization of the derived
              carbon in young  seedlings of soybean and Arabidopsis, as an example of how 
              organisms coordinate complex interconnected metabolic  pathways to achieve net
              interconversions of biomolecules.  In plants, the catabolism of leucine is
              thought to occur in  mitochondria, via a set of reactions which are partly in 
              common with a pathway by which mevalonate may be metabolized  to non-isoprenoid
              compounds.  Acetyl-CoA thus formed from  leucine and mevalonate can be further
              metabolized for  respiration, gluconeogenesis, and lipogenesis.    These
              investigations will define previously unknown  mitochondrial metabolic
              processes and begin to indicte how  they interface with metabolism in other
              organelles.  The  understanding of catabolic provesses will ultimately provide 
              a better understanding of how plants maintain a balance  between anabolism and
              catabolism.  Comprehension of how this  balance is regulated may open new, as
              yet unforeseen,  avenues to the improvement of agricultural production.
