Title       : Emergence of the Tarascan State: The Urichu, Xaracuaro and Pareo Polities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9507673

Award Number: 9507673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen P. Pollard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Helen Pollard will conduct two
              field seasons of archaeological research in the Lake Patzcuaro basin in the
              west-central highlands of Mexico. This project follows on previous work
              designed to document the rise and nature of the Tarascan state which emerged
              during the Postclassic period (AD 900-1520). Despite the fact that the Tarascan
              Empire was the second largest and most powerful state at the time of European
              contact, extremely little archaeological data is available and most of what is
              currently known falls within the realm of legend. Dr.Pollard will focus
              attention on the role of elites in state emergence and will determine the
              demographic, economic and political resources available to this group during
              the period of political and economic transformation associated with the
              emergence of the state. To accomplish these goals the project will: conduct a
              100% surface survey of the region, including agriculturally related areas;
              conduct limited test excavations at larger centers; produce detailed maps;
              conduct field laboratory analysis of all archaeological material within the
              survey region. On this basis it should be possible to: determine changes in
              population size and the nature of settlements; determine the location and
              potential significance in the use of agrarian resources; determine changes in
              elite social identification within different centers and changes in social
              boundaries over time.   The Tarascan state is marked by the incorporation of
              three distinct political entities into a single group. Dr. Pollard has
              hypothesized that the reason for this rests with environmental changes which
              resulted in drought and increased pressure on available agricultural lands. She
              thus wishes to examine the process of climate change and human response.
              Archaeological evidence indicates that the emergence of elite social groups is
              closely tied to the development of complex societies and the Tarascan case
              offers the opportunity to study elite behavior before during and after this
              period of environmental fluxuation and incorporation into the larger state. 
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of the
              relationship between environmental change and the development of social
              complexity and provide training for the students who will participate in the
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
