Title       : Two Projects in Human Capital: "Culture and Language" and "A Jobs-Based Analysis
               of Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1999   
File        : a9507757

Award Number: 9507757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward P. Lazear lazear@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9177,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9507757  Lazear    This project continues the development and implementation of
              a  jobs-based analysis of labor markets and starts a new human  capital related
              research agenda on the acquisition of culture and  language skills.  The entire
              notion of a  job,  which seems  central to the thinking of businesspersons and
              administrators, is  virtually absent from most labor market analyses.  The 
              institutional literature, and especially the work on internal  labor markets,
              asks questions that differ from those asked by  human capital theory.  This is
              a proposal to consider these  questions and to provide answers to them based on
              new data sets,   which will be collected as part of the project.  A few of
              these  questions are:  What is the meaningful definition of a  job  and when
              should the     job category be defined narrowly and when broadly?     What
              theory explains how workers move from one job to another?     How are job
              categories determined in the organization?     How much of wage growth over a
              worker s career depends on     promotion from one job to another and how much
              is accounted     for by within-job wage growth?     Do jobs (as opposed to
              workers in them) display different     turnover behavior?  Are there  ports of
              entry  into the firm?      Are there dead-end jobs?    The research on the
              acquisition of culture and language skills is  based on the premise that common
              culture and common language  facilitate trade between individuals.  Minorities
              have incentives  to become assimilated and to learn the majority language so
              that   they have a larger pool of potential trading partners.  The value  of
              assimilation is larger to an individual from a small minority   than to one
              from a large minority group.  When a society has a  very large majority of
              individuals from one culture, individuals   from minority groups will be
              assimilated more quickly.   Assimilation is less likely when an immigrant s
              native culture  and language is broadly represented in his new country.  Also, 
              when governments pr otect minority interests directly, incentives   to be
              assimilated into the majority culture are reduced.  The  theory is developed
              and tested by examining U.S. Census data on  the relationship between the
              likelihood that an immigrant will  learn English and the proportion of the
              local population that  speaks his or her native language.
