Title       : Dissertation Research: Blade Production in the Early Levantine Mousterian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9507585

Award Number: 9507585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7912               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Marks/Monigal    Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Ms. Katherine Monigal
               will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will study  collections
              of lithic materials which have been excavated from  Mousterian sites in Israel
              and are stored in museums in both the  United States and Israel. The lithics
              are all attributable to an  archaeological industry termed "Tabun-D"; are all
              older than  40,000 years and may span a period of up to 200,000 years. The 
              sites themselves are located in a number of environmental  regions. Ms. Monigal
              will describe and measure a large number of  attributes on selected pieces and
              with these data will  reconstruct the technology used to make stone tools. 
              Archaeologists traditionally focus on the final products which  are produced
              and not on the process used to reach this end. With  the data collected, Ms.
              Monigal will then compare Tabun-D sites  across time and environmental subzone,
              attempt to determine  whether technological data support the incorporation of
              these  sites into a single cultural tradition and try to explain the  causes of
              variation which may be observed.    Based on work in Europe, archaeologists
              have argued that the  production of certain stone tool types, such as blades,
              is  tightly associated with anatomically modern humans. In this  region of the
              world, the emergence of blade producing industries  dates to about 40,000 years
              ago. However, as Ms. Monigal and  others have noted, blades appear much earlier
              in sites in the  Near East and a number of assemblages support this conclusion.
               Using this single characteristic, archaeologists have grouped  these
              occurrences under the heading "Tabun-D." However it is very  unclear what this
              designation means in social terms and whether  the makers of this industry
              belonged to the same group or  tradition. Until this is done, it is not
              possible to ask whether  this data is relevant to questions such as the
              emergence of  anatomically modern humans. Through her study of technological 
              process, Ms. Mo nigal will be able to address this question in an  original
              way.    This research is important for several reasons. It will produce  data
              of interest to many archaeologists. It will providfe insight  into the
              emergence of modern humans and help to train a promising  young scientist.
