Title       : Molecular Aspects of B-Glucan Biosynthesis in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9507266

Award Number: 9507266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Carman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce P. Wasserman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9162,9183,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             Z?lqZ                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    Z?lqZ  
              Z?lqZ        4 @                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J   K  
              L   M                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   9507266
              Wasserman The biosynthesis of callose (1,3)-(-linked glucan) in higher plants
              is catalyzed by the plasma membrane-bound glycosyl transferase callose synthase
              (UDP-Glc: (1,3)-(-glucan synthase).  Callose synthase activity is ubiquitous in
              isolated membrane fractions from a variety of plants, and has been hypothesized
              to be a deregulated form of cellulose synthase.  Therefore, to understand the
              biochemical basis for the regulation of cell wall polysaccharide biogenesis and
              wound healing, it is necessary to identify and characterize the polypeptide
              subunits of polysaccharide synthases, like callose synthase, and the genes
              which encode them.  Red beet (Beta vulgaris L.) storage tissue contains an
              abundant and stable callose synthase.  Purified callose synthase contains 31,
              29, and 27 kDa polypeptides and a weakly-staining 57 kDa protein.  Strongly
              hydrophobic 31 and 27 kDa polypeptides are plasma membrane-localized members of
              the major intrinsic protein (MIP) family.  The hypothesis of this project is
              that callose synthase is a multimeric complex containing a catalytic subunit
              closely associated  with transmembrane proteins, forming a channel through
              which nascent glucans are translocated.  The idea will be tested using three
              approaches.  Immunological and biochemical experiments will pinpoint callose
              synthase complex components responsible for glycosyl transferase activity and
              polymer translocation.  Genetically, these polypeptides will be cloned and
              sequenced to determine their primary structure, orientation within the plasma
              membrane, and to identify factors regulating gene expression.  Functionally,
              reconstitution experiments will correlate specific enzymological and transport
              properties with individual polypeptides.  Collectively, these studies will
              integrate the processes of glycosyl transfer and polymer translocation into a
              single structural model. %%% Cellulosic polymers are among the world s most
              abundant naturally-occurring, renewable biomolecules.  Physiologically,
              cellulose polymers from plant cell walls provide structural integrity and
              protection against invading plant pathogens.  Industrially, wood-containing
              products are ubiquitous, and cellulosics are components for the production of
              paper, textiles, foods, feeds, fuels, and pharmaceuticals.  Despite the
              economic importance of these materials, the biochemical and genetic mechanisms
              are unclear which form plant cellulose polymers.  The objective of this work is
              to isolate the genes and proteins responsible for the production of cellulosic
              biopolymers, also called (-glucans in higher plants.  (-Glucan synthetic
              complexes will be extracted from the outer membrane of plant cells and
              purified.  With this information, immunological and genetic probes will be made
              to isolate and sequence genes encoding protein subunits of (-glucan synthases. 
              Evidence indicates that the complex consists of one class of subunits which
              elongate polymer chains, and a second class which serve as membrane pores. 
              These pores provide a conduit, or aperture, for entry of the polymers into the
              cell wall.  To elucidate the biochemical functions of these  membrane channels,
              expression studies will be done with recombinant DNA techniques.  This system
              will provide understanding of plant growth and development. ***                
                                                   Oh     +'  0                              
                      $       H       l                                               D      
              h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       Wasserman,
              Bruce P.                 Robert Uffen                        Shelley A. Graves 
                       @         S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                         
               (                                                   B                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                K                          @ 
                                               @      ZqZ                                    
                                                                           @    F #          
                                       Microsoft Word 6.0                                    
                               2                                                             
                                       ;                                                     
                                                                                             
                 e =       e                                                                 
                           j       j   j       j       j       j       j                     
                                                                   1                         
                                                       #       %       %       %   %   J
