Title       : Residential Patterns of Minorities in the Metropolis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1995 
File        : a9507920

Award Number: 9507920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174302             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Logan j.logan@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Alba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of residential patterns of minorities in the metropolis.  It
              will examine two important aspects of residential patterns that are only
              indirectly captured by the traditional use of segregation indices.  The first
              is the geographic configuration of areas of minority group concentration as
              "ethnic" or "minority" neighborhoods.  The second is the determinants of
              individual locational choices and outcomes.  The study will include New York,
              Chicago and Los Angeles and examine white, blacks, Hispanics and Asians in each
              region.  A more detailed analysis will focus on the major white ethnic groups
              (such as Italians, Irish, Germans) and on national-origin subgroups among
              Hispanics (e.g., Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, Dominicans), Asians (e.g., Chinese,
              Koreans), and blacks (treating separately blacks from the larger non-US origin
              groups such as the English-speaking Caribbeans and Haitians).  The project will
              begin by calculating descriptive measures of the extent of segregation in each
              area, and then test a variety of hypotheses concerning ethnic concentration,
              drawn from the more recent sociological theories, including the underclass and
              the ethnic enclave models.      This research will increase our knowledge about
              the degree to which several ethnic and racial groups are becoming concentrated
              in certain urban neighborhoods, and it will provide a scientific understanding
              of the factors that cause such concentration.  This is vital information on
              which to base policy decisions concerning housing, city services, and
              schooling.  In addition, it will contribute to our understanding of the
              persistent disadvantage suffered by some ethnic groups and neighborhoods.
