Title       : Hormonal Control of Differences in Brain and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9507979

Award Number: 9507979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309767             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest J. Nordeen ernie@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha C. Bohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy W. Nordeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9507979  Nordeen, Ernest J.    Understanding how the production,
              specification and survival of  nerve cells  are regulated to generate variation
              in neuron number is an  important goal of developmental neurobiology.  In many
              instances,  these processes are influenced by steroid hormones such as 
              estrogen, which act on the developing nervous system to regulate  neuron number
              and growth within specific brain regions.   This  proposal concerns the
              biological mechanisms and cellular  populations through which these hormones
              exert control over brain  cell number.   Several proposed studies will test the
              hypothesis  that hormones prevent cell death to influence neuron number within 
              specific brain regions. Other studies are aimed at identifying the  cell
              populations actually mediating these neurotrophic effects of  steroids.  More
              specifically, experiments will test the notion that  some neurons transiently
              express estrogen receptors during their  migration, and depend on this hormone
              for their survival during  this period.  In addition, the work  will address
              how glia  contribute to the neurotrophic effects of steroid hormones during 
              development.   The long term aim of these studies is to use the  hormonal
              regulation of neuron growth and survival as a tool with  which to explore the
              underlying cellular and molecular changes  influencing a neuron's decision to
              live or die.  In so doing,  a  greater understanding of the factors
              contributing to neuron death  during development and in disease will be
              attained.
