Title       : Fish Maneuverability: Factors Affecting Turning and Agility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9507197

Award Number: 9507197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Webb pwebb@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9507197    The  speed and maneuverability of fishes have long  captured  human
              imagination. Most research has been concerned with how  fish  swim at high
              speeds and accelerate at high rates,  but  as  yet  we  have  little
              understanding of  the  causes  for  differences between species.
              Maneuverability may provide the  unifying explanation, yet there are virtually
              no studies  on  fish maneuverability, its effects on speed and acceleration, 
              or  how  variability in fish body and fin form  improves  or  restricts 
              maneuverability.  The  purpose  of  the  proposed  research is to fill this
              gap.  Maneuverability includes  two  components:  the  ability to turn in a
              small  radius  circle  (turning  radius)  and  the ability to  turn  at  high 
              rate  (agility).   Fish  use  different  patterns,  or  gaits,  of  locomotion
              to swim at different speeds. Their primary  gaits  are  routine swimming
              powered by the median and paired fins,  cruising and sprinting with the body
              and tail fins, and fast  start   accelerations  using  the  body   and   tail  
              fins.  Maneuverability differs between gaits, and experiments  will  be 
              performed to measure maneuverability in each gait  using  mazes,   circular  
              raceways,   and   fast   start   trials.  Maneuverability   will  be  measured 
              using   frame-by-frame  analysis  of  movie or video recordings. Three fish 
              species  varying  in  body  shape and fin location will  be  studied. 
              Measurements   of  maneuverability  during  feeding   around  obstacles and
              movement through mazes will determine  whether  how  shape  affects motor
              performance (maneuverability)  and  energy  gain  during median and paired fin
              swimming.  During  sprints,  fish  are expected to reduce speed to  turn.  This
               contrasts with current theory for fish, which may  be  based  on  sub-maximum
              performance levels. Analysis  of  fast-start  maneuvers  will  test  a  unified
               model  in  which  overall  performance depends on speed, the timing of a turn 
              and  its  radius.   These variables determine  the general  pattern  of  the 
              behavior,  the  specifics of  linear  acceleration  and  deceleration  patterns
              and the final escape trajectory.  The  research    will    provide   detailed  
               measurements    of  maneuverability in various activities and a unified
              approach  to intra- and inter-specific variation in swimming behavior.  Because
              maneuverability may constrain habitat selection, the  research  should 
              contribute to solving  problems  like  the  rehabilitation of aquatic habitat.
              Understanding the factors  that   limit   speed  and  maneuverability  will 
              facilitate  construction  design  that  minimizes  fish  losses  due  to 
              entrainment in industrial practices.
