Title       : Rapid Precipitation of Homogeneous Polymer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9102435

Award Number: 9102435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette D. Shine shine@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   The project outlines a study of the rapid precipitation of                
              homogeneous polymer blends from ternary solutions having a                     
              supercritical fluid (SCF) as the solvent.  Although polymers can               
              have substantial solubility in SCF's, they are insoluble in the                
              same fluids in the gaseous state.  Hence, density reduction,                   
              which can be accomplished at the speed of sound, results in                    
              precipitation of the polymer dissolved in the SCF.  Because the                
              time scale for precipitation can be significantly shorter than                 
              the time scale for phase segregation  to occur by polymer                      
              diffusion, expanding a single phase ternary SCF solution will                  
              result in a single-phase blend of solid polymers.  Thus, the                   
              supercritical fluid precipitation technique suggests the                       
              possibility of producing a homogeneous, compatible blend of                    
              polymers that otherwise have been found to be incompatible by                  
              melt blending or conventional solution blending techniques.                    
                   The objectives of this project are: (1) to develop the                    
              capability of producing compatible polymer blends via a                        
              supercritical fluid blending process, and (2) to assess the                    
              stability of these prepared blends.  These objectives will be                  
              achieved through studies of polymer/polymer/SCF phase equilibria,              
              through experimental and theoretical investigations of the                     
              dynamics of the SCF expansion process, and through examination of              
              the kinetics of phase separation in the precipitated blends.  If               
              new, fine-state polymer mixtures can be developed using this                   
              novel technique, they may have high strength or other unique                   
              properties that will be useful in the manufacture of high-                     
              performance components.
