Title       : The Influence of Presettlement Habitat Preference and Behavior on Settlement
               Patterns of Benthic Reef Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9102641

Award Number: 9102641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise L. Breitburg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Spatial and temporal patterns of recruitment can strongly                      
              influence both the abundance and distribution of animals, as well              
              as the evolution of life history characteristics.  Larvae of most              
              benthic and demersal fishes arrive on reefs with well-developed                
              swimming and sensory capabilities and therefore, have the                      
              potential to strongly influence the pattern of recruitment by                  
              controlling where and when they settle.  This research will                    
              experimentally examine the role of larval behavior in                          
              determining the pattern of settlement of a benthic fish common to              
              oyster reefs.  The naked goby was chosen because its larvae                    
              undergo a demersal schooling phase prior to settlement.  Larvae                
              of this species are extremely abundant and can be easily                       
              observed.                                                                      
                   Dr. Brietburg and collaborators will focus on two aspects of              
              larval behavior (1) how larval behavior influences pre-settlement              
              distribution and dispersion patterns, in turn, influence spatial               
              patterns of settlement.  These two processes are extremely                     
              important to the ultimate patterns of recruitment because they                 
              can determine which other species influence larval survival and                
              movement, the spatial distribution of recruits, the need for                   
              post-settlement dispersal and the importance of density-dependent              
              interactions.
