Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Projects in Modern Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9102488

Award Number: 9102488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Muhly muhly@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raul E. Curto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Palle E. Jorgensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick M. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award will support the research projects of a group of               
              mathematicians whose work centers around operator theory and                   
              operator algebras.  Some of the areas of investigation will be (i)             
              multiplication operators on functional Hilbert spaces, (ii)                    
              polynomial hyponormality using multivariable techniques, (iii)                 
              construction of irreducible subfactors with index greater than                 
              four, (iv) invariant theory, Schur-Weyl duality, and tensor product            
              structure of quantum groups at roots of unity, (v) dilation theory             
              for algebras of operators and covariant systems, (vi) one-parameter            
              deformations of generalized commutation relations, (vii) operator              
              algebras generated by Toeplitz and singular integral operators with            
              random symbol, and (viii) coordinatization techniques to analyze               
              non-self-adjoint operator algebras.                                            
                   A central aspect of this research project is an investigation             
              of Hilbert space operators.  These objects can be thought of as                
              infinite matrices of complex numbers but they often arise in a way             
              more suited to various applications.  In the research projects of              
              these investigators a single operator is usually not the subject of            
              study but rather large classes of operators called algebras.  The              
              structure of such algebras is one of the most intensively studied              
              areas of mathematics.
