Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: High Resolution Delineation of Earth Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9102113

Award Number: 9102113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Crosson crosson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Calloway VanDecar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1574,
Abstract    :
              VanDecar                                                                       
              Long- & Medium-Term Research: High Resolution of Earth                         
              Structure                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Program for Long-& Medium Term                         
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables U.S.                  
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.                      
              The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,                 
              and the use of unique or complimentary facilities, expertise                   
              and experimental conditions abroad.                                            
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Robert S. Crosson                   
              will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by                     
              Dr. John Calloway VanDecar of the University of Washington                     
              with Drs. Guust Nolet and Roel Snieder of the University of                    
              Utrecht.  In order to improve knowledge of the Earth's                         
              mantle, and in particular the structure of tectonically                        
              active regions, to better answer fundamental questions about                   
              tectonic processes, the researchers propose to (A) extract                     
              from large data sets more accurate parameters and quantitative                 
              data covariance estimates; (B) apply robust statistical                        
              techniques to seismic inversion problems to help account for                   
              non-Gaussian noise distributions and gross errors; (C)                         
              implement non-linear inversion techniques where necessary;                     
              and (D) include diverse geophysical data sets (e.g., gravity,                  
              phase amplitudes) into the seismic inversion problem in order                  
              to help constrain the uniqueness of resulting models.  They                    
              also intend to perform detailed resolution analyses with (A -                  
              D) in place in order to determine what limits the highest                      
              quality data, combined with appropriate theory, can place on                   
              small scale earth structure.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the                     
              U.S. home institution.
