Title       : Trace Element Scavenging and Variable Particle Flux: A Time-Series Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9102329

Award Number: 9102329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Boyle eaboyle@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Sherrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Study will be made of trace element scavenging mechanisms and                  
              particle dynamics through measurements of temporal variations                  
              in dissolved, suspended particulate and sinking particulate                    
              elemental distributions during a two year time-series study in                 
              the northeast Pacific.  A recently-developed in situ pump will                 
              be used for collection of contamination-free size-fractionated                 
              samples of suspended matter throughout the water column.  Five                 
              occupations of a deep-water station in the California Current                  
              will sample three seasons of varying productivity.  This                       
              sampling will be coupled with simultaneous sediment trap and                   
              dissolved element measurements to examine the effect of                        
              changing productivity and vertical mass flux on the overall                    
              distribution of trace elements in a productive eastern boundary                
              water column.  Samples of all three pools will be analyzed for                 
              Al, Fe, Ca, Si, Mn, Pb, Zn, Cu, Ni, Cd, Ba, I, U, and 232Th.                   
              This research will address the shortage of fundamental                         
              information on the distribution of particulate trace elements                  
              which currently limits formulation of realistic scavenging                     
              models.  The chemical differences in the behavior of elements                  
              will be used as probes of the scavenging process, as                           
              illustrated by our previous measurements of a subset of these                  
              elements in samples from Bermuda, the Northeast Atlantic, and                  
              the Northeast Pacific.  In addition, elemental composition of                  
              particulate matter will be used as a tracer of mass exchange                   
              among particulate pools.
