Title       : Adaptive Multi-Domain Spectral Methods Applied to High Gradient Problems in
               Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9102981

Award Number: 9102981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jerome Sackman                          
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin Bayliss a-bayliss@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Belytschko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Spectral methods have been shown to be effective in approximating              
              the high gradient bands which occur during failure processes.                  
              These methods are effective in solid mechanics when applied in                 
              small patches or domains, which correspond to the high gradient                
              regions such as shear bands, coupled with a finite element                     
              discretization of the rest of the problem.  Here, adaptive                     
              procedures will be developed to determine the location and extent              
              of these spectral domains from properties of the solution, for                 
              example the strain field.  These numerical methods will be employed            
              in large scale computations to study the structure of shear bands              
              and factors influencing their growth.                                          
                                                                                             
              The use of spectral patches or subdomains provides a high degree               
              of resolution of high gradient bands.  Mappings within the                     
              subdomains and patches will be employed to adaptively enhance the              
              resolution.  These methods, because of their employment of                     
              subdomains, lend themselves naturally to MIMD parallel computers.              
              Implementations designed to exploit this parallelism, will be                  
              developed.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              These methods will be implemented and applied in large scale                   
              computational studies relating to materials forming processes.  In             
              particular the role of imperfections and thermal coupling in the               
              development of shear bands will be studied.  Additionally, these               
              methods will be applied in computational studies of the dynamics               
              of gaseous combustion with multiple stage reaction mechanisms.
