Title       : Experimental Ion Physics Using K500/K1200
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1991      
File        : a9102785

Award Number: 9102785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 1,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Krunoslav Subotic   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Benenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boris Kidrich Inst Nuc Sc
	      Vinca POB 522 11001 Belgrade
	      Belgrade, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in            
              nuclear physics and astrophysics between Krunoslav Subotic of the              
              Boris Kidrich Institute and Walter Benenson of Michigan State                  
              University National Cyclotron Laboratory is to study and produce new           
              nuclei, which have never been observed in nature.  Dr. Subotic will            
              participate in high beam experiments at MSU over a three year                  
              period.  Data analysis will take place at both MSU and the Boris               
              Kidrich Institute.  Measurements and identification of new nuclei              
              will further understanding of supernovae and the formation of the              
              early universe.  It is expected that this project will lead to a               
              long-term relationship with the Boris Kidrich Institute.  Their                
              cyclotron facility is nearing completion and is expected to be                 
              operational in the near future.                                                
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.
