Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Investigation of Quasicon- formal Equivalence
               Classes of Spherical CR Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9102437

Award Number: 9102437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : December 1,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Miner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Investigation of Quasicon-                        
              formal Equivalence Classes of Spherical CR Manifolds                           
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long- & Medium-                       
              Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which                          
              enables U.S. postdoctoral researchers to conduct 3 to 12                       
              months' joint research abroad at centers of proven                             
              excellence, allowing them access to unique or complementary                    
              facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                           
              other countries.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 12-month visit by Dr. Robert                         
              Miner of the University of Maryland, College Park, with                        
              Professor H.M. Reimann, Universitt Bern, Switzerland.                         
              Dr. Miner will investigate quasiconformal equivalence                          
              classes of spherical CR manifolds based on his earlier                         
              classification of CR manifolds with amenable holonomy.                         
              Up to finite cover, such a manifold is either S.n-1, a                         
              nilmanifold, or the Heisenberg analog of a Hopf manifold,                      
              a manifold homeomorphic to S1 X S.n.  There is a natural                       
              notion of a quasiconformal homeomorphism between manifolds                     
              with CR structures, which he hopes to refine up to                             
              quasiconformal equivalence.  In his dissertation, Dr.                          
              Miner showed homeomorphic nilmanifolds arising as covers                       
              of spherical CR manifolds with amenable holonomy are                           
              actually quasiconformal.  In dimension three, the                              
              mappings can be explicitly described.  With Heisenberg                         
              Hopf manifolds, the question is more difficult.  Dr. Miner                     
              will explore techniques for analyzing this case, and for                       
              investigating related questions about quasiconformal                           
              equivalence of domains of the Heisenberg group.  Eliashberg                    
              has described invariants of the symplectic manifold                            
              canonically associated to a CR manifold and has shown that                     
              certain tori are not quasiconformally equivalent, and these                    
              invariants may be more widely applicable.  Given a pair of                     
              domains, one can define an associated pseudoconformal                          
              capacity, which transforms nicely under quasiconformal                         
              mappings.  From this, Reimann, Pansu, and others have been                     
              able to deduce global distortion properties which may be                       
              useful in analyzing quasiconformal equivalence.  Kornyi                       
              and Reimann have developed a theory of deformations of                         
              quasiconformal mappings on the Heisenberg group.  In some                      
              cases Goldman and Miner have produced quasiconformal                           
              mappings by applying this theory, and there is hope it                         
              can be extended to a wider class of examples.                                  
                                                                                             
              The award provides funds for international travel and a                        
              flat administrative allowance of $250 for his home                             
              institution.
