Title       : Environmental and Stochastic Aspects of Creep Crack Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9102093

Award Number: 9102093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2563000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Wei rpw0@Lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. G. Harlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry J. Delph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A new Materials Research Group is established to investigate the               
              chemical and michromechanical processes that control crack growth              
              at elevated temperatures, and to quantify the stochastic aspects               
              of the crack growth response.  The goal of the investigation is                
              to provide fundamental scientific understanding of the                         
              microstructural mechanisms for growth of cracks at elevated                    
              temperatures.  Polycrystalline nickel-iron-chromium ternary                    
              alloys with varying carbon content are being used for the                      
              experimental studies.  The role of grain boundary carbide or                   
              carbon concentration, as well as grain boundary orientation and                
              structure upon cavitation segregation and crack growth kinetics                
              are being determined.  The specimens are being grown by vacuum                 
              melting, forging, rolling of single heats of each alloy.                       
              Bicrystals of the same alloys are being grown by a modified                    
              Bridgeman method for the purpose of producing high angle grain                 
              boundaries of known orientation.  Materials characterization is                
              being accomplished using analytical transmission electron                      
              microscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy, x-ray microprobe                      
              analysis, Laue back-reflection x-ray, and optical microscopy.                  
              Mechanical testing includes constant-load, tensile creep tests in              
              vacuum or high purity argon on polycrystalline and bicrystalline               
              specimens as a function of stress and environment (e.g.,                       
              temperature, hydrogen, water vapor, methane, and oxygen).  The                 
              steady-state creep deformation is being modeled as a function of               
              stress, strain, and temperature.  The models are addressing the                
              mechanistic aspects of deformation (e.g., dislocation glide vs.                
              climb, grain boundary sliding vs climb).  The kinetics of                      
              chemical reactions and transport processes are being determined                
              their effects upon the enhancement of cavitation and creep crack               
              growth in these alloys.  The micromechanical model is being                    
              integrated with the chemically-based model to form a predictive                
              model for environmentally-assisted creep crack growth.  In                     
              addition to the deterministic model, stochastic modeling of the                
              factors that are probabilistic in nature are being incorporated                
              to formulate a comprehensive model.  Factors being considered in               
              the probabilistic portions are cavity spacing, cavity growth                   
              rate, sintering and coalescence of cavities, grain boundary                    
              orientation, distribution of carbide precipitates.
