Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Construction of a Geometric Category Representing
               H4(M;Z), and Its Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9102765

Award Number: 9102765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. McLaughlin dennis@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Over the next three years, McLaughlin plans to find a                     
              category representing H4(M;Z), in a manner similar to the                      
              interpretation of H2(M;Z) as isomorphism classes of line bundles,              
              and H3(M;Z) as equivalence classes of gerbs.  He will                          
              investigate the consequences for string theory, elliptic                       
              cohomology, algebraic K-theory, knot theory, and the problem of                
              defining degree three, non-abelian, sheaf cohomology.                          
                   The basic idea is to use a smooth version of Deligne                      
              cohomology, and the transgression to the free loop space.  This                
              will be interpreted as a generalized holonomy map.  The category               
              will be constructed by deducing which geometric structure has a                
              given gerb as its holonomy.  McLaughlin discovered the object                  
              representing the first Pontrjagin class in this way.                           
                   This work will give a new geometric insight into Deligne                  
              cohomology, as the objects constructed actually lie in this more               
              refined theory.  There will in turn, be consequences for                       
              algebraic K-theory, using Beilinson's regulator.  The very                     
              existence of the transgression raises the possibility of a deep                
              relationship between Chen's iterated integrals and Deligne                     
              cohomology, refining the work of Getzler, Jones and Petrack.                   
              McLaughlin has obtained preliminary formulae in this direction,                
              which emphasize the extraordinary role played by the cup product.              
                   This program offers a candidate for the geometric cocycle in              
              elliptic cohomology.  The object in question is a "fake"                       
              infinite-dimensional vector bundle associated to a gerb.  It                   
              looks locally like a vector bundle but glues together in a                     
              different way.  This approach has the advantage of reconciling                 
              all the standard conjectures about elliptic cohomology and will                
              be a priority in the proposed research.                                        
                   This "fake" bundle can also be studied as a substitute for                
              the string bundle on loop space, opening the way for a rigorous                
              index theory of strings.  Finally, in the case of a three-                     
              manifold M, this object actually transgresses to give a new                    
              structure on the space of knots in M.  The implications for knot               
              theory will be fully investigated.                                             
                   The overall objective of this project is to unify several                 
              deep and currently disparate areas of topology.  This will be                  
              done by showing how analytic techniques employed in their study                
              are different aspects of a common ancestor.  Applications are                  
              envisioned to the theory of knots and to other active areas of                 
              geometry and topology.
