Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research: Studies of Olefin Polymerization and
               Sorption in Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9102649

Award Number: 9102649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Conner wconner@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5911      ARGENTINA
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative reseach between Willam Conner                  
              of the University of Massachusetts and Mario Chiovetta of                      
              the Institute of Technology Development for the Chemical                       
              Industry in Santa Fe, Argentina (INTEC).  This research                        
              involves a coordinated program of olefin polymerization                        
              catalysis research and sorption in zeolites to be conducted                    
              between the University of Massachusetts and INTEC in Argentina.                
              The focus of the work is to experimentally determine the                       
              changes in catalyst morphology and to quantify the changes in                  
              the thermal and mass transport that occur during the                           
              polymerization process and sorption within zeolites.  These                    
              experimentally measured parameters will be used as the basis                   
              for representing the processes and calculating the dependence                  
              of the polymer production and of zeolite sorption on the                       
              process conditions and the changing catalyst morphology.  The                  
              cooperative program will involve both exchanges of graduate                    
              (postdoctoral) research assistants and visits between principal                
              investigators.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The experimental program and extended characterization will                    
              primarily be conducted at the University of Massachusetts                      
              where the reactor systems and instruments for system                           
              characterization are available.  Specific analyses are also                    
              to be conducted at Brookhaven National Laboratories (for the                   
              tomography) and the University of Paris.  Parallel polymer-                    
              ization reaction studies will be conducted at INTEC in                         
              Argentina for a stirred bed polymerization system with                         
              morphological analyses to be primarily conducted at the                        
              University of Massachusetts.  INTEC will be the main center                    
              of the modelling and simulation studies for this collaborative                 
              research.  They will continue their pioneering modelling                       
              studies of polymerization and develop the parallel analyses                    
              of zeolitic systems.
