Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Synthesis and Characteri- zation of Conducting
               Polymers Composed of Porphyrins Linked by Molecular Recognition Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9102007

Award Number: 9102007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Drain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Synthesis and Characterization                    
              of Conducting Polymers Composed of Porphyrins Linked by                        
              Molecular Recognition Molecules                                                
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long- & Medium-                       
              Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which                          
              enables U.S. researchers to work 3 to 12 months abroad at                      
              research centers of proven excellence, and to provide                          
              opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique                        
              or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental                        
              conditions abroad.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 12-month visit by Dr. Charles                        
              M. Drain of The Rockefeller University with Professor                          
              Jean-Marie Lehn of Institut Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg,                         
              France.  Various molecular, spontaneously self assembling                      
              systems are found in nature: hydrophobic and hydrophilic                       
              interactions put lipids into liquid crystalline membranes;                     
              hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions cause                          
              molecular recognition of DNA base pairs creating specific                      
              helical structures; and ionic forces arrange solid state                       
              lattices into crystals.  All rely on molecular recognition                     
              between complementary components.  As effective electronic                     
              conduction through a given media requires it be highly                         
              organized into a specific crystalline or molecular                             
              lattice, structures difficult to achieve in organic                            
              polymers and films, Dr. Drain proposes to use self                             
              assembling systems to create conducting polymers and                           
              films of synthetic porphyrins.  He will use complementary                      
              molecular recognition moieties which are derivatives of                        
              hydrogen bonding molecules already described by Professor                      
              Lehn.  Dr. Drain will synthesize and characterize three                        
              sets of porphyrins derivatized with the molecular                              
              recognition molecules resulting in mono, di, and tetra                         
              substituted meso-tetra-alkylporphyrins.  The mono-                             
              substituted and the di-substituted porphyrins should form                      
              mesomorphic and crystalline phases via two different                           
              porphyrin intercalation geometries, while the tetra-                           
              substituted porphyrin should form highly organized                             
              monolayers on solid supports.  Dr. Drain proposes to                           
              synthesize, characterize, and examine the physical                             
              properties of these arrays, including measurement of                           
              polymeric conductance and photovoltage both in lipid                           
              bilayers and on solid supports such as tin oxide.                              
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover                               
              international travel and a flat administrative allowance                       
              of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
