Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: The Role of Pyoluteorin Production by Pseudomones
               Fluorescens CHAO in Biological Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9102689

Award Number: 9102689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce E. Loper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolee T. Bull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              Bull                                                                           
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  The Role of Pyoluteorin                          
              Production by Pseudomonas fluorescens in Biological Control                    
              of Plant Pathogens                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long & Medium-Term                    
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve                       
              months abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                   
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,                     
              and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise                   
              and experimental conditions abroad.                                            
                                                                                             
              This award, sponsored by Dr. Joyce E. Loper of Oregon State                    
              University, will support a twelve-month postdoctoral                           
              research visit by Dr. Carolee T. Bull with Dr. Dieter Haas                     
              of Eidgenssische Technische Hochschule (ETH), Zrich,                         
              Switzerland.  Certain strains of Pseudomonas fluorescens, when                 
              applied to seeds of agricultural plants, control plant                         
              diseases caused by soilborne fungi.  P. fluorescens strains                    
              CHAO and Pf-5 control a seedling disease of cucumber caused                    
              by the fungal phytopathogen, Pythium ultimum, and produce                      
              the antifungal metabolite, pyoluteorin.  Pyoluteorin                           
              production is implicated in the biocontrol activity of                         
              strain Pf-5 but the role of pyoluteorin produced by strain                     
              CHAO in disease suppression is unknown.  A cosmid clone,                       
              pME3090, obtained from a genomic library of CHAO, confers to                   
              strain CHAO an enhanced biocontrol activity, and enhanced                      
              production of pyoluteorin and of a second antifungal                           
              compound, 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol production to the                         
              enhanced biocontrol activity of CHAO/pME3090 will be                           
              elucidated through a combination of molecular and agronomic                    
              approaches.  The proposed research will use organisms and                      
              techniques developed in the United States and Switzerland to                   
              determine the role of pyoluteorin production in biological                     
              control by CHAO.  The specific objectives are to: (1)                          
              Identify genes involved in pyoluteorin production; (2)                         
              Generate mutants in strain CHAO that are defective specifi-                    
              cally in the production of pyoluteorin (Plt); (3) Determine                    
              the relative ability of pyoluteorin mutants, 2, 4-diacetylph-                  
              loroglucinol mutants (Phl) and of wildtype CHAO to control                     
              plant diseases.  The proposed research will provide critical                   
              information describing fundamental mechanisms in the                           
              biocontrol of plant diseases.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the                     
              U.S. home institution.
