Title       : Mixed-Mode Failure Analysis of a Unidirectional Carbon/EpoxyComposite and
               Ahesively Bonded Composite Systems Using the Modified Losipescu Test Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9102763

Award Number: 9102763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: HUSEYIN A. SEHITOGLU                    
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej S. Kumosa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted to investigate mixed mode fracture                  
              mechanisms of a unidirectional carbon/epoxy composite material                 
              using the modified Iosipescu test technique.  Intralaminar fracture            
              mechanisms in the composite will be analyzed numerically and                   
              experimentally.  The research will use finite element methods                  
              extensively to study the mixed mode stress intensity factors and               
              the energy release rates associated with intralaminar cracks in the            
              composite Iosipescu specimens tested under biaxial stress                      
              conditions.  In addition, adhesively bonded composite systems will             
              be tested under mixed mode loading conditions using the newly                  
              designed Iosipescu fixture.  Linear and non-linear finite element              
              calculations of the adhesive joints in the Iosipescu specimens will            
              be performed.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The fundamental significance of this research is that it will                  
              contribute to the understanding of intralaminar fracture mechanisms            
              in carbon fibre/epoxy composites caused by biaxial stress                      
              conditions.  Moreover, the study will provide new insights into the            
              complex failure phenomena of advanced adhesive joint systems.  The             
              practical significance is that after comprehensive numerical and               
              experimental investigations of the newly designed biaxial test                 
              technique, the test will have great potential to become standard               
              for mixed mode failure and fracture analysis of many advanced                  
              composite systems.
