Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Development of SupercomputerCodes for Solving
               Quantum Optic Master Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9102234

Award Number: 9102234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard J. Carmichael hjcarm@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Alsing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1220,
Abstract    :
              Alsing                                                                         
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Development of Supercomputer                      
              Codes for Solving Quantum Optic Master Equations                               
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long- & Medium-Term                   
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve                       
              months abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                   
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,                     
              and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise                   
              and experimental conditions abroad.                                            
                                                                                             
              This award, sponsored by Dr. Howard J. Carmichael of the                       
              University of Oregon at Eugene, will support a twelve-month                    
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Paul M. Alsing with Dr.                     
              Craig M. Savage at the Australia National University,                          
              Canberra.  They will develop supercomputer codes for solving                   
              quantum optic master equations.  The system under study is a                   
              single atom strongly coupled to a quantized mode of a high                     
              quality optic cavity driven by an external coherent                            
              electromagnetic field.  Via a quantum mechanical master                        
              equation, the problem of calculating quantum statistical                       
              quantities of interest (steady state field distributions,                      
              spectra, etc.) is reduced to solving a large sparse system                     
              of coupled linear differential equations.  Basic supercomputer                 
              codes developed by the researchers already exist and use a                     
              simple one-step Euler algorithm.  They propose to investigate                  
              other, faster integrations schemes to yield a healthy trade                    
              off between speed of execution and memory requirements.  They                  
              will modularize these to extend their applicability, creating                  
              a very general, fast, and efficient quantum optic master                       
              equation solver.  The basic codes have already discovered a                    
              novel phase bimodality for the intercavity field of a single                   
              atom in a cavity driven on resonance.  To this, the                            
              researchers will add detunings and possibly several modes                      
              and/or a few atoms.  They will study quantum mechanical                        
              systems whose classical equations exhibit chaos.  The                          
              proposed master equation solver should prove a very general,                   
              flexible, numerical tool to compliment analytic investigations                 
              into a wide range of phenomena in quantum optics.                              
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, dependent's allowance, and a flat administrative                       
              allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
