Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research: Heavy Ion Reactions at Intermediate Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9102621

Award Number: 9102621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard M. Crawley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Westfall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Galonsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Konrad Gelbke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5911      ARGENTINA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1235,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research in heavy-                             
              ion physics between scientists from the National                               
              Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan                               
              State University and the Pelletron Laboratory,                                 
              University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.  The principal                                
              investigators are G. M. Crawley and A. Szanto de                               
              Toledo, respectively, along with eight colleagues,                             
              four from each country.  The general subject is                                
              heavy-ion reaction mechanism and particularly the                              
              area of multi-fragmentation and particle                                       
              correlations at intermediate energies.  They will                              
              investigate the energy and projectile dependence of                            
              the emission of the reaction products by measuring                             
              both elemental and isotopic cross-sections as a                                
              function of bombarding energy.  The new generation                             
              of detectors developed at the NSCL, as well as the                             
              expertise in the study of reactions involving the                              
              dectection of neutrons will allow important                                    
              contributions to the understanding of the dynamics of                          
              heavy-ions reactions.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The Pelletron Laboratory at USP is upgrading its                               
              facilities by means of the construction of                                     
              superconducting linear accelerator.  The Brazilian                             
              scientists will investigate heavy-ion reactions at                             
              higher energies.  The significant number of                                    
              investigators, as well as students demonstrating                               
              interest in this project, the computational and                                
              technical support that can be offered at the                                   
              Pelletron laboratory joined to the expertise and                               
              updated instrumental support that NSCL can offer                               
              will all contribute to make this a very fruitful                               
              collaboration.
