Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory, Geometry and Arithmetic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9102858

Award Number: 9102858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard M. Lipshitz lipshitz@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Part 1 of this project in model theory, algebra and geometry              
              will continue the development of a theory of p-adic and rigid                  
              subanalytic sets.  The p-adic theory was begun by Denef and van                
              den Dries and the rigid analytic theory was developed by the                   
              investigator.  These developments are based on various quantifier              
              elimination theorems.  It is also intended to give new proofs of               
              theorems in the real case using this method of quantifier                      
              elimination and to transfer these new proofs also to the p-adic                
              and rigid analytic cases.  The investigation of connections with               
              Artin Approximation Theorems is also contemplated.                             
                   Section 2 of the project will continue the investigation of               
              various diophantine problems in the language of addition and                   
              divisibility for the integers and polynomial rings.  This would                
              extend earlier work by the investigator, Denef and Pheidas.                    
                   It is fascinating to see how theorems about algebraic                     
              objects such as rings of power series can be seriously addressed               
              by methods drawn from mathematical logic, that is, methods which               
              deal largely with features of the language in which the theorems               
              are expressed.  This is not the whole story, but seeing how far                
              one can get in this way isolates other obstacles in a highly                   
              illuminating way.
