Title       : Mechanism of Insulin Stimulation of PDH Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9102372

Award Number: 9102372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208519             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Fain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to learn how insulin controls the                  
              activity of pyuvate dchydrogenase (PDH).  PDH is a metabolic                   
              "linch-pin" between energy-yielding processes and biosynthetic                 
              pathways, and it therefore plays a key role in the oxidative                   
              metabolism of glucose.  Most insulin effects result from                       
              interactions between insulin and the insulin receptor (IR), which              
              is located on the surfaces of target cells.  When insulin binds to             
              the IR, it stimulates the IR to attach phosphate groups to a number            
              of cellular proteins that participate in metabolic reactions.  This            
              modification alters the behavior of the targeted proteins - it                 
              enhances the activities of some and inhibits the activities of                 
              others.  But the protein kinase of the IR was not required for the             
              insulin stimulation of PDH activity (preliminary results).                     
              Therefore, the specific aim of this proposal is to learn how the               
              insulin receptor communicates with PDH.  This will be accomplished             
              by identifying the domains of the insulin receptor that are                    
              specifically required for insulin to stimulate PDH.  To accomplish             
              this goal, a number of deletion mutations in the insulin receptor              
              will be analyzed for possible effects on insulin stimulation of                
              PDH.  Appropriate controls will be performed to verify that the                
              mutant receptors are made in the correct way and to quantitate the             
              numbers of receptors that are expressed at the cell surface, and               
              to ascertain whether the mutations introduce localized or global               
              changes in the confiaguration of the insulin receptor B chain.                 
              Global changes could affect a variety of insulin responses, and not            
              just the stimulation of PDH.                                                   
                                                                                             
              These studies will provide important information in the mechanism              
              of action of this vital hormone.//
