Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Transition-Metal Dichal- ompounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9102284

Award Number: 9102284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Kaner kaner@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe R. Bonneau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              Bonneau                                                                        
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Transition-Metal Dichal-                          
              cogenides: From Quantum Confinement to Novel Inclusion                         
              Compounds                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long- & Medium-                       
              Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which                          
              enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to                      
              twelve months abroad at research centers of proven                             
              excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities                        
              for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary                     
              facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                      
                                                                                             
              This award, sponsored by Dr. Richard B. Kaner of the                           
              University of California, Los Angeles, will support a                          
              twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Philippe                       
              Bonneau with Dr. Jean Rouxel of the Institut de Physique                       
              et Chimie des Matriaux, Centre Nationale de la Recherche                      
              Scientifique, Universit de Nantes.  They will investigate                     
              layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and other                      
              lamellar materials, which can be exfoliated or sonicated                       
              in polar solvents to produce solution-suspended monolayers.                    
              The suspended monolayers are then size separated (by gel                       
              electrophoresis) and used in quantum confinement studies                       
              or restacked with other low-dimensional compounds to                           
              create new, metastable inclusion compounds.  Quantum                           
              confinement in TMD monolayers can be investigated both as                      
              a function of particle size and as a function of monolayer                     
              interactions with various chemical environments.  New                          
              inclusion compounds, composed uniquely of low-dimensional                      
              materials, provide almost limitless opportunities to                           
              study topics such as intercalation and electronic                              
              interactions in mixed low-dimensional materials,                               
              superconductivity, charge density waves, and the role of                       
              stoichiometry on the structure and the electronic                              
              properties in low-dimensional inclusion compounds.                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover                               
              international travel and a flat administrative allowance                       
              of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
