Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Negatively Curved Groups and Tilings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9102471

Award Number: 9102471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Feighn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The simplest of infinite groups is the free group on a                    
              finite number of letters.  Here an element of the group is a word              
              in the letters and their inverses.  Two words are equal if and                 
              only if after iteratively canceling consecutive occurrences of a               
              letter and its inverse the two words become the same.  Gromov                  
              initiated the study of a class of groups, called "negatively                   
              curved," that share some of the computational ease of a free                   
              group.  The first part of this project is to continue the                      
              exploration of these groups and to extend this study to include a              
              class of groups that the investigator calls "relatively                        
              negatively curved."                                                            
                   We say we have tiled the complex plane if we have expressed               
              the plane as a union of finitely many congruent pieces, the                    
              tiles, that are pairwise disjoint up to their boundaries.  The                 
              tiles need not be connected and their boundaries may be fractal.               
              The tiling is self-similar if there is a complex number b                      
              associated to the tiling such that multiplication by b takes each              
              tile to a union of tiles.  An example is the famous Penrose                    
              tiling.  Thurston has identified the complex numbers that can be               
              associated to self-similar tilings.  The second part of this                   
              project is to determine which complex numbers may be associated                
              to tilings by disks and which numbers may be associated to                     
              tilings by polygons.
