Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1993    
File        : a9102782

Award Number: 9102782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101579             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Beale beale@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project studies several mathematical aspects of fluid                
              mechanics.  Computational tests will be conducted for numerical                
              methods, known as vortex methods, for time-dependent, inviscid,                
              incompressible fluid flow.  The test problems used are vortex                  
              rings with swirl; they can be computed reliably by other                       
              researchers using variational methods.  The results may serve as               
              a guide in the application of vortex methods and may suggest                   
              possible improvements in the methods.  An analysis of the errors               
              in related methods for fluid interfaces will be initiated, in the              
              hope of better understanding their design.  In such cases a                    
              moving interface is tracked, along with information determining                
              its velocity.  A convergence proof will be attempted along the                 
              lines of earlier analysis for vortex methods.  Work on the                     
              construction of exact solutions for the equations of                           
              three-dimensional water waves, representing interacting                        
              long waves, of the type modeled by the Korteweg-de Vries                       
              equation, will be continued.  Near-resonances with waves in the                
              usual scaling have led to delicate analysis.  Finally, the                     
              relationship between the equations describing large-scale                      
              atmospheric and oceanic motions and their singular limiting form,              
              the quasi-geostrophic equations, will be investigated.  The                    
              nature of this approximation is closely related to the generation              
              of unwanted small scales in time or space in the solutions of                  
              the full system.                                                               
                   In many situations where the nature of fluid flow is                      
              of practical importance, such as the flow past an object or                    
              combustion, quantitative prediction is difficult because of                    
              the large number of variables involved.  The development of                    
              reliable methods for numerical simulation of realistic flows                   
              offers the hope that a greater number of test cases could be                   
              studied with less effort than through experiments alone.                       
              Vortex methods are a special class of methods which have                       
              particular advantages in important but difficult cases.                        
              An interface occurs where one kind of fluid motion meets                       
              another.  Analysis and numerical simulation can predict                        
              whether or not desired configurations can be maintained.                       
              The proposed work might suggest improvements in the numerical                  
              methods used for these special problems.  Nonlinear waves                      
              of the type described in the third topic have been found                       
              to be remarkably stable in water and in other physical                         
              settings; they are completely different from the waves                         
              occurring in linear theory.  Little is known about                             
              their fully nonlinear interaction.  The last topic is                          
              a mathematical investigation of the fundamental and                            
              long-standing question of how the equations for large-scale                    
              circulating flow in the atmosphere or oceans can be                            
              reduced to a simpler system.  One cannot hope to solve                         
              the full system accurately, and much effort has been                           
              devoted to finding ways to predict the main features                           
              by calculating a smaller number of variables.
