Title       : Variational Data Assimilatin with the NMC Spectral Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9102851

Award Number: 9102851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315744             (Estimated)
Investigator: IONEL M. Navon NAVON@csit.FSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaolei Zou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   One tactic for potential improvement of Numerical Weather                 
              Forecasting (NWF)  is the timely incorporation of large bodies of              
              new observational data. These will become available from networks              
              of Doppler radars and other automated instrumental systems that are            
              to come on line throughout the remainder of this decade. The oppor-            
              tunity will be enhanced with the concurrent growth of computer                 
              data-handling power. Also, and just as important, will be recent               
              developments in applied mathematics, particularly in the theory of             
              optimal control. By the mathematical analysis of the equations (or             
              computational algorithms) governing the behaviour of evolving                  
              systems, it is possible to identify key values whose adjustment                
              will minimize undesirable properties of the system. However, the               
              analysis becomes extremely difficult as the governing equations                
              become complex, and even if it is successfully carried out, there              
              remains the problem of implementing its results quickly and cheaply            
              enough to be useful in practice. In the case of NWF, the procedure             
              can be applied to the problem of adjusting the initial meteorologi-            
              cal fields that start a forecast so that the differences between               
              the predictions of a numerical model and measurements coming in                
              early in the forecast period are minimized. This is done by making             
              repeated trial predictions for a short period, while simulteneously            
              and repeatedly fine tuning the initial fields until the desired                
              minimum error is found. The adjusted initial field is then used to             
              carry out the prediction over the full forecast period.                        
                   The model of concern to the PIs is the workhorse operational              
              weather prediction model of the US National Meteorological Center              
              (NMC). In a grant just ending under the NSF-NMC Joint Program in               
              NWF they have successfuly constructed a set of algorithms (the                 
              "adjoint model") that complement the NMC computer program in such              
              a way that by alternately using the adjoint and prediction models              
              during the trial prediction period the number of iterations can be             
              significantly reduced. This has been characterized by the Director             
              of Development of NMC as a "most significant achievement". The                 
              proposed work is to exploit the breakthrough by further analysis of            
              the properties of the two models in order to achieve successful                
              operational implementation of the theoretical findings. This could             
              enhance the accuracy of the weather forecasts to levels equal to or            
              exceeding those achieved at the European Center for Medium Range               
              Weather Forecasting, and increase the return on the national                   
              investment in the next-generation weather observing network.
