Title       : The Archaeometry Laboratory at the Missouri University Reasearch Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1995   
File        : a9102016

Award Number: 9102016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Glascock glascockm@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector Neff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Glascock will continue to operate an archaeometric center at               
              the University of Missouri and employ the technique of                         
              instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) to analyze the                 
              elemental composition of archaeological materials.  INAA is a                  
              multi-elemental technique which allows the major, minor and trace              
              elements of a material to be determined simultaneously and with                
              considerable accuracy and precision.  A sample is not destroyed                
              by INAA and, as a result, the analysis can be repeated or                      
              different analytical techniques can be applied to the same                     
              sample.  For valuable archaeological objects, this is an                       
              important consideration.  Of particular interest are potential                 
              analyses of ceramics, lithics, metal and bone.  Dr. Glascock has               
              established a national review committee to evaluate the                        
              importance of samples submitted for analysis.                                  
                                                                                             
              Through elemental analysis of archaeological materials, a number               
              of significant kinds of questions can be addressed.  INAA                      
              provides a taxonomic tool because it allows materials of similar               
              composition to be grouped together.  In some instances, it also                
              permits the proveniencing of artifacts and thus may provide                    
              information about procurement practices, routes of trade and                   
              political boundaries.  It may also improve understanding of                    
              ancient technologies and (through analysis of skeletal remains)                
              give insight into prehistoric diet and nutrition.                              
                                                                                             
              This project is particularly important because the two                         
              laboratories, which for many years have provided this service to               
              archaeologists, have shifted their foci elsewhere.  The                        
              University of Missouri center fills an important gap and makes                 
              its services available on a nationwide basis.
