Title       : Selection of an Experimental Site in Colombia and Preliminary Measurements of
               the Sky Brightness and Polarization at Long Wavelengths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9102295

Award Number: 9102295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17404              (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Smoot smoot@cosmos.lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1217,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaboration between George                           
              Smoot of the space sciences group at the University of                         
              California-Berkeley and Sergio Torres of the astrophysics                      
              group at the Universidad de los Andes in Bogota,                               
              Colombia.  The project aims to study atmospheric                               
              conditions and preliminary radioastronomical measurements,                     
              in conjunction with the NSF-supported project on low                           
              frequency measurements of the cosmic microwave background                      
              radiation (CMBR).                                                              
                                                                                             
              By looking at the spectral distribution of the CMBR, the                       
              researchers can study the process that took place in an                        
              early epoch of the universe when the mechanisms that                           
              triggered galaxy formation must have left an imprint in                        
              the radiation.  Data from a site near the equator will                         
              provide maximum observation of the galactic plane.  This                       
              project will map the galactic emission in orthogonal                           
              linear polarizations, in order to produce more precise                         
              maps than exist today.  Besides acquiring galactic                             
              intensity data, the researchers will select sites for                          
              future polarization measurements requiring correlation of                      
              data taken at different sites.  The U.S. group has                             
              developed the radiometric technique for the CMBR                               
              measurements to be used in the project.  The Colombian                         
              group will provide the infrastructure for the project in                       
              Colombia, as well as facilities and access to proposed                         
              sites for collecting data to improve galactic models.
