Title       : Generic Relationships Among Dasyurid Marsupials Based on Mitrochondrial
               Cytochrome-b Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9102842

Award Number: 9102842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Annalisa Berta                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey W. Krajewski careyk@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dasyurids are the dominant terrestrial carnivores of Australia,                
              occupying a diverse array of habitats such as aridlands, forest,               
              and alpine heath.  They are small to medium sized mammals, ranging             
              from the tiny Pilbara ningaui (209 g) to the dog-sized Tasmanian               
              devil (6-8 kg).  With approximately 51 species in 17 genera, the               
              family Dasyuridae constitutes one of three major lineages of                   
              Australasian marsupials.  Attempts to understand the evolutionary              
              relationships among dasyurids date from the early 20th century, but            
              these efforts could only reveal the broadest outlines of phylogeny.            
              In recent years, comparative study of molecular genetic variation              
              among dasyurids has shed much light on relationships within the                
              family, but a detailed and well-resolved branching order for genera            
              has not been established.  This lack of phylogenetic resolution has            
              hampered efforts to understand the historical biogeography of                  
              dasyurids, particularly the origins of New Guinean endemics.                   
                                                                                             
              In this study, DNA sequence variation in the mitochondrial                     
              cytochrome-b gene will be assayed for representatives of all                   
              dasyurid genera.  Cytochrome-b, a key component in cellular energy             
              production, is a relatively small (ca. 400 residues) and simple                
              molecule.  Patterns of DNA variation in cytochrome-b across the                
              range of divergence times represented by dasyurids will allow                  
              construction of a simple model of how the gene evolves.  The value             
              of such a model for estimating phylogeny is a key issue in modern              
              molecular systematics.  The data and model together will provide               
              an interesting means of comparing several current and conceptually             
              distinct methods of phylogenetic inference.  Final results should              
              provide a clearer picture of dasyurid relationships, as well as a              
              better understanding of cytochrome-b evolution and molecular                   
              phylogenetics.
