Title       : Acquisition of a Mini-Super Computer for Modeling Normal and Discordered
               Cognition.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1991      
File        : a9102196

Award Number: 9102196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162302             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. McClelland mcclelland+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal seeks funds for instrumentation needed for the                   
              further development and assessment of parallel distributed                     
              processing (PDP) models of a number of different aspects of human              
              cognitive processes.  We seek to study a class of PDP models in                
              which processing occurs through the interaction of a large number              
              of intrinsically variable processing units whose activation is                 
              based on a time-average of their input from other units.  The                  
              knowledge that governs skilled processing is stored in the                     
              strengths of the connections among the units, and the acquisition              
              of the knowledge that underlies skilled processing occurs through              
              gradual adjustments in the strengths of the connections triggered              
              by processing experience.  Previous work has shown the potential               
              of the approach for a number of applications, but continued                    
              progress requires an increase in computational resources.  In                  
              some cases, it has not been possible to explore a realistically                
              diverse range of training examples, thus limiting the opportunity              
              to test the adequacy of the principles to model human performance              
              data.  In other cases, simplified assumptions about processing                 
              have been made, and it is now clear that these simplifications                 
              can result in inadequate fits to experimental data.  In both                   
              kinds of cases, the ability to assess the degree to which the                  
              models can account for experimental data has been compromised.                 
              We therefore seek an upgrade to our existing 5-year old                        
              vectorizing 'minisupercomputer' to a newer, more powerful model.
