Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research: Edge-Layer Physics of Field Reversed
               Configurations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1991  
File        : a9102934

Award Number: 9102934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 11,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2768               (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren C. Steinhauer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : STI Optronics, Inc.
	      2755 Northup Way
	      Bellevue, WA  980041495    425/827-0460

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1241,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research in plasma                             
              physics between Loren Steinhauer of Spectra                                    
              Technology, Inc. of Bellevue, Washington and Roberto                           
              Clemente of the University of Campinas in Brazil.                              
              Measurements have shown edge-layer thicknesses                                 
              several times larger than expected for simple                                  
              outflow of plasma.  A promising explanation is that                            
              an electrostatic potential barrier is spontaneously                            
              established near the ends of the FRC (field reversed                           
              conviguration) which reduces the outflow rate.  This                           
              idea has never been modelled theoretically.  Since                             
              the edge-layer confinement is better than expected,                            
              the implications for a thermonuclear plasma may be a                           
              significantly reduced size requirement for a                                   
              reacting FRC.  The proposed research is to construct                           
              complementary models to explain the observed edge                              
              layer properties; a fluid-based model will be                                  
              developed by Clemente, and a kinetic model by                                  
              Steinhauer.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The FRC concept is a highly promising fusion plasma                            
              concept with possible application to terrestrial                               
              fusion-electric energy (especially the low-                                    
              radioactivity D-3He fuel cycle), space-based power                             
              systems, and space propulsion.  The proposed work                              
              would benefit the U.S. FRC program by enlisting a                              
              researcher from another country in a project of                                
              significant interest to an existing domestic                                   
              program.  The proposed work would also benefit the                             
              Brazilian effort on plasma physics by enabling one                             
              of its scientists to collaborate with a researcher                             
              at a laboratory where major FRC experimental and                               
              theoretical work is in progress.  In addition, the                             
              substantial computation skills at STI, including                               
              access to the National Magnetic Fusion Energy                                  
              Computer Center (Livermore, California) are                                    
              available in support of the research.
