Title       : Fault-Tolerance and Locality in Distributed Network Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9114440

Award Number: 9114440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Baruch Awerbuch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposed work is on two algorithmic topics in asynchronous                
              numerics: fault-tolerance and locality.  The practical significance of         
              theoretical work in fault-tolerance is often limited because of                
              particular assumptions made about possible fault patterns.  In some            
              applications, making unjustifiable assumptions could have grave                
              consequences.  The major goals of this research are to develop a basic         
              theory of fault-tolerant communication protocols, that will be free of         
              unnecessary assumptions, and to apply this theory to real network              
              tasks.  As a general approach a novel self-stabilization framework is          
              proposed.  Self-stabilization is a basic robustness property that              
              enables the system to return to correct operation after an arbitrary           
              pattern of failures.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Traditional network management protocols use locality requiring all            
              sites to maintain full information about the network topology.  This           
              task becomes very complex in large networks.  In a high-speed                  
              environment, the required rate of global state change may be much              
              faster than the propagation delay, thus making it impossible to obtain         
              an accurate picture of the global state of the network.  Fault-                
              tolerance and locality properties are crucial to ensure graceful               
              degradation of the overall system under conditions of extreme stress.          
                                                                                             
              A universal network decomposition approach is proposed, that allows            
              such properties for a variety of network tasks.  There is already a            
              wide range of important applications for which this approach has               
              proved to be successful, including network routing, distributed                
              directories, online tracking of mobile users, resource allocation and          
              load balancing, network synchronization, shortest paths, deadlock              
              avoidance, and others.  For these tasks our approach yields, for the           
              first time, almost optimal solutions.
