Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations, Probability and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9114456

Award Number: 9114456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $993000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Nirenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry McKean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work supported by this award will cover broad areas of                    
              mathematical analysis directed at problems arising from                        
              mathematical physics, liquid crystals, fluid dynamics, free                    
              boundary problems and differential geometry.  The core of the                  
              research is in partial differential equations and systems of                   
              ordinary differential equations.                                               
                   A distinctive feature of this grant is its support of the                 
              ongoing postdoctoral and visitor program at the Courant Institute              
              of Mathematical Sciences.  The institute provides a unique                     
              opportunity for young mathematical scientists to gain new                      
              insights into the applicability of their researches, a tradition               
              at the institute since its inception.  The vast number of U.S.                 
              mathematicians who have been imprinted by the CIMS spirit as                   
              students, postdocs or visitors is unmatched anywhere else.                     
              Probably even in the world.                                                    
                   Much of the present work will focus on nonlinear equations.               
              One class of problems concerns the question of monotonicity of                 
              solutions of nonlinear second order equations in prescribed                    
              directions.  This type of problem arises in the analysis of flame              
              propagation in cylinders.  In a different direction work will                  
              also be done to determine whether there exist periodic solutions               
              to vector-valued ordinary differential equations with a time                   
              periodic forcing function.  Additionally, the classical sine-                  
              Gordon equation has been used by mathematicians to provide                     
              examples of solitary waves as solutions of relatively simple                   
              nonlinear equations.  It has been suspected that solutions which               
              decay at infinity (called breathers) are nonexistent.  Techniques              
              necessary for the resolution of this problem are probably now                  
              developed to the point where an answer can be expected in the                  
              short term.  Work will be done toward this goal.
