Title       : Influence of Anamalous Eurasian Spring Snow Cover on the Indian Summer Monsoon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9114318

Award Number: 9114318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anandu D. Vernekar adv@atmos.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   There is strong empirical evidence that the areal extent of               
              Eurasian spring snow cover is negatively correlated with the                   
              following summer rainfall over rainfall over India.  The purpose of            
              this research is to study the validity of this empirical                       
              relationship from a series of experiments with a general                       
              circulation model (GCM).  The GCM is a global spectral model with              
              rhomboidal truncation at wave number 40 horizontal resolution with             
              18 layers in the vertical.  The physical processes include: surface            
              biophysical processes, diurnal cycle, shallow and deep convection,             
              cloud-radiation interaction and effects of large-scale and subgrid-            
              scale orography.  Three experiments are proposed with varying areal            
              extent and depth of the Eurasian snow cover in the spring to study             
              its influence on the summer monsoon circulations.  All three                   
              experiments will simulate ensemble global circulations in an annual            
              cycle mode from March 1 though September 30.  The difference in                
              these simulations are only due to the prescribed snow extent and               
              depth over Eurasia on March 1.  All other prescribed quantities                
              will come from climatology.  The first experiment is to determine              
              the impact of a negative anomaly in the snow extent on the monsoon             
              circulations by prescribing a minimum snow extent similar to that              
              observed during the spring of 1970.  In this experiment the PI will            
              use average snow depth.  The second and third experiments are                  
              designed to investigate the impact of a positive anomaly in the                
              snow extent similar to that observed during the spring of 1972.  In            
              the second experiment the PI prescribe a minimum snow depth in                 
              order to isolate the effects of the surface albedo.  In the third              
              experiment he will prescribe a maximum snow in order to study the              
              effects of albedo as well as the effects of melting and                        
              evaporation.  The results of these anomaly experiments will be                 
              compared with the control simulations to test the statistical                  
              significance of these results..This research is important because              
              it seeks to improve our understanding of relationships between                 
              important components of the climate system, surface boundary                   
              forcing and monsoons.
