Title       : Collection Computerization in the Division of Birds (Phase II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9114760

Award Number: 9114760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386725             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Willard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Lanyon  (Principal Investigator former)
              Peter E. Lowther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shannon J. Hackett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Field Museum  of Natural History houses the third largest                  
              collection of scientific bird specimens (>380,000) in North                    
              America and the fourth largest such collection in the world.                   
              These specimens are used by researchers around the world in their              
              basic research on the nature and origins of biotic diversity.                  
              Increasingly, conservation biologists are turning to collections               
              such as this for the basic distributional and natural history                  
              information that is required if efforts to conserve biotic                     
              diversity are to be successful.  In addition, Field Museum staff               
              use the collections extensively when teaching undergraduates and               
              graduates at Chicago area universities, and when constructing                  
              exhibits designed for the very young.  However, the sheer                      
              magnitude of this collection has limited in some senses limited                
              its usefulness.  Obtaining some kinds of information can be a                  
              very time consuming process.                                                   
                   The current project is intended to make these collections                 
              more accessible to Field Museum scientific staff as well as to                 
              the broader scientific and educational communities.  The first                 
              phase of collection computerization (entry of specimen data into               
              a relational database) has been completed.  However, only those                
              data present in the written catalog have been entered and these                
              data have not yet been thoroughly proofed.  In this project we                 
              will proof the recently constructed database to insure accuracy                
              and will add additional information about each specimen.  Until                
              each record has been examined against the associated specimen,                 
              the utility of that database will be limited.
