Title       : Dynamic Meteorology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1993   
File        : a9114441

Award Number: 9114441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Lindzen lindzen@wind.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1527,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Lindzen will continue his research on a broad set of problems             
              in dynamic meteorology which follow from studies conducted under               
              his previous grant.  Five specific topics for further research over            
              the next three years are planned:  (1) a special hydrodynamic                  
              mechanism that may allow energy extracted from a region of shear               
              flow to be transported away by waves,  (2) gravitational tides on              
              Jovian planets,  (3) a possible cause of the 100,000-year quasi-               
              periodicity of ice ages,  (4) a new procedure to produce initial               
              data for numerical weather forecasts, and  (5) the role of the                 
              water vapor budget of the upper troposphere in climate and climate             
              change.                                                                        
                   His research on the first topic could uncover a process essen-            
              tial in shaping the atmospheric general circulation. The atmo-                 
              spheres of other planets, or the paleoclimatology of ours, are so              
              remote in space and time that these studies might appear, superfi-             
              cially, to be only of pedagogical and theoretical interest. They               
              will, however, add to our body of knowledge and understanding of               
              the behavior of planetary atmospheres. Lindzen is a member of the              
              National Academy of Sciences and, arguably, the leading present-day            
              dynamic meteorologist. His continued attention to refining the sys-            
              tem that produces our routine, daily computerized weather forecasts            
              serves as an example to the younger members of the research                    
              community in atmospheric sciences. He has also been an outspoken               
              public critic of the global warming numbers calculated by the                  
              present generation of climate models. He bases his skepticism on               
              their imprecise treatment of the feedbacks linking water vapor,                
              cloud, and solar and terrestrial radiation. Improving this aspect              
              of the models is generally acknowledged to be one of most                      
              challenging problems in climate science, and has the highest                   
              research priority in science planning and policy. With his work on             
              the final topic he will contribute to intensified international                
              efforts on the quantitative specification of these links.
