Title       : Multiple Studies of Wind and Wave Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1994   
File        : a9114876

Award Number: 9114876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Kelley mikek@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Seyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research effort is aimed at the further                           
              understanding of the interaction between the various regions of                
              the earth's atmosphere.  One central thrust is to study the                    
              interaction between atmospheric waves generated in the dense                   
              lower atmosphere with the plasma in the ionosphere.  These waves.              
              create considerable structure on the bottom of the ionosphere                  
              from which many radio and communications systems reflect signals.              
              The resulting distortion is well known but not so well                         
              understood.  In addition much fine scale structure results which               
              cause even higher frequency signals to "twinkle" much as                       
              starlight does due to atmosphere turbulence.  We hope to gain new              
              insights into just how these waves affect the mid-latitude                     
              ionosphere on all these scales by conducting an intensive                      
              campaign in the Puerto Rican sector where the NSF is clustering a              
              number of state-of-the-art instruments.  We will add to this                   
              instrumentation by taking our portable radar to the nearby island              
              of St. Croix for the campaign.  In addition to gravity waves we                
              are interested in how lightning may affect the ionosphere and                  
              plan some joint observations with the Millstone Hill Observatory               
              to see if short wavelength electrostatic waves can be detected                 
              preferentially over thunderstorms.  Upward striking lightning has              
              been detected from the space shuttle and ionosphereic effects                  
              seem quite likely.  Another topic of interest is the turbulence                
              induced in the ionosphere by the flow fields in and around the                 
              aurora.  This turbulence may be sufficiently intense that the                  
              present interpretation of incoherent scatter radar data is in                  
              error.
