Title       : A Foundational Knowledge Representation For Knowledge-Based Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9114068

Award Number: 9114068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Y. Sedelow internet: sysedelow@ualr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Talburt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter A. Sedelow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Little Rock
	      2801 South University
	      Little Rock, AR  72204    501/569-3000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research concentrates on the modelling, extension, and use                
              of an associative knowledge base ranging over the English                      
              Language as a whole.  Our existing topological model of English                
              semantic space has been employed experimentally for information                
              analysis, including the exclusively rule-based resolution of                   
              semantic ambiguity.  Specific thrusts of this work include                     
              further research on the global structure of the knowledge base,                
              especially as to implications of relaxing, and also increasing,                
              the strength of the connectivity definition -- for on this                     
              definition depends the elaboration of the semantic distance                    
              metrics.   Such semantic distance metrics, and other structural                
              components, are implicit in the proposed efforts to 1.                         
              automatically add specialized terms (for narrow domain knowledge               
              applications) to appropriate semantic sub-spaces;  2. explore the              
              relationship between non-monotonic reasoning and semantic spaces               
              in the knowledge base (e.g., how do shifts among associative sub-              
              nets relate to rejection of "old" information and the addition of              
              new information?): 3. explore the possibility that the                         
              associative memory structure of the knowledge base implicitly                  
              already contains information of the type currently explicitly and              
              manually pre-encoded for knowledge bases (implicit availability                
              would enable a system either to access such information                        
              automatically or to bypass it); 4. explore the relationship                    
              between the associative knowledge base and the generic human                   
              machine learning models incorporated in current natural                        
              computation, neural computing, and genetic computing; 5.                       
              precisely establish uses for Rough sets as a multi-valued                      
              Knowledge Representation Structure for English semantic space                  
              when there is a degree of uncertainty in the knowledge encoded.
