Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Symmetric Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9114207

Award Number: 9114207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Golubitsky mg@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Melbourne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
              This award supports three visits by Dr. Martin                                 
              Golubitsky and three by Dr. Ian Melbourne, of                                  
              the University of Houston, University Park,                                    
              over three years, to the University of Sydney,                                 
              Australia, to work with Dr. M.J. Field on                                      
              several problems in both the theory and                                        
              application of bifurcations in the presence of                                 
              symmetry.  They will study the iteration of                                    
              symmetric maps (symmetric chaos) and its                                       
              manifestations in systems of ordinary and                                      
              partial differential equations, and the                                        
              stability of heteroclinic cycles (which occur                                  
              naturally in symmetric systems).  Although                                     
              many have studied the effect of symmetry on                                    
              both the dynamics and bifurcation of systems                                   
              of differential equations, few have paid                                       
              attention to discrete dynamical systems with                                   
              symmetry (where the new phenomenon of                                          
              symmetry-increasing bifurcations forced by the                                 
              collision of conjugate chaotic attractors and                                  
              drifting along group orbits seems to occur                                     
              rather frequently).  The researchers will                                      
              investigate the possibility that symmetry                                      
              increasing bifurcations are related to the                                     
              existence of coherent structures in certain                                    
              fluid dynamical systems where symmetry (on                                     
              average) is observed.  For example, turbulent                                  
              Taylor vortices are observed in the Couette-                                   
              Taylor experiment (in which fluid flow between                                 
              two independently rotating concentric                                          
              cylinders is studied).  This fluid state                                       
              demonstrates rather dramatically the                                           
              coexistence of turbulent motion with                                           
              distinctive patterns on average which may well                                 
              be related to the coexistence of chaotic                                       
              dynamics with the symmetry on average of                                       
              symmetric attractors.  Heteroclinic cycles are                                 
              associated with the existence of intermittency                                 
              and bursting phenomena, thus providing                                         
              interesting dynamics.  Except in isolated                                      
              cases, there are few optimal results                                           
              concerning the asymptotic stability of such                                    
              invariant sets.  The researchers propose to                                    
              investigate the possibility that the                                           
              techniques used so far can be unified to give                                  
              a more coherent theory.
