Title       : The Structures of and Processes of Building Provision: A Case Study of
               Master-Planned Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9114399

Award Number: 9114399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Knox knox@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Advanced economic systems have undergone radical transformations in         
              recent decades.  Heavy emphasis on manufacturing and other forms of            
              tangible production has given way to rapid growth in activities dealing        
              with the collection and handling of information.  Considerable scholarly       
              attention has been given to documenting and analyzing these shifts in          
              different economic sectors, but relatively little notice has been given        
              to the ways that these economic shifts have altered other aspects of           
              modern life.  This project will examine the emergence of a relatively          
              new form of urban residential development, the privately planned "new          
              town."  The project will focus on new communities established in the           
              Washington, D.C., metropolitan area between 1975 and 1990.  Changing           
              forms and patterns of investment, construction, and sales related to           
              these new towns will be analyzed through interviews with developers,           
              designers, and planners.  Questionnaires also will be used to elicit           
              information about the values, attitudes, and motivations of residents          
              who settle in these communities.                                               
                 This project will provide detailed information about the crucial            
              actors who collectively produced new forms of residential communities in       
              recent decades.  It also will generate new insights about the complex          
              ways that private and public leaders interact with one another.                
              Conclusions from this research should generate new insights about the          
              dynamics of modern residential development, and they should provide a          
              valuable new perspective on rapid transformations in American economic         
              behavior.  More focused information of direct utility for urban planners       
              also will become available.
