Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research in Spectral Theory (Applied
               Mathematics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1995   
File        : a9114401

Award Number: 9114401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Branson branson@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Palle E. Jorgensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1265,5914,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Thomas P. Branson and Palle                      
              Jorgensen of the University of Iowa and Peter Gilkey of                        
              the University of Oregon to collaborate in applied                             
              mathematics with three strong research groups in Germany                       
              and Denmark.  Their partners are Gestur Olafsson,                              
              University of Gottingen, Reinhard Werner, University of                        
              Osnabruck, Bent Oersted, Odense University and Henrik                          
              Schlichtkrull, Danish Royal Veterinary and Agricultural                        
              University.  Their collaboration is framed around six                          
              topics within the general area of "spectral theory."                           
              These problems are motivated in part by questions in                           
              mathematical physics and also in conformal geometry, and                       
              will be approached with methods from modern analysis and                       
              partial differential operators.  This field is one of                          
              great activity in Europe, with many strong groups and a                        
              long tradition of research that offers diverse                                 
              opportunities for U.S. participation.  In this                                 
              cooperative project, the U.S. participants offer                               
              technical power in the "hard analytic" and geometric                           
              aspects, while the European groups bring great strengths                       
              in invariance group methods.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Spectral theory is the mathematical underpinning of all                        
              scientific work involving a spectrum, ranging from the                         
              theories of light and electromagnetism to chemistry.  In                       
              mathematics, spectral theory is a major tool in work in                        
              several areas in geometry and analysis.
