Title       : 1991 IEEE Communication Theory Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9114463

Award Number: 9114463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Schilling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IEEE
	      445 HOES LANE
	      Piscataway, NJ  088544103    /   -

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The IEEE Communications Theory Workshop has been held each year for            
              about 20 years.  It has been held on the east coast and the west               
              coast of the United States alternately.  It is held in relatively              
              small hotels at somewhat isolated locations in order to focus and              
              enhance group interaction.  Attendees are primarily senior workers             
              in the communications theory area.  No written proceedings are                 
              generated.  It is a true workshop atmosphere,  with invited                    
              sessions only, no parallel sessions, approximately 100 attendees,              
              and maximum attendee interaction and discussion.                               
                                                                                             
              This year for the first time and on a trial basis the workshop will            
              be held outside the US., in Rhodes, Greece.  It is hoped that this             
              will generate a greater level of international input and exchange.             
                                                                                             
              The purpose of the workshop is to present new results in all areas             
              of communications theory.  Focus areas are chosen each year, and               
              outstanding workers in these areas are invited to give lead off                
              presentations to stimulate the discussion.  Focus areas for this               
              year are modulation and coding, optical communication systems,                 
              networking, and broadband telecommunications.                                  
                                                                                             
              The NSF award is to be used primarily to provide support for                   
              younger faculty members in the US who would otherwise be unable to             
              attend.  In order to insure some minimum Soviet participation a                
              small part of the on site expenses of a senior Soviet worker may be            
              offset by the conference and the award if necessary.//
