Title       : Development of Techniques for Mapping Design Features to Manufacturing Features
               via Meta Knowledge Base
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1991  
File        : a9114696

Award Number: 9114696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. Christina Gabriel                    
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jami J. Shah jami.shah@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   Feature based computer aided design systems are now                       
              becoming commercially available for mechanical design.  Features               
              are recurring stereotypical patterns with which knowledge related              
              to various aspects of the product is associated.  Feature modelers             
              make it easy to modify the geometry as associations between                    
              entities of the part are encoded in the feature definition.  Since             
              features are viewpoint dependent, it is necessary to map/transform             
              them from one viewpoint to another for concurrent engineering.                 
              However, feature mapping presents some difficult problems,                     
              particularly with modelers that do not restrict one to a limited               
              set of predefined features, and when there are interactions between            
              features that change their generic meaning.                                    
                   This research develops techniques which will enable                       
              manufacturing application programs to understand design features               
              from a manufacturing viewpoint and automonously generate feasible              
              machining process sequences for undocumented features.  In effect,             
              the system will be a self learning system that will automatically              
              update its own knowledge about machining options for a feature it              
              has never seen before.  Techniques developed will include:                     
              constructive solid geometry tree reconstruction to localize                    
              interactions, intelligent representation of manufacturing features,            
              and a meta knowledge base for encoding capabilities of machining               
              processes from which feasible machining alternatives can be                    
              generated.
