Title       : Cooperative Agreement: Research in Precision Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9114710

Award Number: 9114710
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ming C. Leu                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $985234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hocken hocken@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              David L. Trumper  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              James W. Shelnutt  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Jayaraman Raja  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Steven R. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The research activity is geared to developing solutions to                
              problems in Precision Engineering and Manufacturing. A multi-                  
              disciplinary, large group effort is to be concentrated on such                 
              problems as machine tool and production metrology; ultra-precision,            
              diode laser based interferometry for positional feed-back; design              
              and development of new-material based machine elements for ultra               
              high precision equipment and atomic scale machining and modelling.             
              A balanced perspective of fundamental and applied effort is to be              
              maintained.  The focus of the entire effort is designed to research            
              and develop the equipment and processes for the next generation,               
              ultra-high-precision applications.  This effort will be coordinated            
              with other large groups involved with research in manufacturing                
              processes and equipment in the United States and the domestic                  
              industry, with a high degree of interaction with academic                      
              institutions overseas.  This will ensure research activity of the              
              highest standards while supporting education goals and technology              
              transfer in the area of manufacturing.                                         
                   The area of precision engineering and manufacturing is of                 
              significant strategic and commercial value in the next decade.                 
              Research activity of this nature will have an impact on the                    
              nation's ability to remain competitive in this field of activity.
