Title       : A Program on Solidification and Fast Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1992       
File        : a9114308

Award Number: 9114308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Langlands warfield@math.ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Strain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Rokhlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
              Solidification processes are ubiquitous in modern technology.                  
              They are important whenever a substance changes from a liquid or               
              gas to a solid, for example when ice melts or freezes, when                    
              silicon or gallium arsenide crystals are grown for use in                      
              semiconductor devices or silver halide crystals grown for film                 
              production, when Alaskan soil freezing patterns are altered by an              
              oil pipeline, or when zinc dendrites pierce the walls of a lead-               
              zinc battery.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Computer simulation of solidification processes, the subject of                
              this activity, serves two purposes.  When the fundamental physics              
              is under investigation, the theoretical predictions of any                     
              proposed model must be produced and compared with other models                 
              and with experiment.  Solidification is sufficiently complex that              
              this must be done by careful numerical simulation; exact                       
              solutions almost never exist.  Once the fundamental physics is                 
              well understood, numerical calculations can produce data                       
              inaccessible to experiment and in some situations can even                     
              substitute for experiment.  Considerable savings in time and                   
              money can be realized if numerical simulation can be substituted               
              for experiments.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The goal of the research is to develop technology to solve                     
              solidification problems which are presently beyond the reach of                
              numerical simulation.  To achieve this goal, the investigators                 
              will combine the best numerical methods available and extend them              
              to solve more complex problems.
