Title       : Global Perspectives on the Emergence of Water Rights
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9114766

Award Number: 9114766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Buck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              In Western legal institutions, the evolution of water rights seems             
              to follow stages of management regimes from open access through                
              communal control to exclusive use.  This progression occurs as                 
              consumption increases in water-rich areas.  While there is                     
              empirical and theoretical support for such a pattern, to date this             
              observation has been made in western and well resourced contexts.              
              Drs. Buck and Gleason hypothesize that an alternative regime of                
              correlative use--that is, having some rights, but not absolute                 
              ones--develops where resources are scarce, experience with central             
              authority strong, and public goods predominate.  Their study tests             
              this hypothesis in an arid region with Asian legal traditions:  the            
              Amu-Darya and Syr-Darya river basins of Soviet Central Asia.  The              
              research includes analysis of extant information on water rights               
              in the central Asian republics of the USSR, in-depth interviews                
              with water users and managers in these field locations, and primary            
              data collection on legal, institutional, and environmental changes             
              in the region.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Studying the emergence of water rights arrangements in Soviet                  
              Central Asia can enhance our understanding of the meaning of                   
              property rights and resources in the context of global change.                 
              Also, there have been few efforts to use collective goods theory               
              comparing the experience of communist and non-communist countries.             
              The fact that the Soviet system is currently in tremendous flux in             
              terms of legal, political, and economic transformations only adds              
              to the importance of this project.  The devolution of centralized              
              authority in the Soviet Union and the uncertainty surrounding newly            
              emerging governing arrangements make for a particularly timely and             
              critical research focus.
