Title       : Characterization of Pinocytosis in Isolated Microglial Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1991      
File        : a9114085

Award Number: 9114085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Eric Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Microglia, a specialized type of glia, is related in function and              
              origin to macrophages.  While the functional role and properties               
              of brain microglial cells have been debated for some time, recent              
              evidence supports that these cells are tissue resident                         
              macrophages.  Ramified microglia, a specialized form of                        
              microglia, noted for its branching characteristics, appears to be              
              derived from and capable of conversion into active macrophages,                
              however, these cells are inactive in respect to macrophage                     
              activity.  Because of its inactive status, it has been generally               
              thought that ramified microglia contribute little to the normal                
              operation of brain tissue and serve only as precursors of active               
              macrophages.  Previous studies of ramified microglia in tissue                 
              culture revealed a combination of motility and pinocytosis, fluid              
              uptake and removal activity.  The goal of this research project                
              is to determine the function of ramified microglial.  Dr. Thomas               
              will ascertain whether these cells continually take up and                     
              exchange fluid for the purpose of removing or degrading small                  
              soluble compounds.  Experiments utilizing radioactive gamma-                   
              aminobutyric acid (3H-GABA) will be performed to determine the                 
              kinetic properties of fluid uptake in isolated microglial cells                
              in culture.  The kinetic properties will be used to delineate the              
              fluid-phase from the absorptive phase of pinocytosis.  In                      
              addition, the degradation of pinocytosed compounds will be                     
              assessed.  Results derived from this investigation will provide                
              information on whether ramified microglia functions as a                       
              filtering system to cleanse CNS extracellular fluid.
