Title       : Mental Illness, Violent Criminal Behavior, and the MediatingInfluence of
               Homelessness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1993     
File        : a9114818

Award Number: 9114818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Martell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res Found For Mental Hyg
	      1051 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10032    212/543-5801

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0310000   Municipal Service                       
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Across the country there are data suggesting that, among the                   
              mentally ill, homelessness is associated with increased criminal               
              behavior.  The research literature to date suggests that neither               
              mental disorder nor homelessness alone adequately accounts for an              
              increase in risk for violent crime.  Studies, however, linking the             
              homeless mentally ill with violent crime raise the possibility that            
              homelessness and mental disorder interact in some volatile way.                
              What might explain this relationship?  It is possible that factors             
              associated with homelessness may place the mentally ill at                     
              increased risk for violent criminal behavior.  Alternatively, the              
              homeless mentally ill may simply receive differential treatment by             
              the criminal justice and forensic mental health systems.                       
              Criminological theory suggests that it is not increased risk of                
              dangerous behavior, but an increased vulnerability to arrest that              
              accounts for these patterns.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Using a case-control design, this study seeks to explore this issue            
              systematically.  Two sub-studies are planned.  The first project               
              examines "risk" by exploring the contribution of homelessness to               
              violent criminal behavior in the mentally ill.  Data from 150                  
              homeless and 150 domiciled mentally disordered offenders will be               
              examined.  The second project explores "criminalization" by                    
              discriminating between two groups of homeless mentally ill persons:            
              150 who have a history of criminal behavior and 150 matched control            
              persons who do not.  The data will be derived from court records,              
              hospital records, patient and family interviews, and standard                  
              diagnostic instruments.  This study promises to add substantially              
              to our knowledge of the role of homelessness in mediating the link             
              between mental illness and violent criminal behavior.  It will not             
              only break new ground but also lay the foundation for future                   
              prospective studies of the causes of violence in society.
