Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Quantum Self-Trapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9114503

Award Number: 9114503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alwyn C. Scott acs@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Hameroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator continues his studies of quantization of                 
              several differential equations. particularly the Ablowitz-Ladik                
              equation and a form of discrete nonlinear Schrodinger equation                 
              called the discrete self-trapping equation.  The equations arise               
              in describing the behavior of a variety of nonlinear systems,                  
              many coming from a biological context.  He uses these results to               
              enhance understanding of several applications: comparisons of                  
              quantum theories for the two equations, especially focussing on                
              the issue of soliton binding energies, analysis of spectral data               
              for a molecular crystal, and modelling the growth dynamics of                  
              microtubule.                                                                   
                   A better understanding of how cells behave is a central                   
              theme in biology.  This project uses mathematical tools to                     
              consider several related aspects of cell biology and also                      
              concerns itself with the tools themselves.  Hence the                          
              investigator studies the structure of microtubule (a kind of                   
              "protein crystal"), undertakes a more general analysis of                      
              molecular crystals, and develops the theory of certain kinds of                
              differential equations that describe nonlinear phenomena.  A                   
              microtubule is an arrangement of tubulin in a tube-like shape.                 
              Tubulin is a protein that plays a key role in the ability of                   
              cells to hold their shape and to move.  So a better understanding              
              of the growth of microtubule could lead to a clearer picture of                
              cell development; this is important in areas as diverse as the                 
              development of fetuses and the growth of tumors.
