Title       : Relationship Between Task Structure and Choice of Navigational Aid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9114972

Award Number: 9114972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Oscar N. Garcia                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Strong strong@note.nsf.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Navigating complex computer applications has become a critical                 
              problem.  Understanding what the innate human navigational                     
              abilities are and how they relate to specific types of                         
              environmental complexity will facilitate the design of assistive               
              devices for the navigation of complex computer applications.  Two              
              different techniques for using spatial information to help                     
              computer users navigate complex applications have been proposed                
              by the authors.  These techniques are derived from studies that                
              have shown how the spatial distribution of information constrains              
              attentional processes in vision.  In this project the researchers              
              are undertaking an examination of the relationship between the                 
              structure of computer search tasks and the spatial structure of                
              assistance information.  They are constructing four computer                   
              applications.  In two cases the task and guidance information                  
              structures are matched in terms of spatial information needs and               
              spatial information presentation, and in the other two they are                
              mismatched.  Use of these applications by subjects will be                     
              compared on the basis of speed and accuracy.  The research is                  
              expected to produce a deeper understanding of human-computer task              
              performance under periods of stress and the need for rapid                     
              decision-making.
