Title       : Miocene Continental Paleoclimate and Fossil Horse Evolution:Trace Element and
               Stable Isotope Geochemistry of Enamel- Phosphate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1991      
File        : a9114083

Award Number: 9114083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36071              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Froelich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm C. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   We propose to explore the potential for linking mid-Miocene               
              paleoclimate and horse evolution by establishing the systematics               
              of trace elemental and isotopic preservation in the bone and tooth             
              phosphate of North American fossil horses.  We will test whether               
              enamel phosphate provides quantitative information about changes               
              in paleoenvironment (temperature, hydrology), paleodiet (graze vs.             
              browse), and evolution (the mid-Miocene radiation of horses), or               
              if bone and tooth phosphate is diagenetically opaque.  This                    
              preliminary work could catalyze new avenues for unraveling Miocene             
              continental paleoclimate changes, an important period of global                
              climatic deterioration with scant quantitative paleogeochemical                
              information from continental records.                                          
                   Fossil horses are particularly suitable for study because they            
              are geographically widespread and common in fossil assemblages from            
              the Eocene to late Pleistocene and have modern analogues.  Horses              
              underwent an explosive adaptive radiation and presumed dietary                 
              shift in the middle Miocene (16-12 Ma) perhaps responding to                   
              paleoclimatic changes and the spread of savannah grasslands.  This             
              climatic shift is inferred from paleoceanographic data; the dietary            
              shift, from studies of the functional morphology of teeth.  We wish            
              to determine if a paleodietary shift is evident in the chemistry               
              of the fossil teeth; if the continental paleoclimate record                    
              corroborates the marine record in magnitude, direction, and timing;            
              and if paleoclimatic change occurred concurrently with                         
              paleoenvironmental and evolutionary changes.  In this preliminary              
              venture, we will explore the effects of diagenesis, inter- and                 
              intraspecific variations, and characterize the del 18Opo4 of fossil            
              horse teeth and bones from the Burge Quarry, one of the richest and            
              best-preserved middle Miocene (-12 Ma) horse faunas.  Diagenesis               
              will be evaluated with trace element, SEM, and XRD analyses of                 
              enamel phosphate and compared to modern horses.  If diagenesis                 
              proves to be negligible, del 18Opo4 of tooth-enamel in modern and              
              fossil teeth will establish the suitability of reconstructing the              
              continental paleoclimate record.
