Title       : Investigation of Nonlinear Gravity Waves in the Earth's Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1994   
File        : a9114311

Award Number: 9114311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xun Zhu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell F. Strobel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julio T. Bacmeister  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A high resolution, time dependent, nonlinear, two-                        
              dimensional gravity wave model will be used in a series of                     
              investigations to understand the dynamics of gravity wave                      
              forcing, propagation, breakdown, and their role in modifying                   
              larger scale motions in the atmospehre.  These studies will use                
              simulations of idealized flow situations to clarify basic                      
              dynamical processes in parallel with more realistic simulations                
              to understand the magnitude and distribution of gravity wave                   
              effects in the atmosphere.  Our numerical studies will be guided               
              by estimates of mountain wave generation and propagation                       
              determined from NMC global wind and temperature analyses and                   
              global topographic data.  These investigations will also involve               
              use of observational data from the Flatland radar system as well               
              as NASA's aircraft experiments to verify model results.  The                   
              ultimate objectives of this project are to estimate the amount of              
              gravity wave flux escaping from the troposphere as a function of               
              mean flow conditions and topography and to develop                             
              parametrization schemes for gravity wave stress and transport to               
              be used in general circulation models.  Results from this                      
              investigation may also help to clarify the effect of small-scale               
              (less than 100 km) variability on the transport and microphysics               
              of aerosols and PSC's in the stratosphere.                                     
                                                                                             
                   A second objective of the proposed research will be to                    
              investigate the dynamics of large amplitude atmospheric solitary               
              waves with a series of numerical experiments.  The PI's                        
              experiments will be guided by both theoretical analyses of                     
              solitary wave properties and by direct observations of                         
              atmospheric solitary waves from the Flatland Radar.  The PI's                  
              studies will be especially concerned with examining the                        
              sensitivity of solitary wave structure of the background                       
              atmospheric flow.
