Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences
               "Turbulence of Nonlinear Waves With Applications to geophysics and
               oceanography, May 25-29,1992"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1991   
File        : a9114483

Award Number: 9114483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23582              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wojbor A. Woyczynski waw@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Gurarie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The search for satisfactory models of turbulence is still                 
              one of the major problems of mathematics and physics.  Because of              
              its importance in diverse areas such as aeronautics, geophysical               
              fluid dynamics, atmospheric sciences, magnetohydrodynamics, and                
              astrophysics, tremendous effort has been devoted to its study                  
              over the last few decades.  A broad spectrum of mathematical                   
              tools from partial differential equations, stochastic processes,               
              statistical mechanics, dynamical systems, renormalization theory,              
              statistics, and functional analysis has been employed in an                    
              effort to elucidate its nature.                                                
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Turbulence of                       
              Nonlinear Waves with Applications to Geophysics and Oceanography               
              to be held May 25-29, 1992 at Case Western Reserve University.                 
              Professor Vladimir Zakharov of the Landau Institute of                         
              Theoretical Physics (Moscow) and the University of Arizona will                
              be the principal lecturer.  To stimulate interest and activity in              
              mathematical research, the National Science Foundation each year               
              supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in                 
              the Mathematical Sciences.  Each five-day conference features a                
              distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of                 
              important current research in one sharply focused area of the                  
              mathematical sciences.  The lecturer subsequently prepares an                  
              expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally              
              published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for              
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American                 
              Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical                      
              Statistics.  Certain features differentiate these conferences                  
              from typical research conferences.  These are: (1) Focus on a                  
              single important and timely area of research by a leading                      
              practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through               
              regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and                  
              timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.
