Title       : An Operational 3-D Magnetospheric B-Field Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1994      
File        : a9114269

Award Number: 9114269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Hill hill@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerd-Hannes Voigt  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal proposal for a three-year NSF grant.  We                     
              propose to develop an operational three-dimensional                            
              magnetospheric B-field model for Earth's magnetosphere which                   
              responds to changes in the solar wind and interplanetary field                 
              conditions, and to changes in the plasma conditions within the                 
              magnetotail and ring-current regions.  The new model                           
              approximately satisfies the MHD equilibrium condition; it is                   
              time-dependent on the quasi-static time scale.  We aim at                      
              developing a user-friendly FORTAN code which can be used by the                
              scientific community upon request.                                             
              The proposed work is important, because most available three-                  
              dimensional B-field models for Earth's magnetosphere are rather                
              limited: they represent only "average" magnetospheric conditions               
              (e.g., ordered with respect to the Kp index).  B-field models                  
              much more flexible are needed for simulating critical                          
              magnetospheric situations, such as highly stretched tail field                 
              lines in the late state of the substorm expansion phase, or                    
              "collapsed" magnetotail field lines following a neutral sheet                  
              reconnection event.  Also, field-aligned Birkeland currents and                
              boundary conditions of the "open" magnetosphere need to be well                
              represented.                                                                   
              We propose to achieve such a goal by developing a second-                      
              generation code of the so-called Hilmer-Voigt magnetospheric                   
              magnetic field model ?Hilmer, 1989!; that model has been                       
              designed, coded, and tested under the previous NSF grant (with                 
              the additional help from other funding as well).  A preliminary                
              version of the Hilmer-Voigt model is presently being used in                   
              connection with the "Rice Convection Model" and the                            
              "Magnetospheric Specification Model".  The experience gained                   
              through those "applications" has led us to propose some major                  
              physical improvements  which include the following:                            
              (1) Replace the existing magnetopause by a flexible shape which                
              responds to the solar wind ram thermal pressures.                              
              (2) Include magnetopause boundary conditions for an "open"                     
              magnetosphere.                                                                 
              (3) Provide the computational tools to include field-aligned                   
              Birkeland currents.                                                            
              (4) Use Stern's stretch transformations to make the magnetotail                
              and ring currents approximately consistent with the requirement                
              of quasi-static MHD force balance.                                             
              The proposed work is not a narrow or limited task| We claim that               
              a user-friendly flexible B-field model that responds to a                      
              variety of physical input parameters is a significant achievement              
              for magnetospheric physics, in that it provides us with a                      
              versatile research tool for both data analysis and theoretical                 
              studies.
