Title       : Multiquantum Interactions in Atom-Surface Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9114015

Award Number: 9114015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Manson jmanson@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted to extend and develop the theory of                 
              scattering of small mass particles by surfaces, with emphasis on               
              interactions in which many quanta of energy are exchanged during               
              the collision.  A fundamental and quantum mechanical approach will             
              be used initially, and then the theory will be extended to                     
              semiclassical limits at various levels in order to investigate the             
              transition from the quantum mechanical to the classical regime.                
              Initial results indicate that the diffusely scattered intensity,               
              due to multiple phonon interactions is insensitive to fine details             
              in the phonon density of states, and this will be further                      
              investigated for realistic surface models.  This lack of                       
              sensitivity in the phonon spectra implies that the multiphonon                 
              contribution to the intensity will give directly the form factor,              
              or transition matrix, for the atom-surface interaction potential.              
              Analysis of available data will give the form factor as a function             
              of exchanged energy and momentum, which will in turn lead to a                 
              determination of better models of the interaction potential.  The              
              data analysis will involve visits and some collaboration with the              
              major experimental groups in the area of helium-surface scattering.            
              The work will lead to applications in other related areas of gas-              
              surface interactions including calculation of accommodation                    
              coefficients, sticking and desorption, electron-hole pair creation             
              during collisions and scattering from disorder.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be done on the interaction of small                  
              particles scattering from surfaces in which there are many                     
              exchanges of quantized energy and momentum.  These calculations                
              will lead to more accurate determinations of the forces which exist            
              between the impinging particles and the surface and will develop a             
              powerful formalism to deal.  The work will be closely correlated               
              with various experimental groups.
