Title       : Advanced Marine Technology and Historic Shipwrecks: Conflicting Values and
               Principles of Professional Responsibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9114699

Award Number: 9114699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Ballard   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Broadus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Kenneth Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Gallo  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9145,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in marine exploration technologies are                         
              revolutionizing capabilities to find and use submerged cultural                
              resources such as historic shipwrecks.  The pace of these                      
              technological developments seems to have outstripped institutional             
              abilities to protect these resources.  This situation presents                 
              problems and value conflicts for marine scientists and engineers               
              who develop these technologies.  To understand and resolve these               
              problems requires consideration of the effects of technology                   
              development, the influence of legal rules and ethical norms, and               
              the structure of institutions such as markets, through which                   
              submerged resources are appropriated.  This project will employ                
              theory and methods from the fields of ethics, law, economics,                  
              policy analysis, archeology, marine technology, and resource                   
              management to identify and characterize these factors.  It will                
              include careful consideration of the ethical problems and                      
              responsibilities facing marine scientists and engineers concerned              
              about the impacts of new technologies they develop.  Research will             
              be undertaken by an interdisciplinary team, including advisors and             
              consultants, who will prepare papers and meet in planning sessions             
              and at professional society meetings as well as at a workshop                  
              planned for the summer, 1993.  The investigators will conduct a                
              series of guided discussions in workshop settings to progress                  
              toward the development of widely accepted principles of                        
              professional responsibility in this field, curricula, and enlarged             
              public consideration of issues and values in protection and                    
              exploitation of marine cultural resources.                                     
                                                                                             
              The topic of this proposal is of high priority for Ethics and                  
              Values Studies.  The qualifications and track record of these                  
              investigators and their associated consultants and advisors are                
              excellent.  The project provides an important test for theories and            
              methodologies to study issues of professional responsibility in the            
              development and dissemination of new technologies.  Results will               
              be useful for a wide range of individuals and groups.  The proposal            
              is recommended for support.
