Title       : MOTI: Decision Making with Incomplete Information in an Integrated Product and
               Process Development Enterprise -- A Management Decision Tool for Cost Modeling
               & Affordability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9525991

Award Number: 9525991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ladislav J. Kohout kohout@cs.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Zenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wyllis Bandler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chun (Chuck) Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9525991  Kohout   Analysis of cost and realistic cost/benefit analyses in the
              product design phase  must involve determining the affordability of a design
              that has never before been manufactured and making technical and business
              decisions based on incomplete, uncertain data.  This project will develop a
              systematic accounting including incomplete or conflicting information,
              constraints, and consequences during engineering design and planning for
              advanced jet propulsion systems.  A new methodology focusing on the use of
              fuzzy logic theory will be developed to supplement existing parametric and
              probabilistic tools to perform realistic and appropriate cost and benefits
              assessments at the component level through the system level.  The use of fuzzy
              attributes for cost models and affordability applications addresses the problem
              of the limited or unavailable empirical data, for example in new materials
              characterization or new manufacturing processes.  The use of verbal descriptors
              parallels the knowledge-gathering exercise and will provide the ability to
              assign different levels of accuracy, precision, or certainty to each element
              such as cost, material input, or processing condition.  A proof-of-concept
              manufacturing process trade study will be carried out for an existing turbine
              engine component, such as one made with gamma titanium, with a limited
              manufacturing base.  Demonstration of the new methodology and its validation
              with empirical data will be done using data taken in an existing jet engine
              manufacturing environment in collaboration with an industrial partner.   The
              results of this research could allow the development of software tools for
              integrated product and process design that can be used when a designer has only
              incomplete or uncertain information.
