Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Traveling Waves in Excitable Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9525766

Award Number: 9525766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9525766  Tyson       Traveling waves of excitation provide a mechanism for 
              communication and spatial organization in a variety of biological  systems,
              such as waves of membrane depolarization in  neuromuscular tissue, waves of
              mitosis in fruit fly embryos,  waves of cyclic AMP during slime mold
              aggregation, and waves of  infection spreading through susceptible populations.
               These and  other examples of excitability share many common features that  can
              be expressed in generic mathematical models of excitable  media.  The
              investigator and his colleague study wave propagation  in such models using
              established theoretical tools and new  computational approaches, focusing
              primarily on rotating scroll  waves in three-dimensional excitable media.  As a
              scroll waves  rotates around its central "filament," the filament moves slowly 
              through space according to certain laws of motion that are still  poorly
              understood.  The investigators develop efficient and  accurate computational
              tools, based on a cellular automaton model  of excitable media, in order to
              simulate the motion of scroll  filaments in large domains over long periods of
              time.       The thick-walled ventricle of the mammalian heart is a 
              three-dimensional excitable medium that propagates waves of  electrochemical
              activity.  By modulating intracellular calcium  levels, these waves control the
              beating of the heart.  During a  normal heartbeat the wave induces the muscle
              fibers of the left  ventricle to contract synchronously and blood is
              efficiently  expelled from the chamber.  But under pathological conditions 
              (flutter and fibrillation), the heartbeat degenerates into a  rotating scroll
              wave of the sort studied in this project.  The  rotating scroll wave causes the
              muscle fibers to contract  asynchronously, so that part of the chamber is
              relaxed when other  parts are contracting.  As a result the blood within the
              chamber  is not pumped efficiently and the heart must be "defibrillated"  to
              save the victim's life.  To understand the fundamental  causes  of ventricular
              fibrillation and its effective treatment, one  needs a better understanding of
              the onset, development and  annihilation of rotating scroll waves in
              three-dimensional  excitable media, which is the basic goal of this project.
