Title       : Operational Improvement of Wastewater Treatment Plants by Utilizing Electron
               Beam Technology to Enhance In-Plant Processing and Sludge Recycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9525059

Award Number: 9525059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Waite twaite@eng.maimi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles N. Kurucz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9525059  Waite      This is an award to support research, the objective of which
              is to  determine the parameters for design of electron beam radiation 
              processes to treat wastewater and intermediate products of treatment  system
              components.  Specific examples of research to be investigated  include use of
              ionizing radiation of the electron beam for  modification of process residuals
              to improve their biodegradability  when subjected to aerobic and anaerobic
              digestion, processing of  anaerobic digester supernatant fluids to improve
              their  biodegradability and to reduce their disruptive effect when recycled  to
              the treatment system for additional exposure to biotreatment  processes,
              improvement of sludge dewaterability by modification of  their fluid properties
              and acceleration of biostabilization processes  such as composting and soil
              injection.  The project involves an  initial workshop to be conducted in
              January of 1997 conducted in  cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
              Agency for guidance  in conduct of the pilot and engineering-scale research.   
                Electron beam radiation has been found to be effective in disinfection  of
              sludges produced during treatment of domestic wastewater.  The  ionizing
              radiation of a beam of energized electrons has been shown to  be effective in
              destruction of organic compounds of pollutional  significance.  Indications are
              that electron beam radiation could be  utilized productively within existing
              wastewater treatment plants to  improve the efficiency of other treatment
              system components.  This  project will utilize an existing 1.5 MeV electron
              beam accelerator  located at the Miami-Dade Wastewater Treatment Plant on
              Virginia Key  to obtain engineering-design parameters.  This engineering-scale 
              operation will be guided by results from pilot-scale research using a  4 MeV
              linear accelerator being installed at the University of Miami's  Laboratory for
              Pollution Control Technologies. ***
