Title       : Physical-Biological Interactions Controlling Larval Krill Development and Early
               Survival: Implications for Population Recruitment and Demography of Euphausia
               Superba Dana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1995 
File        : a9525803

Award Number: 9525803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172199             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Franks pfranks@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9525803  Franks  This project will investigate how spatial and temporal 
              variability in physical-biological features affects the  development, condition
              and survival of Antarctic krill larvae  (Euphausia superba).  It is believed
              that adult spawning behavior  and regional differences in primary productivity
              and temperature  are significant forces controlling krill mortality, population
               demography and recruitment.  Using a modified stage-structured  larval
              population model, the effects of spawning behavior and  variations in stage
              durations and mortalities on demography and  recruitment will be examined.  The
              model results will be compared  with observed larval distributions to determine
              which processes  best account for the observed population structures.    Using
              a detailed metabolic model with stage structure and  realistic external
              forcing, we will determine how much of the  variability in stage durations and
              mortalities can be explained  by the effects of food availability and
              temperature.  Larval  lipid metabolism will be incorporated into the model for 
              elucidating the influences of physical and biological variability  on larval
              krill condition.  Models will integrate the effects of  multiple parameters and
              will intimately coupled to field  observations and laboratory experiments. 
              This study will  provided a valuable contribution to the understanding of 
              interactions between marine populations and physical processes in  the Southern
              Ocean ecosystem.    The results from this study will be applicable to
              concurrent  research investigating the physical-biological interactions 
              affecting Euphausia superba in the Southern Ocean, and Euphausia  pacifica in
              the California current.  The ultimate intent is to  quantify the impact of
              physical-biological patchiness associated  with physical features and phenomena
              on larval condition,  demography and recruitment in euphausiid populations.  
              Understanding species' responses to physical perturbations will  elucidate how
              environments have evolutionarily  constrained life-  history patterns to
              maximize survival in inherently patchy and  variable systems.  Through this
              understanding, this study will  provide insights into the potential effects of
              climatic change on  euphausiid populations and their ecosystems.
