Title       : Modeling Primary Production of the Southern Ocean for ROAVERRS (Research on
               Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9525805

Award Number: 9525805
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin R. Arrigo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA-Goddard Space Flight
	      
	      Greenbelt, MD  20771    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9525805  Arrigo  This proposal describes modeling studies of primary production
              in  the water column and sea ice for an NSF-funded field program to  take place
              in the southwest Ross Sea between October and March of  1996-97 and 1997-98. 
              The focus of the initial modeling studies  will be to derive initial estimates
              of primary productivity for  the Southern Ocean.  These initial estimates will
              be based on:   1) current understanding of the physiology, biochemistry and 
              ecology of Southern Ocean phytoplankton and sea ice algae; 2)  climatologies
              for sea ice cover, cloud cover, sea surface  temperature and algal pigments;
              and 3) existing modeling  approaches for depth-dependent (1-D) primary
              production in sea  ice and water column.  One of the primary goals is to make
              the  first determination of the relative amounts of primary production  in the
              water column and in the sea ice using a consistent, modern  estimation method
              (bio-optical modeling) for both systems.   Sensitivity analyses will then be
              performed to guide planning of  the ROAVERRS Project; these analyses will be
              directly applicable  to planning for JGOFS and GLOBEC activities related to the
               question of estimating primary production in the Southern Ocean.  
              Specifically, they will study model sensitivity to sampling  scales (temporal
              and spatial) in the ROAVERRS study region and to  variation in the variables
              proposed for measurement during  ROAVERRS (e.g., algal bio-optics,
              photosynthetic parameters,  spectral quality of light, nutrient concentration,
              sea ice  thickness, snow cover, water column mixing rates, temperature).  
              Following completion of this modeling study, the ROAVERRS Project  will make
              improvements to the models based on an expanded data  base (e.g., tuning the
              model for different types of sea ice  habitat or phytoplankton blooms) and
              carry out testing of these  models against field observations.
