Title       : Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (LMS): Caltech's Multi-Disciplinary Activities
               for Studies of Fundamental Processes in Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a9525756

Award Number: 9525756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald M. Burland                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000003            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed H. Zewail zewail@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,0001,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities of  the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences supports
              the research of Professor  Ahmed Zewail and colleagues at the California
              Institute of Technology for the establishment  of a multidisciplinary research
              laboratory for the study of fundamental processes in complex    molecular
              systems with atomic scale resolution.  The Laboratory for Molecular Science 
              (LMS) will involve eight members of the Cal Tech faculty and will involve
              research in the  following five thrust areas: 1) Dynamics of Ionic Solvation
              and Weak Interactions;  2)  Femtosecond Dynamics by Photoelectron and
              Photodetachment Spectroscopy;  3) Structure  and Dynamics of Electrocatalysts
              and Interfaces; 4) Atomic-scale Structure and Function of  Receptor Proteins; 
              5) Electron and Energy Transfer in DNA and Condensed Phases.  The  purpose of
              the LMS is to advance the understanding of molecular and biological function in
               the five thrust areas at the microscopic level for complex molecular systems. 
              The LMS will  bring to bear state-of-the-art instruments with temporal and
              spatial resolution at the atomic  scale.  Femtosecond time resolution achieved
              with light, electron, and eventually X-rays will  make it possible to relate
              structures at the most fundamental level to functions in real  systems.  In
              addition to the Principal Investigator, Ahmed Zewail, the members of the LMS 
              include Fred C. Anson, Jacqueline K. Barton, Dennis A. Dougherty, Rudolph A.
              Marcus, B.  Vincent McKoy,  Mitchio Okumura, and Douglas C. Rees.    Over the
              last 15 years great strides have been made in both spatial and temporal
              resolution of  chemical systems down to the atomic scale.  This capability has
              provided new opportunities  for studying molecular structure and dynamics in
              chemistry and biology.  From the  elementary dynamics of reactions and protein
              folding to the dynamics of molecular  assemblies and condensed phases, theory
              and experiment at the fundamental scale of atomic  resolution provides the key
              to our understanding of molecular function and materials  properties.  The
              field of molecular sciences is indeed witnessing a revolution, especially at   
              the interface between chemistry and biology where new experimental tools can be
              exploited  to elucidate the structure and dynamics of complex molecular
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
