Title       : Embedding and Attitude Theory: An Empirical Test
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9525533

Award Number: 9525533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Heberlein taheberl@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nora C. Schaeffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0510201   Domestic Economic Modeling              
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Enbedding and Attitude Theory:  An Empirical Test   This study will draw from
              recent developments in attitude theory and survey research to address the
              embedding program contingent valuation (CV).  Conventional wisdom and economic
              theory assume that people should be willing to pay more for the whole than for
              just one part of that whole, but empirical CV data show that these expectations
              are sometimes not fulfilled.  This has caused some scholars to question the
              overall validity of CV.   Employing a social psychological perspective, this
              research considers the contingent values estimated on questionnaires by
              willingness to pay (WTP) as one component of attitude called behavioral
              intention (BI).  What economists call a `good` is traditionally conceptualized
              as an `attitude object` by social psychologists.  In the literature, several
              variables have been shown to affect BI (WTP) toward attitude objects:  the
              nature of the attitude object itself (specific vs general), the nature of
              attitude structure toward the object (many beliefs vs few beliefs), the degree
              of direct personal experience with the object (high or low), the degree of
              emotional attachment (high or low), the relationship of the object to
              self-identity (far or near), and the level of importance/centrality (high or
              low).  In this study, the goal is to specify the variables that influence CV
              assessments and then test the conditions under which the embedding effect
              occurs.   By tackling the embedding problem, this study will aid in the future
              design of contingent valuation surveys, particularly those dealing with broad
              and diffuse attitude objects like ecosystem diversity and regional
              environmental amenity improvements.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
