Title       : The Somerset Laboratory: An Open Facility for Experimentation in Safety-Critical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9525843

Award Number: 9525843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Knight jck@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Somerset Laboratory is a facility being developed at the  University of
              Virginia that provides a focus for  experimental research in safety-critical
              software  engineering.  Over the long term, the intent of the  laboratory is to
              establish empirical research with safety-  critical systems as a sub-field of
              software engineering.    The laboratory provides the following to researchers
              World  wide, via the Internet: (1) A comprehensive set of artifacts  associated
              with a small number of safety-critical  applications that, to the extent
              possible, describe the  applications accurately and comprehensively. There are 
              sufficient artifacts and the artifacts are of sufficient  quality that
              researchers can perform substantial experiments  which will be very similar to
              those that they could be  perform if they had direct access to the actual 
              applications. (2) A repository of the results of research  projects undertaken
              using the available applications. This  repository contains contributed
              artifacts, tools, research  papers, data files, and contact information. As
              well as  allowing dissemination of results, the repository  facilitates
              cooperative research by alerting researchers to  the status, plans, and work of
              others. (3) A vehicle for  accurate comparison of software engineering
              techniques for  safetycritical systems. Using the artifacts associated with 
              the safety-critical applications in the laboratory,  researchers are able to
              evaluate tools and techniques and  then compare and contrast different tools
              and techniques.  The comparisons are especially significant in this case 
              because data is obtained by applying them to precisely the  same applications. 
                By carrying out experiments using extensive material from  actual
              safety-critical applications, researchers are  presented with the complex
              details of such applications.  Dealing with these details helps to ensure the
              relevance and  practical value of the research that is undertaken. In 
              addition, once a solution concept or approach is devised,  it  can be evaluated
              (at least in part) by applying it to one or  more sample safetycritical
              applications thus providing a  believable assessment. The first safety-critical
              application  that the laboratory has chosen to support is a nuclear  reactor.
              The reactor is a lowpower, research reactor that  employs a conventional
              electromechanical control system.  Though a small reactor, it presents
              significant challenges  to researchers interested in softwarebased control and 
              safety systems. The artifacts being developed for the  laboratory include
              details of the reactor's physical  structure, the safety rules that must be
              enforced, digitized  images of key elements of the physical equipment, sample 
              traces of all the reactor's sensors, a reactor simulator,  and complete wiring
              diagrams.  The goal of this planning grant is to obtain an assessment  of the
              likely level of interest in the laboratory by the  research community and to
              develop a detailed plan for the  implementation of the laboratory.  ***
