Title       : Conference: Symposium on Multiphase Flow, Microstructured Media, Diffusion and
               Biological Transport at the 26th Annual Meeting of the Fine Particle Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1995       
File        : a9525791

Award Number: 9525791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ludwig C. Nitsche lcn@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Johannes M. Nitsche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9525791  Nitsche, L.C., Nitsche, J.M.  University of Illinois
              Chicage    It is proposed for the NSF to help support a Symposium on Multiphase
              Flow, Microstructure Media, Diffusion and Biological Transport being organized
              for the 26th Annual Meeting of the Fine Particle Society (Chicago, 22-25 August
              1995).  Beyond furnishing a forum for exposition of the most recent advances in
              transport phenomena, the Symposium has two key objectives.  First, the program
              has been carefully designed to bring researchers in fluid mechanics and
              transport phenomena together with specialists in the fields of pore and surface
              diffusion, microstructure media (liquid crystals, zeolites, membranes, etc.)
              and cell biology (gap junction channels, exocytotic fusion pores, etc.).  This
              amalgamation will promote interdisciplinary contact to an uncommonly broad and
              comprehensive extent.  Second, the Symposium will serve as a focal point for
              contact between researchers in fluid mechanics/fluid-particle systems and the
              sizable industrial constituency of the Fine Particle Society, representing
              nanoparticle and magneto-particle technology, particle characterization and
              separation, filtration, powder technology, clean room technology, and
              pharmaceuticals.  Novel features of the Symposium include (I) subsidized
              graduate student participation and a poster session dedicated to graduate
              research; and (ii) a round-table discussion for the identification of key open
              problems at the interface between transport and biology, and between transport
              and microstructure materials.  Results of the Symposium and the round-table
              discussion will be disseminated in a dedicated issue of the journal Particulate
              and Processing Science and Technology.
