Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Associative Polymers for Suppression of
               Misting of Machining Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1995 
File        : a9525105

Award Number: 9525105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Manke cmanke@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esin Gulari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9525105  Manke   Suppression of machining fluid misting is an area of major
              importance to automotive manufactures and related metalworking industries
              because of health concerns related to worker exposure to machining fluid mist
              in manufacturing plants.  Previous research has led to the use of high
              molecular weight polyisobutylene (PIB) additives to reduce misting of straight
              oil machining fluids, and this mist control method is now being implemented in
              many automotive manufacturing facilities.  This research will extend to water
              based machining fluids which are used much more widely than straight oil in the
              machining industry.  Water-soluble polymers such as polyethylene oxide (PEO)
              have proven to be effective in suppressing misting of water-based machining
              fluids, which are used for about eighty percent of metalworking applications. 
              But water-based machining fluids have much lower viscosities than straight
              oils, thereby requiring polymers of very high molecular weight to accomplish
              mist suppression, and they are often circulated at much higher flow rates. 
              Consequently, mechanical degradation of water-soluble antimisting polymers and
              the need for frequent replenishment presents an economic barrier to widespread
              use of  polymer mist control agents in water-based fluids.  This research will
              investigate the behavior of:  (1) unsubstituted PEO in a surfactant-oil
              emulsion where interactions between the PEO and surfactant micelles lead to
              associative thickening of elongational viscosity; (2) PEO chain ends
              substituted with hydrophobic blocks, which promote end-to-end associations in
              addition to polymer-micelle interactions; and 3) a Kraton triblock
              copolymer-oil system that will provide fundamental information on the
              elongational flow behavior of associative-thickening polymer systems.  These
              systems will be investigated by light scattering, elongational flow rheometry,
              and mechanical and optical shear rheometry to elucidate associative structures
              and characterize the rheology of these structures b oth at equilibrium and
              under flow conditions.  This research will seek to isolate and optimize
              associative interactions leading to high elongational viscosity.  Atomization
              experiments will be carried out to evaluate associative mist suppression
              mechanisms directly.   The outcome of this research is expected to be the
              development of practical associative polymers for mist suppression of
              water-based machining fluids.     Machining fluids play a key role in
              determining the efficiency of the machining process.  By far, the most
              ubiquitous fluid for machining and grinding is water based fluids which contain
              many additives to impart machining efficiency.  However, when such a fluid is
              inhaled as a mist during working conditions, there is cause for concern of the
              operators' health. By successfully developing an economical, long lasting
              antimisting additive, this research has the potential to make the working
              environment safer in the metal working industry.
