Title       : High Performance Algorithms for Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1997    
File        : a9525885

Award Number: 9525885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $593000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Chelikowsky jrc@msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yousef Saad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9162,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9525885  Chelikowsky  This computational materials science grant is co-funded by
               the Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials  Research and the
              New Technologies Program in the Advanced  Scientific Computing Division.  One
              principal investigator  is a computational materials scientist while the other
              is a  computational scientist.  A primary objective of this  research is to
              develop computer codes for materials modeling  on advanced platforms which
              utilize the combined expertise  of these two researchers.    The goal of the
              research is to develop computational methods  which fully utilize innovations
              in high performance  computers in order to open new applications of electronic 
              structure codes to complex materials.  The focus of the  research will be on
              real space methods through higher order  finite difference techniques to
              electronic structure  problems.  Finite difference techniques coupled with ab 
              initio pseudopotentials can provide a simple, yet accurate  and efficacious,
              approach to complex systems.    A few of the advantages of finite difference
              techniques over  more traditional plane wave techniques include:         finite
              difference techniques are far easier to  implement than plane wave codes   
              with no loss of accuracy,  especially for parallel implementations;        
              these techniques to not require the use of supercells  for localized systems. 
              No    cell-cell interactions are  present.  Charged systems can be handled
              directly  without artificial compensating backgrounds.  Replication of  vacuum
              is natural   and minimized compared to extended basis  sets;         finite
              difference algorithms result in a minimum factor  of 4-5 gain in speed over    
              plane wave techniques for  shared memory architectures.  Significantly better 
              performance is expected for massively parallel platforms;         no
              fast-Fourier transforms are required.  Global  communications are minimized.   
              Applications will center on electronic materials such as  large clusters,
              liquids and amorphous s olids.  Algorithm  development will concentrate on
              designing parallel  preconditioners for the eigenvalue problem, as well as the 
              implementation of these techniques on various paralllel  platforms.  %%%  This
              computational materials science grant is co-funded by  the Materials Theory
              Program in the Division of Materials  Research and the New Technologies Program
              in the Advanced  Scientific Computing Division.  One principal investigator  is
              a computational materials scientist while the other is a  computational
              scientist.  A primary objective of this  research is to develop computer codes
              for materials modeling  on advanced platforms which utilize the combined
              expertise  of these two researchers.  The goal of the research is to  develop
              computational methods which fully utilize  innovations in high performance
              computers in order to open  new applications of electronic structure codes to
              complex  materials.  ***
