Title       : Selective and Regenerable Metal Sorbing Vesicles for Metal Ion Recovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9525019

Award Number: 9525019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold G. Monbouquette harold@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1099,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9525019  Monbouquette  UCLA    The central goal of this research is to
              demonstrate the feasibility of novel metal-sorbing vesicle media for the
              selective recovery of toxic heavy metal ions, such as Cu2+, Cd2+ and Pb2+, from
              dilute aqueous solution in a continuous process.   Metal-sorbing vesicles,
              which are submicron-diameter, surfactant bilayer membrane capsules, have been
              engineering to scavenge and to concentrate metal ions by virtue of a lipophilic
              metal carrier in the vesicle wall and a water-soluble, meal-chelating agent
              dissolved in the aqueous vesiclle interior.  The carrier facilitates transport
              of the charged metal ion across the otherwise impermeable lipiid bilayer while
              the encapsulated chelating agent provides the driving force for metal ion
              uptake.  Batch results show that suspensions of engineered metal-sorbing
              vesicles, which present 103-104m2 of surface area per liter of suspension, can
              selectively reduce Pb2+ or Cu2+ concentrations from 1-5 ppm to low ppb levels
              in minutes or less while concentrating the metal by 3 orders of magnitude. 
              These results were used to design a bench-scale continuous metal-ion extractin
              process where the vesicles and the feed stream were contacted using a
              hollow-fiber ultrafiltration cartridge.  Lead ions were selectivly separated in
              this continous systems, which was described well by a simple mathematical
              model.  However, this continuous system did not include a vesicle regeneration
              stage for metal ion release such that the vesicles could be reused repeatedly.
              During the proposed three-year project, this separations technology will be
              brought forward in three areas critical to the establishment of technical
              feasibility:  design for selectivity, continous processing with vesicle
              regeneration, and vesicle stability enhancement.  The overall selectively of
              the metal-sorbing vesicle depends in a non-additive way on the relative
              affinity of both carrier and chelator for the ions present in solution.  A
              proposed qualitative model of this fundamentally  new mechanisms in separations
              shows that the overall systems can be orders of magnitude more selective than
              the carrier or chelator alone if their selectivity profiles are properly
              matched.  The selectivity of vesicles harboring carefully chosen carrier and
              chelator pairs will be determined to confirm the qualititative model of
              metal-sorbing vesicle selectivity.  As for vesicle reusability, preliminary
              data indicates that metal-laden vesicles can be regenerated in minutes at
              slightly elevated  temperature and a moderate pH of 2.0.  A metal-sorbing
              vesicle regeneration process will be further investigated, optimized and
              integrated into a bench-scale continuous metal-ion recovery system.  A
              descriptive mathematical model of the system, useful for process design, will
              be constructed and tested by comparison to experimental results.  Finally,
              polymerized vesicles of various chemistry will be tested for improved stability
              at the elevated levels of detergent, alcohols, and Ca2+ ions, for example, that
              could be encountered in an actual process stream.  Coupled to this study will
              be an assessment of the permeability and regenerability properties of the
              polymerized vesicles, as these properties have a direct impact on the efficacy
              of the proposed continuous metal recovery systems.  Currently there is no data
              available in the literature on carrier mediated transport across polymerized
              vesicle bilayers.
