Title       : Bioengineering of Biosurfactants for Cleaning and Degreasing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9525091

Award Number: 9525091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Gross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9525091  Gross    Surfactants are needed that have a high affinity for oil and
              can form stable oil-in-water (o/w) emulsions for a number of important
              applications such as in cleaners that will effectively remove oil-type residues
              from tankers, various storage vessels and metal parts during
              manufacturing/surface cleaning processes.  From a toxic use reduction
              perspective, it would be desirable for such surfactants to use non-toxic
              renewable resources in their production.  Furthermore, these functional
              products should show low/no toxicity and must biodegrade upon disposal. 
              Moreover, it would be advantageous if the surfactants could easily be tailored
              so that optimal performance characteristics could be obtained for different
              cleaning and degreasing requirements.  Currently, environmental factors are the
              guiding principles in the design of such functional surfactant products by
              manufactures that are looking towards "Green" processes and products.  For
              example, soap and detergent producers are beginning to realize that many
              customers will pay more for products that are environmentally sound. 
              Therefore, it is proposed herein that microbial fermentation processes that
              involve conversion of various renewable fatty acids will be used as routes to
              new biosurfactants that have enhanced performance characteristics.  The key
              feature of this work is that the surfactant structure will be varied by
              alteration of the fatty acid carbon source used and by inhibiting de novo
              pathways for fatty acid biosynthesis.  The latter will be accomplished by the
              use of specific and non-specific fatty acid biosynthesis inhibitors in
              cultivation media.  Previous work in our laboratory using these approaches for
              the biosynthesis of the composition and degree of substitution of the resulting
              polymeric surfactants.  Thus, the idea that a family of surfactants can be
              formed by a microbial production system has now been demonstrated.  The
              bioengineering of surfactant structure is of fundamental important since it
              shows that the a cylation of sugar units by an acyltransferase enzyme systems
              can potentially take place with a wide range of acyl doner molecules to
              optimize produce performance.  This proposal seeks to extend this finding to
              the production of rhamose and sophorose lipid surfactants by candida bombicola
              and pseudomonas aeruginosa.  The flexibility of these microbial production
              systems for the formation of novel biosurfactants will be explored by
              systematic investigations using a wide range of fatty acid carbon sources of
              variable chain length and unsaturation.  The direct incorporation of
              hydroxyacids will also be studies.  Also, mutant strains of A.calcoaceticus
              that produce emulsans with enhanced ability to emulsify heavy oils will be
              selected and studied.  The effects of changes in biosurfactant structure on
              surface tension and critical micelle concentration values as a function of
              substrate will be evaluated.  In
