Title       : Modeling the Transport and Exchange of Krill between the Antarctic Peninsula and
               South Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1999 
File        : a9525806

Award Number: 9525806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen E. Hofmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Klinck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9525806  Hofmann  Increasing evidence indicates that krill populations
              surrounding  South Georgia are supplied by krill exported from the Antarctic 
              Peninsula region.  However, little knowledge of the potential  krill transport
              pathways exists.  General circulation patterns  for the Antarctic Peninsula and
              Scotia Sea regions are known.  However, recent observations have shown
              considerable mesoscale  structure to the flow on the continental shelf west of
              the  Peninsula, in Bransfield Strait, around Elephant Island and in  the Scotia
              Sea, which potentially influences krill transport and  retention.  Moreover,
              local hydrographic and current conditions  have considerable influence on the
              development and growth of  krill.  Hence, understanding and elucidating krill
              transport  pathways or possible retention regions requires knowledge of the 
              mesoscale current and water mass distributions.    The overall goal of the
              research is to investigate transport of  krill between the Antarctic Peninsula
              region across the Scotia  Sea to South Georgia.  To accomplish this general
              objective the  following specific research objectives will be pursued:  (1) 
              implement a circulation model for the Antarctic Peninsula-Scotia  Sea region;
              (2) interface an energetically based model for the  development of krill from
              larva to adult with the circulation  model; and (3) use the circulation-krill
              model to investigate the  retention and/or transport of krill in the Antarctic
              Peninsula to  South Georgia.  This modeling study is a joint effort between E. 
              Hofmann and J. Klinck at Old Dominion University and Dr. Eugene  Murphy at the
              British Antarctic Survey (BAS) in Cambridge,  England.  It will provide a
              framework for analyzing, synthesizing  and integrating the large environmental
              and krill data sets  collected by BAS around South Georgia with those from the 
              Antarctic Peninsula region that have come from historical sources  (e.g.,
              BIOMASS) and the Palmer Long Term Ecological Research  (LTER) Program and those
              from the Bransfi eld Strait and Elephant  Island regions from the U.S.
              Antarctic Marine Living Resources  (AMLR) program.  Moreover, the proposed
              modeling studies are  relevant to the key science questions set forth by U.S.
              GLOBEC  (GLOBEC, 1990) and International GLOBEC (GLOBEC, 1993) for the 
              Southern Ocean.  In particular, it addresses issues related to  the role of
              circulation and biological processes in structuring  Antarctic krill
              populations.  Also, quantifying the krill  transport (flux) between the
              Peninsula and Scotia Sea has been  identified as a high priority issue by the
              Convention for  Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).
