Title       : Workshop on Biodiversity, Ecology and Evolution of Thermo- philes from
               Yellowstone National Park: Overview and Issues to be held Sept. 17-20, 1995 in
               Yellow Stone National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9525964

Award Number: 9525964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna-Louise Reysenbach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman R. Pace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             ;Y MX                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     ( MX   
              ( MX        4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                            ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9525964
              Reysenbach In the past decade there has been a surge of interest and research
              in the ecology, biology, and biotechnology of microorganisms from extreme
              environments.  As a result, microbiological research at Yellowstone National
              Park (YNP) has expanded significantly.  Much of the earlier work at YNP was
              pioneered by Thomas Brock laying the foundations for microbiological research
              in the Park.  It is the organism isolated by Brock et al. From Mushroom Pool,
              Thermys aquaticus that is the original source of Taq polymerase enzyme in the
              polymerase chain reaction.  The usefulness of Taq polymerase has now focused
              interest on the biotechnological potential of thermophilic microorganisms, and
              on YNP thermal springs.  In addition, the many ecological studies, in
              particular those utilizing molecular phylogenetic techniques to assess
              microbial diversity, have identified a plethora of novel microbial and
              metabolic diversity.  As a result, park officials are faced with a new
              dimension of administrative policy: administering the microbial resources of
              YNP in a way that is both realistic and beneficial fo r the Park and the
              industrial and academic communities. Microbiological research at YNP has
              expanded significantly in recent years, and much has been published about
              microbiology at Yellowstone.  Yet, no synthesis of the research has been
              assembled.  This workshop addresses the following objectives: (1) recent
              advances in microbial ecological research, (2) biotechnological potential of
              microbial resources, and (3) park policies and initiatives for microbiological
              research at YNP thereby consolidating the interests of the National Park
              Service, the scientific community, and industry.  The workshop will result in a
              published document that will include contributions of the symposium. ***       
                               ;                                                      Oh    
              +'  0                                       $       H       l                  
                                          D       h                                          
                      R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              9525964                             Shelley   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o
              n                           (                                                  
              +                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          A.
              Graves                   Shelley A. Graves           @       KX                
                       @      VLX                          @    ym MX                        
                                                                                       @    
              d                                     Microsoft Word 6.0                       
                                            3                                                
                                                    ;                                        
                                               e =       e                                   
                                                         j       j   j       j       j      
              j       j                                                                      
              A   ?                                                                          
                                  #                   #           T       =   A              
                      j                                                                      
                A               j       j                                                    
                                j               j                                       ~    
                        j       j       j       j                           6                
                                                                                             
              9525964 Reysenbach In the past decade there has been a surge of interest and
              research in the ecology, biology, and biotechnology of microorganisms from
              extreme environments.  As a result, microbiological research at Yellowstone
              National Park (YNP) has expanded significantly.  Much of the earlier work at
              YNP was pioneered by Thomas Brock laying the foundations for microbiological
              research in the Park.  It is the organism isolated by Brock et al. From
              Mushroom Pool, Thermys aquaticus that is the original source of Taq polymerase
              enzyme in the polymerase chain reaction.  The usefulness of Taq polymerase has
              now focused interest on the biotechnological potential of thermophilic
              microorganisms, and on YNP thermal springs.  In addition, the many ecological
              studies, in particular those utilizing molecular phylogenetic techniques to
              assess microbial diversity, have identified a plethora of novel microbial and
              metabolic diversity.  As a result, park officials are faced with a new
              dimension of administrative policy: administering the microbial resources of
              YNP in a way that is b
