Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1996    
File        : a9525905

Award Number: 9525905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jirair Kevorkian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kevorkian DMS-9525905  This proposal concerns research that  builds on the PI's
              recent work  in developing multiple scale  asymptotic expansions that
              approximate  solutions over long  periods and in the far field for weakly
              nonlinear  conservation  laws with source terms. The primary effect of source 
              terms is  that the leading approximation in the multiple scale  expansion  is
              complicated; in general, it involves an integral   representation that has to
              be analyzed asymptotically for large  time  before one can derive the
              appropriate evolution equations.   Extensions of previous work to include the
              effects of variable   coefficients, leading order diffusion, and resonant wave 
              interactions  are outlined. In particular, it is proposed to  study wave
              propagation  problems with axial or radial symmetry  where radial dependence 
              occurs in the source terms. A second  phase of the research involves a  class
              of problems where the  usual Ginzburg-Landau technique does  not apply because
              the  linearly most unstable wave number equals  zero. Problems with  three or
              more dependent variables involve a  further comlication,  the possibility of
              resonant interactions between  waves. The  combined effect of source terms snd
              resonant  interactions has  not been studied, and is one of the main goals of
              the  proposed  research.   This proposal outlines research in the approximate 
              analytic solution  of conservation laws when the desired solution  is close to
              one that is  known exactly. Conservation laws that  model physical or
              biological  processes typically involve source  terms as well as diffusive
              terms.  Source terms usually arise  when reactions are present, whereas 
              diffusive terms often  account for dissipation. The effect of small  diffusion
              is  benign; as in many fluid dynamics problems, small  diffusion  corresponds
              to small viscosity and acts to "smooth out" the   solution in a thin layer
              centerd around a shock wave. If,  however,  diffusion occurs to leading order,
              as in many  biological applications,   the structure of the solution is 
              fundamentally altered. This proposal  identifies a class of  problems involving
              diffusion to leading order for  which the  standard approaches do not apply. It
              is also proposed to  study  the effect of source terms in systms that have
              three or more   interacting waves, as in gas dynamics for reacting flows. Here,
               the  primary focus is to clarify the role of source terms in the  process that
               governs the resonant interaction of these waves.
