Title       : Dynamics of Selective Adsorption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9802476

Award Number: 9802476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haskell Taub taubh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Herwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                      9802476  Taub    In  this research
              program, Professors H. Taub and K.W. Herwig  of  the  Department  of  Physics
              and Astronomy of the  University  of  Missouri  at  Columbia will investigate
              processes  in  which  one  chemical component in a fluid mixture preferentially
              adsorbs on a  solid surface.  Such processes occur widely in materials science.
               A case of particular interest is the preferential adsorption from  solution 
              of  long flexible-chain molecules, a process  which  is  important  in  such 
              applications as lubrication,  adhesion,  and  coatings.   Whereas  considerable
               progress  has  been  made   in  understanding the structure, thermodynamics,
              and, on  macroscopic  time  scales,  the  kinetics  of such polymers  near 
              interfaces,  little  is  known of the dynamics of these systems at the  atomic 
              level.  In simplest terms, the questions to be addressed are  how  do  polymer 
              chains move so as to anchor, diffuse, and eventually  desorb  from  a  solid
              surface.  Both linear and branched  alkane  molecules  of  intermediate size
              (containing between  20  and  40  carbon atoms) on graphite and Ag(111)
              substrates will be used  as  prototype   systems  for  studying  the  dynamics 
              of   selective  adsorption. Quasielastic neutron scattering will be used to
              study  the  diffusive  motion  within  the  alkane  films,  while  their 
              structure  will be investigated by neutron and synchrotron  x-ray  scattering. 
               The  interpretation  of  the  experiments  will  be  assisted  by  detailed 
              computer  simulations.  Experiments  will  utilize  existing  state-of-the-art
              facilities  at  the  Missouri  University  Research Reactor and both the
              Intense Pulsed  Neutron  Source and Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National
              Laboratory.  %%%  In  this research program, Professors H. Taub and K.W. Herwig
               of  the  Department  of  Physics and Astronomy of the  University  of 
              Missouri  at  Columbia will investigate processes  in  which  one  chemical
              component in a f luid mixture preferentially adsorbs on a  solid surface.  Such
              processes occur widely in materials science.  A case of particular interest is
              the preferential adsorption from  solution  of  long flexible-chain molecules,
              a process  which  is  important  in  such  applications as lubrication, 
              adhesion,  and  coatings.  Unfortunately very little is known  at the
              microscopic  level about the dynamics of how such polymer molecules anchor  to 
              a  solid  surface, then crawl about, and eventually  desorb.   In  this 
              project  intermediate-length   hydrocarbon-chain  molecules  (both  linear  and
               branched alkanes), which  are  the  principal  constituents of commercial
              lubricants, will be used as prototypes  for  studying the dynamics of selective
              adsorption.  Quasielastic  neutron  scattering  will  be used to investigate 
              the  molecular  motion  within the hydrocarbon films, while their structure 
              will  be investigated by neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering.  The 
              interpretation  of the experiments will be assisted  by  detailed  computer
              simulations. Experiments will utilize existing state-of-  the-art  facilities
              at the Missouri University  Research  Reactor  and  both  the Intense Pulsed
              Neutron Source and Advanced  Photon  Source  at  Argonne  National  Laboratory.
                This  research  will  provide training of graduate students in fundamental 
              aspects  of  polymer science, preparing them for careers in the petroleum  and 
              rubber industries.  ***
