Title       : Seasons: The Global Plant Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9802174

Award Number: 9802174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393914             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Verbyla dverbyla@merlin.salrm.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Elena B. Sparrow  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Leslie S. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global  Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program  (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and  objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a  global information network with the ultimate goal of
              better  understanding Earth's environment and changes that take  place within
              it.  This project will design a new observation  protocol for use at GLOBE
              schools in order to detect the  annual waves of plant green-up and senescence
              that occur as  photosynthesis becomes active and then dormant with the  cycling
              of the seasons.  These waves are important because  they can be directly
              related to global carbon fixation, and  they are observed to respond to
              long-term global change.  It  is expected that they also respond to
              shorter-term phenomena  such as El Ni=F1o.  The greenness index measures
              reflectance  related to photosynthesis and plant cellular structure, and  is
              derived from satellite data.  Each satellite sensor is  calibrated for spectral
              reflectance before launch, but these  calibrations drift with time, and
              therefore the measurements  lose accuracy as the instrument ages. Combined with
              changes  in viewing angle and sun-angle, the index estimates have low 
              precision.  Ground-based observations of spring green-up and  fall senescence
              can therefore contribute greatly to the  validation of satellite estimates of
              growing seasons.  The goal of the project is to improve math, science, and 
              technology in K-12 classrooms by providing an opportunity  for scientists and
              students to collaborate in a research  project of real significance to
              scientists who are tracking  plant phenological changes as indicators of global
              change.  Students, teachers and scientists will benefit from this  project. 
              Students will take part in an authentic learning  project where they will have
              the chance to apply what they  are learning to create new knowledge.  Teachers
              will have a  new and interesting tool with which to teach basic  principles of
              math and science.  Scientists will have access  to global plant phenology data
              -- data which are currently  very rare and are needed for validation of global
              remotely  sensed estimates of plant phenology.  %%%  In response to an
              Announcement of Opportunity for the Global  Learning and Observations to
              Benefit the Environment Program  (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE
              goals and  objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a  global
              information network with the ultimate goal of better  understanding Earth's
              environment and changes that take  place within it.  This project will design a
              new observation  protocol for use at GLOBE schools in order to detect the 
              annual waves of plant green-up and senescence that occur as  photosynthesis
              becomes active and then dormant with the  cycling of the seasons.  These waves
              are important because  they can be directly related to global carbon fixation,
              and  they are observed to respond to long-term global change.  It  is expected
              that they also respond to shorter-term phenomena  such as El Ni=F1o.  The
              greenness index measures reflectance  related to photosynthesis and plant
              cellular structure, and  is derived from satellite data.  Each satellite sensor
              is  calibrated for spectral reflectance before launch, but these  calibrations
              drift with time, and therefore the measurements  lose accuracy as the
              instrument ages. Combined with changes  in viewing angle and sun-angle, the
              index estimates have low  precision.  Ground-based observations of spring
              green-up and  fall senescence can therefore contribute greatly to the 
              validation of satellite estimates of growing seasons.  The goal of the project
              is to improve math, science, and  technology in K-12 classrooms by providing an
              opportunity  for scientists and students to collaborate in a research  project
              of real significance to scientists who are  tracking plant phenological changes
              as indicators of  global change. Students, teachers and scientists will 
              benefit from this project.  Students will take part in an  authentic learning
              project where they will have the chance  to apply what they are learning to
              create new knowledge.  Teachers will have a new and interesting tool with which
               to teach basic principles of math and science.  Scientists  will have access
              to global plant phenology data -- data  which are currently very rare and are
              needed for  validation of global remotely sensed estimates of plant  phenology.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
