Title       : Topics in Differential Dynamics and Differential Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9802849

Award Number: 9802849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Tabachnikov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The project concerns two topics: the geometry and dynamics of billiard-like
              dynamical systems, and the topology and geometry of Legendrian knots and curves
              in contact 3-dimensional manifolds. The former includes the study of the
              classical Birkhoff billiards, dual (or outer) billiards, and projective
              billiards.  The techniques include symplectic topology, KAM theory,
              Aubry-Mather theory, integral geometry, and symbolic dynamics. The latter
              includes applications of "quantum" topology to Legendrian and transverse knots
              and links, study of the recently introduced contact homology rings and their
              applications, and applications of Sturm theory and the theory of generating
              functions to the global geometry of Legendrian curves.      The motivation for
              the study of billiards is two-fold.  First of all, mathematical billiards are
              intimately related to geometrical optics, and progress in the study of
              billiards may have practical applications in optics.  Secondly, billiards
              provide a very good model in the theory of dynamical systems, and many
              developments in various areas of dynamical systems have been stimulated by
              problems from the theory of mathematical billiards.  The theory of Legendrian
              curves belongs to the intersection of two very active research areas:
              symplectic topology and knot theory. Both have deep connections with
              theoretical physics: the former, with classical mechanics; the latter, with
              quantum physics. The Legendrian knot theory provides a good testing ground for
              symplectic topology and knot theory, and progress in the former will stimulate
              new developments in these fundamental theories.
