Title       : Structure and Dynamics in Boron-Containing Oxide Glasses andLiquids:
               High-Resolution and High-Temperature Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9802072

Award Number: 9802072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Stebbins stebbins@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802072  Stebbins    The objective of this project is to use nuclear magnetic 
              resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to acquire quantitative  structural and dynamical
              information on borate,  borosilicate, and boraluminate glasses and liquids at 
              ambient and high temperature, and to interpret and model  existing macroscopic
              thermodynamic and transport property  data in light of these new findings.  The
              fundamental  difference between a glass and the corresponding liquid is  that
              the structure of the latter can change with temperature  rapidly enough to
              remain in equilibrium.  This process  results in often large effects on
              properties that must be  assessed to accurately describe melt behavior during
              glass  melting and processing.  Structural change with temperature  also
              controls the mechanical relaxation during annealing of  glasses, which in turn
              is an essential step in making  technologically useful glassy materials. 
              Extensive data  sets exist on these macroscopic properties, and  sophisticated
              phenomenological models have been formulated  to describe and quantify
              relaxation.  However, these models  in general lack empirical data on
              temperature effects on  either molecular-scale structure or dynamics and thus
              are  limited in their predictive value: when extrapolated  hundreds (or even
              >1000) degrees up to temperatures of glass  melting furnaces, they may even be
              grossly in error.  The  studies proposed here will use NMR on a variety of
              nuclides  at ambient temperature to determine the effects of varying  fictive
              temperature on glass structure, which will constrain  T effects on liquid
              structure in the vicinity of the glass  transition.  In situ, high resolution,
              high T NMR on these  nuclides will also be used to determine T effects on
              average  coordination environments to temperatures as high as 1500   C.  The
              effects of observed structural changes on entropy,  enthalpy, activities, molar
              volumes, and other properties  will be assessed using simple thermodynamic
              models.  At  lower temperatures but sti ll in the liquid range, static and  MAS
              NMR will be used to observe exchange among structural  species and measure
              their exchange rates.  Spin-lattice  relaxation times will be measured to gain
              dynamical  information over wider ranges in temperature.  These results  for
              molecular-scale dynamics will be compared to shear  relaxation times derived
              from existing data on viscosity,  and to data on electrical conductivity and
              diffusivity.  Models linking the microscopic and macroscopic will be 
              formulated and tested.  %%%  Boron-containing oxide glasses, and their
              corresponding high  temperature liquids, are of wide-ranging importance in 
              industry and society, finding use in corrosion- and  temperature resistant
              containers, tanks and pipes, fibers in  structural composites, optical
              components, computer display  screens, etc.  Borosilicate glasses are also
              likely to be of  major importance in the solidification and sequestering of 
              radioactive wastes.  This research project will have a major  impact on the
              understanding of glass formation and  relaxation needed to improve the
              properties of commercial  products.  ***
