Title       : Acquisition of a 300MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Solids Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9802866

Award Number: 9802866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Watterson Arthur_Watterson@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Warner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok L. Cholli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Sandman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sukant K. Tripathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802866
Watterson
This award provides partial support for a 300MHz Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Solids instrument to be shared by research faculty and
              students conducting polymers materials research.  The research of the faculty
              and staff of the Center for Advance Materials (CAM) at the University of
              Massachusetts Lowell involves preparation and characterization of a large
              variety of new and novel organic and inorganic materials.  A large portion of
              the materials need to be examined and characterized in the solid state as their
              unique properties are observable only in this state of matter.  Valuable data,
              obtained from the nmr cross polarization/magic angle spinning, proton and
              deuterium experiments carried out at variable temperature would help determine
              the detailed molecular structure of solids and the molecular motional dynamics
              of solids.  Detailed information about the morphology and crystallinity, about
              surfaces and interfaces will be readily accessible with the acquisition of the
              NMR instrumentation.  Much of this valuable knowledge cannot be obtained with
              the existing instrumentation at CAM.  Current as well as future research will
              benefit as new polymers, composites, organic crystals and other materials are
              continually being generated as part of the ongoing research at the CAM.  A
              number of ongoing projects funded by NSF and other federal agencies will be
              direct beneficiaries of this instrument.  The funding of this proposal will
              provide the CAM with the full complement of NMR instrumentation for solids
              characterization, as the CAM is already well equipped for solution
              characterization.  In addition to directly benefit and develop the research of
              CAM, the proposed instrumentation will expand and further develop the strong
              interdisciplinary doctoral programs at the University of Massachusetts
              Lowell.
%%%
***  


