Title       : Stochastic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9802753

Award Number: 9802753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Marcus mbmarcus@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay S. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802753
Marcus

Professors Marcus and Rosen will continue their study of
              continuity properties of functionals of symmetric Markov processes and their
              limiting behavior.  Using an isomorphism theorem of Dynkin and extensions that
              they have obtained they will exploit the interplay between high order Wick
              power and Wick product Gaussian chaos processes and the renormalized
              self-intersection local time of a large class of Levy processes, to study the
              phenomenon of ``near-intersections'' of a Levy process and path properties of
              local times of Levy processes on lines and curves.  The processes considered
              include Brownian motion and stable processes in dimensions one two and three,
              as well as processes in their domains of attraction.  Marcus and Rosen plan to
              characterize the self-intersection local time functional as the process of zero
              quadratic variation in the decomposition of an associated Dirichlet process. 
              Given that the self-intersection local time functional has zero quadratic
              variation it is natural to ask what is its precise p-variation.  They plan to
              investigate this question as well. They expect to be able to use techniques
              developed in an earlier paper based on the theory of random Fourier series to
              expand the definition of the self-intersection local time functional by
              replacing measures by distributions.  They will continue their study of
              continuity properties of high order Gaussian chaos processes and stable moving
              averages, and level crossings of absolutely continuous infinitely divisible
              processes.  They will also study the multifractal spectrum of occupation
              measures and intersections of random walks on a four dimensional
              lattice.

This research deals with fundamental properties of stochastic
              processes.  It exposes a deep relationship between two classes of stochastic
              processes, Markov processes and Gaussian chaos processes that previously were
              considered to be unrelated.  This relationship leads to increased understanding
              of the two component processes, an understanding that cannot be obtained by
              considering the  processes separately.  These results may have long range
              applications in the transmission, reception and analysis of data, in quantum
              physics and in the analysis of financial derivatives.

