Title       : Acquisition of a Nano-Indenter for Moderately Elevated Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9802716

Award Number: 9802716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew R. Begley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Montgomery T. Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802716  Begley  This award provides support to purchase a nano-indentation 
              system which has the new feature of being in an environment  chamber allowing
              tests to be made from -50 C to  100 C on technologically important materials. 
              This  instrument allows a wide variety of tests, including  submicron-sized
              hardness tests, micro-scratch tests, the  determination of damping properties
              via force-displacement  measurements during cyclic indentation and constant
              load  creep tests.    The instrument will be heavily used by Institute of 
              Materials Science members in several materials projects:  (i) the measurement
              of individual layer properties in  conventional and nanocrystalline thermal
              barrier coatings  and nanocrystalline wear resistant materials, to provide 
              both mechanical properties for modeling and the  understanding of
              properties-microstructure-processing  relationships coatings, (ii) the mapping
              of highly localized  property changes due to aluminum depletion which leads to 
              phase and stochiometry changes, (iii) the measurement of  thin polymer
              properties at slightly elevated temperatures,  (iv) the measurement of thin
              film properties in electronic  devices at ambient and moderately elevated
              temperatures, (v)  characterizing of mechanical property variations in systems 
              experiencing interdiffusion between layers.    Finally, the instrument will be
              used for advancing the  understanding of properties revealed in experiments on
              the  very fine scale of nano-indentation.  It has been shown that  the
              deformation characteristics (and hence, inferred  mechanical properties) are
              influenced by length scales  presumed to be governed by the characteristics of
              the  microstructure.  The interpretation of mechanical properties  determined
              via indentation tests can not be separated from  the fundamental problem of
              length-scale-dependent behavior.  This work will extend current research in
              size-dependent  indentation and collaborate with experts in processing, 
              metallography and electron microscopy regarding  sample  preparation and
              characterization.  Additionally, open issues  remain on how to develop
              inelastic material properties from  indentation tests, particularly those that
              are time-and  temperature-dependent.  These issues will be addressed in  detail
              in on-going and future research programs.  %%%  ***
