Title       : Thin Films and Self-Assembly Near Contact Lines: Their Structure and Control of
               Wetting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9802290

Award Number: 9802290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Garoff sg2e+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Suter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Wynblatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                       9802290  Garoff    This is small group research proposal involving in
              two physicists and  an  engineer. The project will investigate phenomena
              occurring in the  microscopic region near the three-phase contact line where a
              solid, a  wetting  liquid  and  the  vapor phase meet.  In  complex  or  multi-
               component  fluids,  it  is  qualitatively  known  that  the  relative 
              concentration  and self-assembly of the components near  the  contact  line 
              and  in the thin film differ from those in the bulk or  on  the  interface  far
               from  the  contact  line.  However,  there  is  scant  quantitative 
              information  about what is going  on.  Using  ultrahigh  vacuum,   optical,  
              x-ray,  neutron  and  atomic  force   microscopy  techniques  the  researchers
              will investigate the unique  microscopic  structures  of  these films and
              self-assemblies, and probe  how  they  control  macroscopic  wetting phenomena.
              The project  will  integrate  studies  of high temperature, metallic systems
              with studies  of  room  temperature,  aqueous and organic systems. The research
              will  improve  the  understanding of how fluids behave in confined environments
               and  will  generally improve our knowledge of how fluids wet and flow over 
              surfaces.  The  multidisciplinary character of the  project  provides 
              excellent training for graduate students, preparing them for  careers  in  a
              range of technical areas. The research is fundamental, but  its  application 
              to  technology  in many  areas,  such  as  printing  and  mechanics, is
              immediate and of high importance.  %%%  This is small group research proposal
              involving in two physicists and  an engineer. The research is focused on how a
              fluid wets and flows on  a  surface.  This  is  a  complex problem  which  is 
              of  fundamental  importance. It also has great technical importance in areas 
              such  as  lubrication,  detergents, etc. The research group will use  ultrahigh
               vacuum,   optical,   x-ray,  neutron  and  atomic  force   microscopy 
              techniques  the  researchers wi ll investigate the unique  microscopic 
              structures  of  these films and self assemblies, and probe  how  they  control 
              macroscopic  wetting phenomena. The project  will  integrate  studies  of high
              temperature, metallic systems with studies  of  room  temperature,  aqueous 
              and  organic  systems.  The  multidisciplinary  character  of  the project
              provides excellent training  for  graduate  students,  preparing them for
              careers in a range of technical  areas.  The  research  is fundamental, but its
              application to  technology  in  many  areas, such as printing and mechanics, is
              immediate and of high  importance.  ***
