Title       : Functionalized Rigid Conjugated Aromatic Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9802180

Award Number: 9802180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoshiyuki Okamoto yokamoto@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. K. Kwei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shiro Matsuoka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802180  Okamoto    Aromatic conjugated rigid rod polymers play an important
              role in  a number of diverse technologies including high performance 
              engineering materials, conductive polymer, nonlinear optical and  laser
              materials.  Recently aromatic conjugated polymers and their  blends have found
              applications in various photoelectronic  techniques.  Electroluminescence
              devices based on  conjugated  aromatic polymers have attracted increasing
              attention due to easy  fabrication of large areas, wide choices of colors and
              thermal  stability.  However, the luminescence properties of these  materials
              both in solution and in the solid state when blended  with a second polymer
              have not been fully investigated.  The  objective of this research is to expand
              past work to include  several new rigid aromatic polymers.  (1) The novel
              phenomena of  luminescence enhancement and alteration of emission wavelengths 
              in blends of aromatic rigid polymers will be studied in depth and 
              electroluminescence devices will be constructed for promising  candidates.  (2)
              An approach using non-covalently bonded graft  copolymers as compatibilizers
              will be adopted to design novel  elastomer-reinforced rigid polymers.  (3) The
              relaxation  properties of the rigid polymers will be measured in water and 
              organic solvents and compared with biological systems.  %%%  Display technology
              finds itself in many applications from laptop  screens to aerospace electronic
              devices.  The development of  organic materials for use in display technology
              is an area in  which the United States is in keen competition with Japan and 
              Europe.  The proposed work has the potential of offering new  candidates for
              light emitting devices.  Concurrent with device  applications, the novel
              approach to construct molecular  composites may lead to strong but light-weight
              plastics      for  high technology uses.  Graduate students trained in these
              areas  will be sought-after employees for industries.  ***
