Title       : Japan STA Program: Rapid Growth of Microcrystalline Silicon for Thin Film
               Silicon Solar Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9802639

Award Number: 9802639
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802639  Payne    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Adam Payne at  the
              Electrotechnical Laboratory in Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.  Payne will work with Dr.
              Akihisa Matsuda, Director, Thin  Film Silicon Solar Cells Super Lab, on a
              research project  entitled, "Rapid Growth of Microcrystalline Silicon for Thin 
              Film Silicon Solar Cells."    The proposed research project will focus on two
              aspects:  (1) further investigations of dichlorosilane as a new source  gas, as
              well as looking at different ways to increase the  deposition rate of
              Microcrystalline silicon (uc-Si), and (2)  applying a method for improving hole
              mobility to a-SiGe:H  films and solar cells.  It is believed that fossil fuels 
              lead to dramatic changes in the global climate.  Also, use  of coal and
              petroleum-based liquid fuels is causing massive  degradation in local air
              quality.  Photovoltaic cells have  the potential to become a good substitute
              for the above  fuels.  Although the bulk of their demand is being met by 
              single crystalline and polycrystalline silicon cells, thin-  film solar cells
              will dominate the future of photovoltaics.  Microcrystalline silicon (uc-Si)
              shows increased  conductivity compared with a-Si:H, but it does not absorb 
              light as well.  The deposition rate of uc-Si is lower than a-  Si:H so the
              thicker layers required to absorb sunlight take  even longer to deposit.  The
              research will focus on  improvements necessary to incorporate uc-Si as the
              absorbing  layer of a solar cell in order to increase its deposition  rate as
              much as possible.  ***
