Title       : Electron Transport in Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9802242

Award Number: 9802242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Westervelt westervelt@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9802242 
              Westervelt    This  experimental research project investigates the behavior  of
               electrons in tunnel-coupled quantum dots. In an apt analogy, such  systems 
              can be regarded as artificial molecules, the  individual  dots  being 
              considered as atoms. The fundamental characteristics  of  electrons in these
              systems; how electrons are shared  between  dots,  the  energy of shared
              electron states, and  how  electrons  move  through  coupled  dot circuits; are
              of  interest.  Specific  measurements  include  Coulomb  blockade  spectroscopy
               of  small  tunnel-coupled  dots (less than 100 electrons per  dot);  Coulomb 
              blockade spectroscopy of tunnel-coupled dots in the quantum  Hall  regime;
              transport through single quantum dots with partially open  leads,  predicted 
              to  show interesting many  body  effects;  and  transport through open electron
              wave resonators. Dot samples  are  made  at  Harvard using electron beam
              lithography on  GaAs/AlGaAs  wafers grown via molecular beam epitaxy at Univ.
              California Santa  Barbara. This research program is interdisciplinary in nature
              and  involves  one  or  more graduate students, who receive  excellent 
              training  in  preparation  for careers  in  industry,  government  laboratories
              or academia.  %%%  This  experimental research project investigates the
              behavior  of  electrons  in  semiconductor quantum  dots  coupled  by  quantum-
               mechanical  electron tunneling. In an apt analogy,  such  systems  can  be 
              regarded  as artificial molecules, the  individual  dots  being considered as
              atoms. The "quantum dot" is a small region in  the  surface  of a GaAs/AlGaAs
              wafer, similar to  those  used  in  advanced microelectronic devices. A
              two-dimensional electron  gas  is  produced just below the surface of the
              entire wafer, and then  miniature   electrodes   are  deposited   using  
              electron   beam  lithography which can isolate a tiny region containing as few 
              as  100   electrons,   called  a  qu antum   dot.    The   fundamental 
              characteristics of electrons in these systems; how electrons  are  shared 
              between dots, the energy of shared electron  states,  and  how electrons move
              through coupled dot circuits, are of interest.  Specific  measurements include
              Coulomb blockade  spectroscopy  of  small  tunnel-coupled  dots (less than 100 
              electrons  per  dot);  Coulomb  blockade  spectroscopy of  tunnel-coupled  dots
               in  the  quantum  Hall regime; transport through single quantum dots  with 
              partially  open  leads, predicted to show interesting  many  body  effects; and
              transport through open electron wave resonators. Dot  samples  are  made at
              Harvard using electron beam lithography  on  GaAs/AlGaAs  wafers  grown via
              molecular beam  epitaxy  at  Univ.  California  Santa  Barbara. The research is
               relevant  to  future  electronics  in  which devices will approach the  size 
              of  large  molecules. At this size scale quantum mechanics is important even 
              at  room  temperature. Quantum phenomena offer new approaches  to  computation
              ranging from ultra dense single-electron memories  to  quantum  computers
              projected to give an exponential  increase  in  speed.    The    research  
              here   addresses   the    fundamental  characteristics  of  quantum  mechanical
               electron   states   and  electron transport in tunnel-coupled semiconductor
              nanostructures  as a first step toward these possible applications. This
              research  program  is interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or  more 
              graduate  students, who receive excellent training in preparation  for careers
              in industry, government laboratories or academia.  ***
