Title       : Optical Measurements and Modeling to Estimate Concentrations and Fluxes of
               Organic Matter in the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9802836

Award Number: 9802836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222555             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Gregory Mitchell gmitchell@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dariusz Stramski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mati Kahru  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9531975  Mitchell    This research project is part of the US Joint Global
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the physical, ecological, and biogeochemical
              factors and processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.    The Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) has had three
              successful field efforts (in the North Atlantic, equatorial Pacific, and the
              Arabian Sea), and the last major field effort will be in the Southern Ocean. 
              The overall objectives of JGOFS are to determine and understand processes
              controlling the time-varying fluxes of carbon and associated biogenic elements,
              and to predict the response of marine biogeochemical processes to climatic
              change.  The Southern Ocean is critical in the global carbon cycle, as judged
              by its size and the physical processes which occur in it (e.g. deep and
              intermediate water formation), but its present quantitative role is uncertain. 
                This project concerns the development of relationships between the optical
              properties of sea water and the concentrations of carbon-based biological
              parameters such as phytoplankton pigments, particulate organic carbon, and the
              formation and export of organic carbon from the upper layers of the ocean.  The
              objectives are both to investigate biochemical processes in the low stability
              Southern Ocean environment, and to develop algorithms for the interpretation of
              remotely sensed ocean color images.  The in situ data will be obtained from an
              instrumented ocean buoy that will provide detailed information on the spectral
              reflectance, light attenuation, and scattering coefficients in the context of
              actual process data provided by other investigators in the Southern Ocean
              Experiment.  The information and understanding developed through this project
              will directly improve our abil ity to extrapolate the time and space scales of
              the Southern Ocean carbon flux system, and allow the development of more
              accurate system models and the interpretation of long-term changes in the
              ecosystem.
