Title       : Logic and Computability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9802843

Award Number: 9802843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Shore shore@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil Nerode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project includes research into a broad range of topics in
              computability theory (recursion theory) and logic, both theoretical and applied
              to other areas of mathematics and computer science. Included in the first area
              are investigations of the structures of sets and functions ordered by different
              notions of relative complexity of computation.  Particular emphasis will be
              placed on the complexity structures of sets which are effectively enumerable
              and on the most general notion of relative computability as defined by
              unrestricted Turing machine computations.  Computation procedures that place
              effective bounds on the access to oracle information or the run time of the
              computations will also be investigated, as well as reductions between real
              numbers based on the relative rates of convergence of effective approximations
              to the real numbers. Applications of the methods of pure computability theory
              will be made in the areas of computable algebra and model theory. The second
              area includes the study of structures representable by finite automata,
              decision procedures, the analysis and development of nonmonotonic logic,
              concurrent programming models, and applications of linear programming ideas and
              algorithms to data structures and logic programming. A primary focus here will
              be the logical and mathematical foundations of hybrid (continuous and discrete)
              control theory as well as the practical implementation of algorithms for these
              subjects based on the theoretical work being done.

The work proposed in the
              first area is directed at a better understanding of the fundamental notions of
              computability and relative difficulty of computation for different tasks. The
              theoretical work deals both with the abstract notions of computability as well
              as with applications to specific branches of, and questions in, other areas of
              mathematics. One important application (within mathematics) concerns the
              general question of what starting information is needed to be able to compute
              other aspects of many important classes of mathematical structures. In
              practical terms, the results at times indicate that there are no algorithms for
              certain important tasks or that more information than might have been expected
              is needed to write programs calculating the desired results. The second area
              deals more directly with developing the mathematical (and especially logical)
              tools needed for the crucial areas of program verification, data management,
              and automated control of real-world complex systems. Commercial applications
              are expected for some of this work and there has already been a spin off to a
              start-up company developing several applications including data compression and
              network management algorithms.

