Title       : Extended Linear Modeling with Free Knot Splines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9802071

Award Number: 9802071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Stone stone@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9802071
Charles J. Stone

In many statistical models of current
              theoretical and practical interest, the log-likelihood function depends on one
              or more unknown functions.  The theory and methodology of such models, referred
              to as extended linear models, are particularly tractable when the models are
              concave; that is, when the log-likelihood depends concavely on the unknown
              function or functions.  Among the class of concave extended linear models are
              regression; logistic, probit, Poisson, and other forms of generalized
              regression; multiple logistic regression (which is useful in multiple
              classification); hazard regression for survival analysis; the extension of
              hazard regression to event history analysis; and models for the estimation of
              density and conditional density functions.  In the context of such models,
              polynomial splines and their tensor products are natural building blocks for
              constructing finite-dimensional estimates of infinite-dimensional main effects
              and low-order interactions, and the resulting ANOVA decompositions provide an
              insightful tool for data analysis.  Corresponding nonadaptive theory and
              adaptive methodology have been extensively developed in recent years.  In this
              research, in order to reduce the gap between the existing theory and
              methodology and to improve on the methodology, similar theory and methodology
              and methodology for free knot splines are being developed, in which knot
              locations are viewed as free parameters to be determined by the maximum
              likelihood method along with the other parameters of the model.

The
              investigator is concurrently working on a monograph on extended linear modeling
              with splines with four of his collaborators, all former Ph. D. students and
              Research Assistants on previous NSF Grants of the investigator.  The research
              on free knot splines will be incorporated into the monograph.  This should
              contribute to the civil infrastructure by encouraging the inclusion of
              spline-based methodology in commercial statistical software packages, which
              would facilitate its use in the analysis of data of scientific and industrial
              importance.  It should also extend the appeal of this methodology to include
              researchers in the data mining community.

