Title       : The Numerical Analysis and Application of High Dimensional Higher Index DAEs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9802259

Award Number: 9802259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Campbell slc@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9263,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9802259  Campbell    A differential algebraic equation  (DAE) is  a system of
              equations  relating various quantities with some of their derivatives. 
              However,  unlike with an ordinary differential equation (ODE), the equations do
               not directly provide all the derivatives of the state variables.     A 
              nonnegative integer called the  index is one measure of how far a DAE  is from
              an ODE which is index zero.  The higher the index the greater the  difficulty
              in working with the system.   Many  physical problems are  most naturally
              initially modeled as a DAE particularly those that are  analyzed and simulated
              using computer generated mathematical models.  Because of the importance of
              DAEs in applications a variety of numerical  techniques have been developed in
              recent years to simulate and analyze  DAEs.  These techniques, while very
              useful, are limited to systems with  special structure and low index (no more
              than three and often limited to  one or two)    This project is to investigate
              the analysis, simulation, and application of  high dimensional, higher index
              DAEs of unknown and nonstandard structure.  Two applications, of considerable
              independent interest, will be considered  to serve as both application of, and
              guide for, the theoretical,  analytic,  and numerical work.  The first
              application is the optimization of the path  of a trim tool.  A trim tool is a
              machine used for cutting a part from a  piece of metal.  Improved performance
              of trim tools is of great importance  for manufacturing and industrial
              competitiveness.  The second application is  the simulation of densely packed
              high frequency circuits for which current  industrial simulation packages are
              inadequate.  The robust solution of these  types of problems requires
              additional fundamental theoretical results and  algorithms for high index high
              dimensional DAEs.  This project will develop  theory and computational
              algorithms for high index high dimensional  DAEs and apply them to the two
              applications.  For both of these  applications  the high fidelity models needed
              are mixed systems of partial  differential equations, DAEs, and  constraints. 
              Their  solution will  require  examining the interplay between type of  model,
              type of approximation process,  and resulting types of DAEs.
