Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Role of Neurospora Genes Involved in Recovery
               from DNA Damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9802676

Award Number: 9802676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice L. Schroeder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802676
Schroeder

This award provides funds to support a three-month
              research visit by Dr. Alice L. Schroeder, Department of Genetics and Cell
              Biology, Washington State University, for collaboration with Dr. Hirokazu Inoue
              and Dr. Chizu Ishii, Department of Regulation Biology, Saitama University,
              Urawa, Japan.  Their cooperative research will be directed toward studying DNA
              repair in the filamentous fungus, Neurospora crassa.  Filamentous fungi are
              important in biosynthesis of many products and as plant and animal pathogens. 
              Neurospora has a UV endonuclease apparently unique to certain fungi and a
              unique third epistasis group not involved in excision repair of pyrimidine
              dimers, suggesting that filamentous fungi may handle DNA repair somewhat
              differently than other organisms.

Exploration of DNA repair, and
              particularly of differences, is important in understanding the mechanism and
              evolution of these processes and may have practical uses in pathogen control. 
              Experiments will be planned and begun to explore the possibility that the uvs-2
              gene, thought to participate in chromatin modification, alters dimer excision. 
              Other experiments will be planned and possibly begun to examine dimer like
              structures remaining in the DNA of uvs-2 strains following UV irradiation and
              subsequent growth.  Isolation and characterization of a completely inactive
              allele also will be begun.  Cloning experiments will be used to obtain the
              genes in the uvs-3 epistasis group, which has no counterpart in yeast, mammals,
              or bacteria.  The visit supported by this award will be mutually beneficial
              because it will allow the two-way exchange of expertise between the only two
              groups currently studying DNA repair in the filamentous fungus, Neurospora
              crassa.
***

