Title       : Neutron Activation Analysis in the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9802366

Award Number: 9802366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Glascock glascockm@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector Neff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Glascock will continue to operate an archaeometric center at the University
              of Missouri and employ the technique of neutron activation analysis to analyze
              the elemental composition  of archaeological materials. This multi-elemental
              technique which allows the major, minor and  trace elements of a material to be
              determined simultaneously and with considerable accuracy and  precision. Of
              particular interest are potential analyses of  ceramics, lithics, metal and
              bone.  Through elemental analysis of archaeological materials, a number  of
              significant kinds of questions can be addressed. NAA provides a taxonomic tool
              because it allows  materials of similar composition to be grouped together. In
              some instances, it also permits the  proveniencing of artifacts and thus may
              provide information about procurement practices, routes of  trade and political
              boundaries. It may also improve understanding of ancient technologies and
              (through analysis of skeletal remains) give insight into prehistoric diet and
              nutrition.  This project is  particularly important because the Missouri
              laboratory is one of the very few which provide NAA  service to archaeologists.
              It also plays an important role in training students and it maintains large
              data bases and is working actively to facilitate scientific access to them.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
