Title       : Acquisition of a High-Magnetic-Field/Low-Temperature 
Facility for Materials
               Research with Synchrotron X-Rays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9802737

Award Number: 9802737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Greven greven@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802737
Greven
Synchrotron X-ray scattering plays an increasingly important
              role in materials science and condensed matter physics.  This award provides
              partial support for the acquisition of a nearly unique
              high-magnetic-field/low-temperature facility to be operated at one of the
              Nations's major synchrotron X-ray sources, the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation
              Laboratory (SSRL).  This new facility will allow the study of structural and
              magnetic properties of novel materials with the high momentum-resolution unique
              to synchrotron-generated X-rays, at magnetic fields up to 13 Tesla, and over
              more than three orders of magnitude in temperature, 0.3K < T < 400K.

The
              scientific program involves the study of materials in which electron-electron
              interactions play an important role.  Such "correlated-electron" materials are
              at the frontier of condensed matter physics, and they provide myriad
              possibilities to discover, 
observe, and characterize nove fundamental
              phenomena.  For example, the strong electron-electron correlations in
              charge-carrier-doped antiferromagnetic insulators with perovskite-derived
              structures are known to lead to such diverse properties as: (i) insulator-metal
              transitions, (ii) high-temperature superconductivity, (iii) colossal
              magnetoresistance, (iv) charge-ordered phases, (v) and spin-ordered phases. 
              The structural, magnetic, and electronic properties are generally intimately
              coupled in these systems, and the presence of a magnetic field often leads to
              new phases.  The scientific program involves charge, resonant magnetic, and
              non-resonant magnetic X-ray scattering techniques.  It will furthermore involve
              in situ transport measurements to obtain simultaneous structural, magnetic, and
              electronic information.  Moreover, it will benefit from complementary research
              involving the growth and characterization of single crystals, neutron
              scattering experiments, and the collaboration with the ongoing photoemission
              spectroscopy effort at Stanford.  This new high-magnetic-field/low-temperature
              synchrotron X-ray facility will thus allow the invesitgator to conduct research
              at the forefront of materials science and condensed matter physics, and it will
              help educate a new generation of undergraduate and graduate students with
              materials science, applied science, and physics backgrounds.
%%%
***

