Title       : An Innovation In Real-Time Acoustic Holography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9802847

Award Number: 9802847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean F. Wu swu@me1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project is being carried out in collaboration with the Advanced
              Engineering Center of Ford Motor Company. The objectives of this investigation
              are two-fold: (1) to develop an innovative methodology to reconstruct the
              acoustic pressure fields accurately and cost-effectively, and (2) to extend
              this methodology to producing real-time acoustic holography that enables one to
              visualize the instantaneous acoustic pressure distributions and their evolution
              as the excitation forces change with time. The novelty of the methodology lies
              in the fact that the acoustic pressures are reconstructed through an expansion
              of acoustic modes, or a set of particular solutions to the Helmholtz equation.
              The coefficients associated with these acoustic models are determined by
              requiring the assumed form solution to satisfy pressure boundary conditions at
              measurement points. The errors incurred in this process are minimized by using
              the least squares method. The significance of this methodology is that
              solutions thus obtained are unique and the efficiency of numerical computations
              is high. This is because the acoustic modes employed represent a complete set
              of eigenfunctions that satisfy the Helmholtz equation. The number of acoustic
              modes determines the measurement points, which is small when a right coordinate
              system is selected for the source geometry under consideration. Hence numerical
              computations are fast and efficient. Moreover, the acoustic pressure is written
              as an explicit form of the acoustic modes. Therefore the time-domain signals
              can be obtained by  taking a direct inverse Fourier transformation. This makes
              the generation of real-time acoustic holography possible. The investigation
              will yield an effective tool for diagnosing both structure and airborne noise
              sources. Using this tool, the design engineers can acquire a better
              understanding of the noise generation mechanisms, assess the noise performance
              of a complex machine cost-effectively, and develop effective measures to
              circumvent vibration and noise problems. This tool will also significantly
              enhance the teaching effectiveness in classroom education. It will enable
              students to `see` the radiation, reflection, and diffraction of sound waves,
              thus making the learning of complex acoustic concepts easier, and more
              interesting and effective.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
