Title       : Ergodic Theory and Dynamics over Teichmuller Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9802380

Award Number: 9802380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90678              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Veech veech@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              William A. Veech is pursuing the question of existence of a prime geodesic
              theorem for a generic meromorphic finite norm quadratic differential on a
              generic closed Riemann surface.  Using his recently developed theory of Siegel
              measures, he is led to the question of whether a related Teichmuller map action
              of SL(2,R) on a topological component of a stratum in the moduli space of norm
              one quadratic differentials does not almost have invariant vectors, in the
              orthocomplement of the constants relative to the Liouville measure. Veech is
              studying moduli spaces of flat metrics with cone singularities on punctured
              surfaces.  For fixed cone angles, there is an identification between the
              Teichmuller moduli space and the moduli space of metrics up to scale which
              gives rise to interesting integrals over the Teichmuller moduli space. Veech is
              attempting to prove that these integrals, which represent natural volumes of
              the moduli space, are finite, using his recently developed "Delaunay partition
              coordinates" for moduli space. He is pursuing the question of whether every
              geodesic relative to the natural flat (cone) metric on the truncated
              icosahedron is either closed or uniformly distributed, reducing this to a
              question of whether a certain discrete subgroup of SL(2,R) which is associated
              to the truncated icosahedron is a lattice.

William A. Veech is studying
              periodic trajectories for a class of dynamical systems. These include systems
              whose descriptions require little more than high school geometry but whose
              analysis requires rather deep notions from disparate fields, including complex
              analysis, ergodic theory and representation theory of Lie groups.  Location and
              enumeration of periodic trajectories are central problems in the theory of
              dynamical systems. The former may be interpreted as the problem of predicting
              periodicity from knowledge of intitial conditions while the latter is the
              problem of obtaining quantitative information about the set of all periodic
              trajectories, including an asymptotic formula for the number of trajectories
              whose period is less than T for large T. An elementary example of a system for
              which both questions are for the most part unresolved is the uniform motion of
              a pointlike particle which is contained in a planar polygonal area and which
              rebounds from the sides of the container according to Snell's law, i.e. "angle
              of incidence equals angle of rebound".  To indicate the complexity of the
              situation it may be mentioned the the problems of location and enumeration of
              periodic trajectories for such motion in a regular polygon (other than
              equilateral triangle, square and regular hexagon) were open until only recently
              when they were solved by Veech.


