Title       : Interaction of Particles and Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a9802709

Award Number: 9802709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2556000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cumrun Vafa vafa@string.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Georgi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney R. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon L. Glashow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The disciplines of particle physics, cosmology and  mathematics are coming
              together today in remarkable ways.  Research in theoretical elementary particle
              physics and  string theory will examine how the world works, from the  strings
              that may lie deep inside the smallest particles to  the edge of the visible
              universe and beyond. The tools  developed in doing this may influence the
              nature of  mathematics as well. The areas to be studied include the 
              large-scale structure of the universe, the nature of space-  time, the
              fundamental forces of nature and the most basic  constituents of matter.  Both
              phenomenologically and with  powerful new techniques arising from string
              theory, the  research will study the properties of matter, such as  revealed at
              the largest accelerators (the Tevatron, and in  the next decade, the Large
              Hadron Collider). This endeavor  should explain the origin of particle masses.
              In addition,  the work will seek the underlying explanation of CP  violation --
              the difference between the behavior of matter  and that of antimatter.  This is
              a tiny effect soon to be  explored further at the BABAR collider in Stanford,
              but it  is likely to explain why we are made of matter, not  antimatter. Other
              challenges to be addressed involve the  physics of supersymmetry (a striking,
              but still hypothetical  prediction of string theory), the quantum mechanics of
              black  holes, and the physics and mathematics underlying string  theory. These
              researches will deepen our understanding of  the fundamental processes
              occurring in the universe and lead  to new insights in mathematics and quantum
              field theory.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
