Title       : JSPS Fellowship: Investigation of Quantum Dynamics of Coherent Phonon Generation
               in Semiconductor Nanos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9802624

Award Number: 9802624
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Hurley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hurley  9802624    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  David Hurley at
              Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan.  Dr.  Hurley will work with Dr. Wright
              in the Department of  Applied Physics on a research project entitled, 
              "Investigation of Quantum Dynamics of Coherent Phonon  Generation in
              Semiconductor Nanostructures."    The proposed research is aimed at essential
              basic studies of  the coherent phonon generation in semiconductor films and 
              nanostructures.  In the past thirty years, the optical  generation and
              detection of lattice vibrations (phonons)  using laser pulsed excitation has
              been utilized to probe  macroscopic and microscopic material properties.  In 
              particular, ultrafast generation using laser pulses with  extremely narrow
              temporal profiles (pulse width~100fs) has  been used to study the dynamics of
              photo-excited non-  equilibrium carriers and phonon propagation, in 
              semiconductor film and nanostructures.  Despite growing  interest from many
              groups in this area there are still  significant gaps in our knowledge of
              phonon generation and  detection mechanisms in these materials.  For example,
              the  ultrafast generation mechanisms in direct band gap  semiconductor samples,
              as basic as single layer GaAs, have  not been studied experimentally.  This
              groundwork will pave  the way for the investigation of generation and
              propagation  of coherent phonons in geometries relevant to heat transport  and
              carrier relaxation in nanoscale electronics or  optoelectronic devices such as
              semiconductor lasers.  ***
