Title       : Collaboration on Inverse Problems Using Holographic Image Data; Using RAM Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9802309

Award Number: 9802309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce R. McLaughlin mclauj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9183,9251,9263,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator and her colleague Yulia Karpeshina will 
collaborate
              to solve inverse problems for holographic image data using
              
Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory.  The goal is to use selected 
level
              sets of mode shapes of vibrating systems as data for the inverse 
problem.
              With these level sets as data, formulas will be established.  The 
formulas
              will then be used to determine physical properties of the system, 
such as
              density or stiffness.  The results will be based on perturbation 
results for
              the natural frequencies and the mode shapes.  The difficulty in 
establishing
              these results arises from the fact that a small divisor problem 
and a
              sequence of Eikonal equations must be solved simultaneously.  A 
consequence
              of the resultant mathematical structure will be that the 
perturbed quantities
              can be strongly different from the unperturbed 
quantities.  McLaughlin's
              graduate student will concentrate on developing 
formulas to use the data and
              on numerical implementation of those 
formulas.

The goal with this work is
              to consider membrane like materials, such as a 
thin slice of biological
              tissue.  Excite this membrane with an oscillating 
force and suppose the
              frequency of oscillation is a natural frequency, that 
is, a frequency where
              the membrane gives a large response. Illuminating 
the vibrating surface with
              two lasers we see a dark and light line pattern.  
Each line is a level set of
              the vibrating surface.  Now assume that the 
membrane is nonhomogeneous; it
              could be more stiff or less stiff in some 
places.  [In the biological
              example, increased stiffness can indicate the 
presence of rapidly dividing
              cells.  In a mechanical example, decreased 
stiffness can indicate
              deterioration of the material.] The goal is to 
determine the stiffness
              variations without altering the membrane, that is, to 
find a nondestructive
              test for the stiffness variations.  Our data is the dark 
and light line
              pattern. The problem is difficult because the stiffness 
variations can have
              (but not always) a very large perturbative effect on the 
pattern.  The
              mathematics will establish when the perturbation is large, 
when it is not,
              and what formulas will yield the stiffness variations from 
this particular
              data set.

