Title       : Citizen Deliberation of Public Issues: The Internet Versus Face to Face Contact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9802335

Award Number: 9802335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35642              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Bimber bimber@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1338,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is a pilot study of citizen deliberation of public issues,
              comparing Internet-based and face-to-face communication.  The study responds to
              growing scholarly enthusiasm about citizen engagement with public issues though
              new modes of meaningful public discussion, with the aim of assessing the
              capacity of the Internet to serve deliberative functions. The main research
              question is: `How are processes of public deliberation on-line different from 
              processes of public deliberation in face-to-face settings?`  The approach of
              this project as a pilot is to explore a variety of prototype measures
              potentially useful in answering this question. The study draws on research in
              political philosophy delineating normative conceptions of the nature of
              political deliberation in a democracy. From survey research in political
              science, the study draws measures of opinion, attitudes, and trust. From
              psychological and sociological research on small groups, the study draws a
              framework for analyzing the content of small group processes.  From research on
              computer-mediated communication, the study draws baseline expectations for
              differences between face-to-face and Internet-based communication.  The
              research design is experimental, using ten groups of seven subjects. Five will
              engage in on-line deliberation and five in face-to-face deliberation of two
              public policy issues.  Three exploratory measurement techniques will be used. 
              The first is pre-deliberation and post-deliberation surveys of individual
              opinion, designed to measure quantifiable shifts in positions on the policy
              problems, group polarization effects, and the like.  The second technique is
              direct observation and qualitative analysis of group processes, using an
              eight-dimensional coding scheme for identifying the emergence of norms, roles,
              leadership, innovativeness, communication styles, and other aspects of small
              group dynamics.  The third is two post-deliberation de-briefings, one in-group,
              and one privately by telephone, designed to capture participants' reactions,
              degree of satisfaction, and so on. A separate follow-up study is envisioned, to
              be designed and conducted after this pilot study is completed.  That future
              study will use the measures that emerge from this pilot study as the most
              reliable, valid, and analytically useful, to examine more subjects, with a full
              set of controls, and with greater statistical power.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
