Title       : SGER: Development of an Immunoassay for Nitrogenase for Estimating Nitrogen
               Fixation Rates in Trichodesmium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1997  
File        : a9802057

Award Number: 9802057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53534              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan P. Zehr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Trichodesmium is a filamentous nonheterocystous cyanobacterium which is widely
              distributed throughout tropical and subtropical seas. Trichodesmium is
              important in the primary productivity of these environments, but also is the
              major nitrogen fixing organism found in the open ocean. Recent studies of the N
              budgets of the central oceanic gyres has pointed towards the importance of
              Trichodesmium as a source of nitrogen. Trichodesmium fixes nitrogen only during
              the day, and also is buoyant and not evenly distributed throughout the euphoric
              zone. Thus, estimates of depth integrated daily nitrogen fixation rates for
              natural populations of Trichodesmium require multiple nitrogen fixation rate
              measurements at different times of day and at different depths. Although
              nitrogen fixation rate measurements are relatively simple, they do require
              shipboard incubations and specialized equipment, and need to be perfomed at
              sea. The proposed research exploits a recently discovered relationship between
              nitrogen fixation rates and abundance of a component of nitrogenase, the enzyme
              that catalyzes nitrogen fixation, to provide a new approach for estimating
              nitrogen fixation by Trichodesmium in the sea.  The goal of this small grant
              for exploratory research is to develop an immunoassay approach for estimating
              the rate of nitrogen fixation by Trichodesmium. The proposal is based on
              preliminary results showing a strong correlation between abundance of the
              active form of the Fe protein of nitrogenase and nitrogen fixation rates in a
              culture of Trichodesmium. The proposed research is exploratory in that the
              mechanism of modification of the Fe protein in Trichodesmium is not yet known.
              However, if an antiserum can be made that distinguishes between the active and
              inactive forms of the Fe protein, an immunoassay can be developed for
              estimating nitrogen fixation activities, without the need for sample
              containment and incubation. This immunoassay approach will make it possible to
              obtain estimates of N2 fixation in Trichodesmium over large spatial and
              temporal scales, and is one of the first uses of an immunoassay approach for
              estimating rates of biogeochemical cycles in the sea. This project will provide
              post doctoral training in ocean sciences, as well as provide for the
              development of a new application of immunological approaches in the marine
              sciences.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
