Title       : Symposium: The Role of the Hippocampus in Learning and Memory: June 11, 1998:
               Richmond, VA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9802692

Award Number: 9802692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emmeline Edwards                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. Kelly kelly@garnet.cla.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9802692  Symposium on the role of the Hippocampus in Learning
              and  Memory    The objective of the project is to present new research and 
              theoretical perspectives on the role of the hippocampus in  learning and memory
              by a number of prominent American  neuroscientists to the international
              community of behavioral  neuroscientists. This special satellite symposium will
              take  place at the 1998 meeting of the International Behavioral  Neuroscience
              Society. This unique society is comprised of  members from 29 different
              countries and meets on an annual  basis alternating between the USA and other
              countries.    The project will focus on the role of the hippocampus in 
              learning and memory. The speakers will focus on a variety of  approaches to
              this question ranging from an examination of  the role in specific forms of
              learning and memory such as  declarative memory, associative learning, and
              spatial memory  to theoretical explanations of the multiple contributions of 
              the hippocampus to learning and memory. The project will not  simply involve
              presentation of data from the laboratories of  the speakers, but in addition,
              will highlight important  theoretical contributions from the speakers and allow
               integration across theoretical approaches to hippocampal  function. This mix
              of data and theory and the integration  across laboratories will present the
              current state of the  field to the international community of neuroscientists.
              The  neuroscientists who come to the IBNS meeting are from many  disciplines
              within neuroscience, including psychology,  pharmacology, molecular and cell
              biology, ethology, etc., yet  all of them have an interest in behavior.
              Presenting these  theories and findings to the IBNS membership will serve to 
              educate the membership about the most current issues and  theories in this
              field and encourage more research in the  area with an interdisciplinary
              emphasis and collaboration  across national boundaries.
