Title       : Theoretical Calculations for High Energy Particles in the Atmosphere and in
               Underground and Accelerator Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9802403

Award Number: 9802403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John W. Lightbody, Jr.                  
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Hall Reno mary-hall-reno@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Calculations will be performed to improve the  theoretical predictions for
              underground and accelerator  experiments detecting high energy elementary
              particle  interactions.  Consequently, experimental results can be  better
              interpreted whether as tests of aspects of the  standard model of strong
              nuclear, weak and electromagnetic  forces or as signals of new physics.      
              Large underground detectors act as neutrino telescopes  by detecting the
              conversions of neutrinos to muons in the  water, rock or ice surrounding the
              detector.  Neutrinos  produced by galactic or extra-galactic sources travel 
              undeviated to the earth, bringing information about the  astrophysical
              processes that cannot be inferred from  studying electomagnetic radiation. 
              Muons and neutrinos are  also produced by cosmic ray interactions with air
              nuclei in  the earth's atmosphere.  At high energies, charmed particle 
              production and decay in the atmosphere is the dominant  terrestrial source of
              fluxes of muons and neutrinos.  A new  calculation of the fluxes of muon and
              neutrinos from the  decays of charmed particles that are produced in the 
              atmosphere will be performed using a range of inputs  consistent with
              laboratory measurements of charm production,  extrapolated to higher energy. 
              In addition, calculations  related to the interpretation of electron neutrino
              and muon  neutrino conversions to charged particles in underground  detectors
              will be refined.  The improvements to existing  calculations may have an impact
              on the allowed regions of  parameter space in models with neutrino
              oscillations.       A `Monte Carlo` simulation of neutrino production of  charm
              quarks in quantum chromodynamics (QCD) will be  developed.  QCD is the
              theoretical description of the strong  nuclear force.  The Monte Carlo will be
              used by experimental  groups to help them determine strange quark content of
              the  proton.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
