Title       : Resonance Raman Studies of Solvent Dynamics in Solvatochromic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9802075

Award Number: 9802075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne L. McHale jmchale@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McHale is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program for   studies
              to elucidate solvent dynamical influences on the optical spectra   of
              solvatochromic molecules.  The program includes (1) measuring   absorption,
              emission, and resonance Raman spectra in low-temperature   glass, in order to
              isolate the intramolecular contribution to the   linewidth, (2) employing
              solvent isotopomers to isolate solvent dynamical   effects on absorption,
              emission, and resonance Raman spectra in room   temperature solvents, and (3)
              determining fluorescence yields and   lifetimes as a function of solvent
              isotopic substitution in order to   obtain radiative and nonradiative decay
              rates in glass and liquid phase   solutions.  These strategies will enable the
              extraction of the   solvent-induced dephasing function, and hence the solvent
              spectral   density.  Issues to be addressed include the sensitivity of
              radiative and   nonradiative relaxation rates to solvent isotopomer, the
              validity of   treating solvent response as independent of the solute electronic
              state,   the possible dependence of solvent-induced electronic dephasing on  
              vibrational mode, and the role of solvent intramolecular modes in   electronic
              dephasing.   Molecules dissolved in liquid solvents exhibit behaviors that are
              much   affected by the solvent molecules in the surrounding environment.  These
                interactions are complex and still not understood well at this time.   
              Results from this project will help to bridge the gap  between   theoretical
              predictions and real systems in understanding solution   dynamics.  Fundamental
              insights from this work could improve both the   description of electron
              transfer processes relevant to biochemistry and   the molecular models for
              nonlinear optical properties relevant to   materials science.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
