Title       : Differential Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9802646

Award Number: 9802646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183258             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugenio N. Calabi calabi@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman R. Gluck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julius L. Shaneson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang Ziller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal: DMS-9802646
Principal Investigator: Eugenio Calabi

              
Eugenio Calabi proposes to continue his research on variational
problems and
              partial differential equations arising from various
aspects of the geometry of
              manifolds.  Herman Gluck proposes to
continue his research on spectral
              geometries for the writhing of knots
and the helicity of vector fields, on
              embedding and knotting of
positive curvature surfaces in 3-space, and on the
              existence and
uniqueness of volume-minimizing cycles in Grassmann manifolds. 
              Julius
Shaneson plans to apply higher dimensional Euler-MacLaurin
              formulae
with remainder to some problems in number theory related to
              counting
of lattice points, and to continue his research on singular
              spaces,
characteristic classes, and related classification problems.
Wolfgang
              Ziller proposes to continue his research on positively
              curved
cohomogeneity-one manifolds, minimal isometric immersions
              into
spheres, weakly symmetric spaces, and primitive subgroups of
              Lie
groups.
 
One aspect of Calabi's work is an application to computerized
              image
enhancing by a method that does not interfere with the
              optical
distortion due to the projection into a photographic plate. 
              One
aspect of Gluck's work applies to the writhing and coiling of DNA and
to
              the writhing of magnetic field lines in the Crab Nebula.  Shaneson
plans to
              use Euler-MacLaurin formulae with remainder to study the
numer of lattice
              points in curved regions of the plane and
higher-dimensional spaces, with a
              view towards progress on some basic
questions in number theory and also some
              practical applications to
problems involving complex networks.  Ziller plans
              to continue, in
joint work with Karsten Grove of the University of Maryland,
              the study
of cohomogeneity-one metrics with positive or nonnegative
              sectional
curvature; finding new examples with this property is important
              for
geometry and also very difficult, as one can see by the fact that
              new
ones are discovered only about every 15 years.

