Title       : Microscopic Dynamics in Metallic and Semiconducting Amorphous Systems Detected
               by NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9802101

Award Number: 9802101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yue Wu yuewu@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                             9802101  Wu    This   is   a  condensed  matter  physics 
              research  project   in  microscopic  dynamics  in  metallic and semiconducting 
              amorphous  systems with high degrees of local order that are on the verge of 
              forming nanocrystalline phases. Materials being studied include a  newly
              discovered zirconium-titanium-copper-nickel-beryllium  bulk  metallic  
              glasses,  as  well  as  highly  ordered   hydrogenated  amorphous  silicon made
              by hot filament assisted  chemical  vapor  deposition.  The  main tool of
              investigation is nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR) which probes structural
              dynamics at  the  atomic  level. Of interest is the rate of structural
              relaxation and other  atomic   motion   toward   equilibrium,  especially  
              below   the  calorimetric  glass transition temperature, Tg, in  the  metallic 
              glass. The diffusion dynamics of hydrogen in amorphous silicon is  a  long 
              standing  problem  that  will  also  be  addressed.  The  materials  in this
              project have important applications  including  micromachines  and  solar
              energy. The research  involves  quantum  mechanics,   computer  simulations 
              and  laboratory   skills   in  electronics and low temperature physics. The
              project trains under  graduate  and  graduate  students in a  range  of 
              techniques  in  physics,  material  science,  computer  simulation, 
              experimental  skills, and communication skills with other scientists.  %%% 
              This  research  project in condensed matter  physics  deals  with  atomic-level
               motion  in  metallic and  semiconducting  amorphous  systems  that are on the
              verge of "freezing" into nanocrystalline  solids.  The main experimental tool
              is nuclear magnetic resonance  (NMR)  which is particularly appropriate for
              detecting  the  slow  atomic  motions accompanying the phase behavior.
              Materials  being  studied include newly discovered
              zirconium-titanium-copper-nickel-  beryllium  bulk  metallic  glasses, as  well
               as  highly  ordered  hydrogenated  amorphous  silicon made by  hot  filament 
              assi sted  chemical   vapor  deposition.  These  materials  have   important 
              applications  including  micromachines  and  solar  energy.   The  research 
              involves  quantum mechanics, computer  simulations  and  laboratory skills in
              electronics and low temperature physics. The  project trains under graduate and
              graduate students in a range of  techniques  in  physics, material science,
              computer  simulations,  experimental   skills,  and  communication  skills  
              with   other  scientists.  ***
