Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hamiltonian Theory of Soliton Equations and Geometry of
               Moduli Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9802577

Award Number: 9802577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Krichever krichev@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1265,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal:  DMS-9802577
Principl Investigator:  Igor
              Krichever

The main objective of the present project is a further development
              of
the algebraic-geometric integration theory of non-linear equations,
models
              of solid state physics, and models of quantum field theories.
An immediate
              goal is a complete algebraic-geometric approach to the
Hamiltonian theory of
              integrable equations, applicable to 2D equations
as well as finite-dimensional
              models. Particular attention will be
paid to the investigation of the
              non-local symplectic structures for
2D integrable equations which arise in
              this way, and to the
Hamiltonian theory of finite-dimensional systems
              equivalent to the
pole dynamics of elliptic, trigonometric and rational
              solutions of 2D
soliton equations.  Among these systems are
              spin-generalizations of
Calogero-Moser and Ruijsenaars-Schneider systems.
              These systems are
related to Seiberg-Witten solutions of N=2 supersymmetric
              gauge
theories, and have attracted recently considerable interest. 
              Efforts
will also be devoted to the clarification of some unexpected
              relations
between Seiberg-Witten solutions of N=2 supersymmetric gauge
              theories
and topological field theories. The moduli spaces
              of
algebraic-geometric solutions of soliton equations provide a
              unifying
framework for these problems.  Seiberg-Witten solutions are related
              to
the symplectic geometry of Jacobian bundles over these moduli
              spaces,
while topological field theories are related to their
              Riemannian
geometry. The effective Lagrangian in the first case and the
              free
energy in the second case are just restrictions of the exponential
              of
the tau-function of the universal Whitham hierarchy, which is itself
              a
corner stone of the perturbation theory of soliton equations.  It is
very
              important to determine whether these relations can be explained
from first
              principles.

The algebraic-geometric theory of soliton equations developed in
              the
middle seventies has had enormous influence on many branches
              of
mathematics and theoretical physics. Originally it was mainly aimed
              to
construct exact solutions of the wide variety of equations describing
wave
              phenomena in the plasma physics, non-linear optics,
              oceanology,
super-conductivity.  In recent years the universality of the
              methods
and ideas developed has led to the outreach far beyond the
              initial
framework. It includes applications to the string theory
              and
supersymmetric gauge theories. The new approach to the Hamiltonian
theory
              of soliton equations combines all these directions and should
allow us to make
              the next important step. A development of the
Hamiltonian theory of difference
              equations as a Hamiltonian theory of
systems with discrete time is a
              challenging problem which should
provide a bridge between classical and
              quantum integrable systems.

