Title       : Fluctuations and Flow for Granular Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9802602

Award Number: 9802602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Behringer bob@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                       9802602  Behringer    This  condensed  matter  physics project will 
              probe  the  dynamics  of  granular  materials primarily via experiments but
              with some theory  and  computation.  Three  areas  are  represented.  First  is
               the  role  of  fluctuations  in slow granular flows. Experiments will provide 
              precise  local  and  global measures of fluctuations in forces and in 
              kinematic  properties  of  static  and  slowly  sheared  ensembles  of 
              particles,  including both two- and three-dimensional configurations. The  goal
               is  to  provide  a quantitative measure of the length and time  scales  for 
              these fluctuations, and to guide the development of models that include  the
              effects of fluctuations. Second is the characterization of granular  flows  in 
              the  inertial  regime characterized  by  binary  collisions.  Experiments  will
               characterize the collective  dynamics  of  colliding  particles,  and  the 
              thermal-like  properties  of  ensembles  with   a  continuous  input of energy.
              Finally, experimental configurations  will  probe   gas   flow  in  fine 
              granular  materials,  with  an   eye   to  quantitatively  understanding 
              heaping  effects  for  shaken   granular  materials.   Granular   flows  of 
              all  types  are   highly   important  commercially, and this project is should
              contribute knowledge  that  is  technically  relevant, as provide excellent
              training for  students  and  post-docs in both fundamental and applied areas. 
              %%%  This   condensed   matter  physics  project  is   focused   on   better 
              understanding  the  flow  of  granular materials.  Such  materials  are 
              ubiquitous and include food grains, ore, coal, and pharmaceuticals,  to  name 
              only  a few. The processing of these materials is vital  to  many  industries,
              yet, there is not a solid scientific understanding  of  how  to  describe 
              these  materials. As a consequence,  processes  involving  granular processing
              typically operate at 2/3 of design efficiency,  and  catastrophic failures are
              frequent. This proje ct identifies three areas  of  study  that will provide
              deeper scientific understanding  with  the  potential for applications to
              commercial processes. For slowly  flowing  systems,  we  will characterize the
              nature of fluctuations,  which  are  known  to  be  large,  and therefore
              potentially destructive,  but  are  poorly  characterized. For rapidly
              stirred/shaken systems,  experiments  will  test  models based on the
              similarity of these systems to  a  gas.  Finally,  for  grains  that are small
              enough,  such  as  typical  sand,  cracking   catalyst,  or  powder,  ambient 
              air  flow   is   important.  Experiments   will  characterize  the  interplay 
              between   grain   and  surrounding  gas.  This  project  will also  provide 
              technical  career  training for one to two graduate students as well as
              training for post-  doctoral researchers and undergraduates.  ***
