Title       : Probability Models from Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9802368

Award Number: 9802368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Alexander alexandr@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802368  Alexander   Probability models from statistical mechanics are a
              framework for studying how   small-scale randomness produces global-scale
              phenomena, such as phase transitions,   which are essentially nonrandom. 
              Alexander proposes to investigate the following aspects   of the subject.  (1) 
              The use of random-cluster representations to study Gibbs uniqueness,   dilution
              and its effect on critical temperatures, disordered models, lattice gases with 
               weak interactions, bounds on critical points, and monotonicity of various
              quantities as a   function of system parameters.  (2)  Two-dimensional systems
              (percolation and the Ising   model) conditioned so as to exhibit the formation
              of a large droplet, that is, a macroscopic   region enclosed by a long contour,
              with emphasis on the discrepancy between the actual   and ideal shape of this
              droplet.  (3)  Confetti percolation, a model which is both isotropic   and, in
              two dimensions, self-dual, and hence is a natural setting in which to   study
              conformal invariance and related phenomena.  (4)  The use of percolation ideas
              to   create a model which mimics certain features of the freezing of water
              which contains   impurities.  (5)  The geometry of finite clusters, and its
              relation to the cluster size   distribution, for certain continuum models of
              percolation.    This work is part of an ongoing effort by mathematicians and
              physicists to   understand various systems in the natural world in which
              nonrandom global-scale   phenomena reflect aspects of small-scale randomness. 
              Examples include (i) magnetic   properties of materials; (ii) waves traveling
              through irregular materials, such as seismic   waves through the earth's crust;
              (iii) impurities in semiconductors; and (iv) percolation of   liquid through a
              porous material, such as water or oil through underground rock.  It has   long
              been understood that many qualitative aspects of the relation between small- 
              scale randomness and macroscopic properties, including critical phenomena, do  
              not depend  too closely on the particular system being studied.  One can
              therefore gain   insight into real-world phenomena by studying abstract systems
              not intended to model   specifically magnets, or porous rock, or any other
              particular part of the physical world.    The systems need only exhibit
              parallel features, such as clustering and critical phenomena.    The systems
              which Alexander will investigate--percolation, random cluster models,   Ising
              and Potts models, and other spin systems--are examples of such abstract
              systems.
