Title       : Understanding Degrees of Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a9802066

Award Number: 9802066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara H. Liskov liskov@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with making atomic transactions perform well in the
              wide-area distributed systems that will be the norm in the future. The work
              focuses on support for consistency levels that are weaker than serializability;
              these levels are of interest because many applications do not require full
              serializability and can achieve better performance by running at weaker levels.
              Some consistency levels have been defined in the past, but the earlier
              definitions are inadequate because they either do not rule out undesirable
              behaviors, or they limit implementation techniques unnecessarily. In particular
              they do not allow optimistic techniques, which is unfortunate because these are
              the best for wide area and mobile systems. This research provides definitions
              of existing levels that are both constrained enough to rule out bad behaviors
              and permissive enough to allow a wide range of concurrency control mechanisms.
              In addition the research defines a number of useful new levels. Furthermore,
              the research develops optimistic implementations of the weak levels, and uses
              simulation and implementation to investigate the performance advantages that
              can be achieved by running at weaker levels. The research will lead to precise
              definitions of new and old weak levels, to a set of new, optimistic
              implementations of the levels, and to a thorough understanding of the
              performance benefits that derive from weaker levels.    
              http://www.pmg.lcs.mit.edu
