Title       : Quantum Nuclear Magnets and Superfluid 4He in Nanopores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9802050

Award Number: 9802050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasumasa Takano takano@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                       9802050  Takano    This project investigates quantum nuclear magnets at
              positive and  negative spin temperatures. The studies will be performed
              primarily  at sub-microKelvin spin temperature using the powerful nuclear 
              demagnetization cryostats in the MicroKelvin Laboratory of the  University of
              Florida, one of only two such facilities in the United  States. The research
              will investigate the spin I=1/2 nuclei in  yttrium and deuterium hydrides and
              their alloys. Their magnetic  properties will be studied using ac
              susceptibility techniques and  near-zero-field nuclear magnetic resonance
              employing superconducting  quantum interference devices. These nuclear magnets
              promise to be the  first realizations on the laboratory of a quantum dipolar
              magnet and  random dipolar quantum magnets. The studies will address
              fundamental  issues in magnetism involving fluctuations of highly quantum 
              mechanical spins. A significant aspect of the project is to advance  the
              education of postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and  undergraduate
              students involved in experiments at a unique national  facility.  %%%  This
              project investigates quantum nuclear magnets at positive and  negative spin
              temperatures. The studies will be performed primarily  at sub-microKelvin spin
              temperature using the powerful nuclear  demagnetization cryostats in the
              MicroKelvin Laboratory of the  University of Florida, one of only two such
              facilities in the United  States. The research will investigate the spin I=1/2
              nuclei in  yttrium and deuterium hydrides and their alloys. Their magnetic 
              properties will be studied using ac susceptibility techniques and 
              near-zero-field nuclear magnetic resonance employing superconducting  quantum
              interference devices. These nuclear magnets promise to be the  first
              realizations on the laboratory of a quantum dipolar magnet and  random dipolar
              quantum magnets. The studies will address fundamental  issues in magnetism
              involving fluctuations of highly quantum  mechanical spins. A significant aspe
              ct of the project is to advance  the education of postdoctoral associates,
              graduate students, and  undergraduate students involved in experiments at a
              unique national  facility.  ***
