Title       : Construction of a Low-Temperature Scanning SQUID Susceptometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9802719

Award Number: 9802719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Moler kmoler@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802719                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Moler                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                  This award provides partial support for the construction of
              a low-temperature scanning system, designed for using miniature susceptometers
              to study the magnetization of individual electronic and magnetic
              nanostructures.   The susceptometers are based on Superconducting QUantum
              Interference Devices (SQUIDs). Miniature SQUIDs with micron-scale spatial
              resolution can detect magnetic moments as small as a thousand electron spins,
              nine orders of magnitude smaller than can be detected by commercially available
              bulk magnetometers.   Such sensitive magnetic measurements hold great promise
              for the study of qunatum chaos, macroscopic quantum coherence,
              superconductivity, and magnetism.  At present, however, the promise of this
              technique is limited by the slow process of integrating each sample with its
              own SQUID.  A scanning susceptometer would have several advantages.  First,
              many samples could be studied in each cooldown, by placing well-separated
              individual mesoscopic, objects on the same substrate.  Secondly, background
              discrimination could be much easier,  since the SQUID could be moved away from
              the sample.  Thirdly, a scanning susceptometer would not be limited to samples
              which can be integrated onto the same chip as the SQUID.  In addtion to being
              an ideal tool to study mesoscopic magnetization, this apparatus could be used
              to make precise, quantitative, local magnetic susceptibility measurements of a
              wide range of materials.                %%%                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                 This award will provide
              unique capability to study mesoscopic materials systems; is important for
              magnetism studies.  Potential for broad impact on field.  Will increase
              diversity in field and offer new educational opportunities.
*** .
