Title       : Development of an Ultrabroadband Terahertz Emission Spectrometer for Materials
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9802743

Award Number: 9802743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Mittleman daniel@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802743
Mittleman
This award provides partial support for the development of
              an ultrabroad band terahertz emission spectrometer for materials research at
              Rice University.  Recently, there has been a great deal of activity in the
              development of new spectroscopic methods based in the far infrared, or
              terahertz, range of the electromagnetic spectrum.  These have been driven by
              the importance of the numerous physical phenomena which are active in this
              spectral range, and by the relative difficulty in generating and detecting
              terahertz radiation using conventional means.  One of the more interesting of
              these systems is known as terahertz time-domain spectrocopy (THz-TDS).  This
              technique relies on femtosecond laser technology, in combination with
              conventional electronics, to generate sub-picosecond pulses of terahertz
              radiation, with very high signal-to-noise ratios over extremely broad
              bandwidths.  This unique system has been used in recent years as a novel
              spectroscopic tool in studies of many different materials.  Very recent
              developments in the coherent detection scheme have led to dramatic enhancements
              in the accessible bandwidths, by as much as an order of magnitude.

This
              award will exploit these new techiques, in order to gain a better understanding
              of the ultrafast charge carrier dynamics in a broad range of electronic
              materials.  In particular, this advance is of particular importance in the area
              of  terahertz emission spectroscopy.  Here, the THz radiation emitted by a
              sample which has been excited by an ultrafast laser pulse can be used to
              monitor the acceleration of charge carriers.  By accurately measuring the
              emitted electric field ETHz(t), valuable information can be inferred about the
              ballistic motion of charge carriers, carrier screening and space charge
              effects, and displacement polarization dynamics.  This emission spectroscopy
              has been increasingly valuable in recnet years in studies of many different
              material systems.  In combination with pump-probe techniques, it can be used to
              observe charge carrier dynamics on a 10 femtosecond time scale.  However, the
              information gleaned in such experiments is incomplete if the emitted radiation
              bandwidth extends substantially beyond the acceptance bandwidth of the
              detectors used in the study.  The recent advances involving the extension of
              this acceptance bandwidth will greatly enhance the value of this experimental
              technique.  This exciting new capability will be used to study the ultrafast
              dynamical processes involved in carrier transport in a number of material
              systems, including bulk semiconductors, heterostructures, and superconducting
              systems.

This development effort will be directed towards the construction
              of a versatile ultrabroadband THz emission spectrometer, for use in materials
              research.  It will be configured to perform both linear and non-linear THz
              emission experiments, with the broadest possible detection bandwidth.  Three
              initial experiments are proposed; these should provide valuable new information
              about the fundamental transport of polarization dynamics in several important
              classes of materials.  Additionally, the unique capabilities of this
              spectrometer will provide the opportunity for interaction with several
              researchers affiliated with the Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology, a
              new materials research effort at Rice University.  Consequently, this
              development project is expected to have a broad impact, not only on the PI's
              research program, but also through interactions with members of the Physics,
              Chemistry, and Electrical and Computer Engineering Departments.
%%%
***     
              


