Title       : Large Scale Simulations and Local Analysis of Si-based Materials to Study their
               Energetics, Bonding, and Structural Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9802274

Award Number: 9802274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chakram S. Jayanthi csjaya01@gwise.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shi-Yu Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhenyu Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802274  Jayanthi  This is a theoretical research project, largely 
              computational, involving the University of Louisville and  Oak Ridge National
              Laboratory.  There is also experimental  collaboration with the University of
              Wisconsin.  The central  objective is to perform large scale simulations based
              on the  order-N  O(N)  non-orthogonal tight-binding molecular  dynamics
              (NOTB-MD) to predict accurately the structural,  electronic, and bonding
              properties of Si-based materials.  Very recently an O(N) technique for the
              calculation of both  total energy as well as atomic forces has been developed
              by  two of the PI's in the context of a NOTB Hamiltonian.  The  importance of
              the O(N) technique is that it overcomes the  bottleneck present in the
              conventional total energy and  atomic force calculations by reducing the
              scaling of  computational time from N3 to N, where N denotes the size of  the
              system.  The advantage of NOTB Hamiltonian is that it  incorporates a quantum
              mechanical description of the  electronic structure and it is best suited for
              situations  with arbitrary coordination encountered in MD simulations.  Hence,
              the O(N) NOTB-MD scheme provides an excellent means  to investigate systems
              with realistic sizes that are  currently outside the scope of first-principles
              molecular  dynamics simulations.  Furthermore, using innovative local  measures
              and the method of real space Green's function in  conjunction with the O(N)
              NOTB-MD technique, a powerful tool  is now in place to analyze the vast amount
              of information  obtained from a MD simulation.  The twin theme of performing 
              large scale simulations, and predicting properties  accurately at the
              microscopic level, is one of the unique  features of this research.    The
              research is comprised of four projects.  The first  focuses on the initial
              stages of growth of Si and Ge  depositions on a Si(100) surface.  The second is
              concerned  with the study of the onset of the transition from a two- 
              dimensional to three-dimensional growth for Gen films  d eposited on the
              Si(001) substrate.  In project three,  equilibrium and electronic structures of
              Si nanoparticles  from a few hundred to a few thousand atoms will be 
              investigated with the aim of understanding the effect of  quantum confinement
              on the properties of these nanosystems.  Finally, project four looks at issues
              related to the  fabrication of nanoheterostructures (SixGe1-x) and the  effect
              of strain on their properties will be explored.    The scientific outcome of
              this study is expected to lead to  the understanding of the link between the
              adsorption of  monomers and the formation of growth structures in Si and Ge 
              depositions on the Si(100) substrate, the formation of  islands, alloy ordering
              and surface segregation, equilibrium  shape of nanoparticles, the effect of
              quantum confinement on  the properties of Si nanoparticles, etc.  %%%  This is
              a theoretical research project, largely  computational, involving the
              University of Louisville and  Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  There is also
              experimental  collaboration with the University of Wisconsin.  The central 
              objective is to perform large scale simulations to predict  accurately the
              structural, electronic, and bonding  properties of silicon-based materials. The
              twin theme of  performing large scale simulations, and predicting  properties
              accurately at the microscopic level, is one of  the unique features of this
              research.  The scientific outcome of this study is expected to lead to  the
              understanding of the link between the adsorption of  monomers and the formation
              of growth structures in silicon  and germanium depositions on the silicon
              substrate, the  formation of islands, alloy ordering and surface  segregation,
              equilibrium shape of nanoparticles, the effect  of quantum confinement on the
              properties of silicon  nanoparticles, etc.  Research results will be of great 
              fundamental interest and will find broad application in the  microelectronic
              industry.  ***
