Title       : Variational Problems in Symplectic and Kahler Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9802487

Award Number: 9802487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon G. Wolfson wolfson@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal: DMS 9802487
Principal Investigator:  Jon Wolfson

In
              this proposal we will continue our study, joint with R. Schoen, of
variational
              problems for lagrangian submanifolds: Let M be a
symplectic 2n-manifold
              equipped with a compatible metric.  Given a
homology class in M that can be
              represented by an immersed lagrangian
submanifold, find a lagrangian that
              minimizes volume among all
lagrangians that represent this homology class. 
              The minimizer is
known to exist as a lagrangian rectifiable varifold, so the
              focus of
our research is on the regularity of these minimizers.  When
              the
ambient manifold M is Kaehler-Einstein it may be possible to show
              that
the lagrangian minimizers are stationary, in the classical sense. 
              We
hope to develop a good regularity theory of lagrangian minimizers and
then
              to use these minimizers to study the geometry of the ambient
Kaehler or
              symplectic manifolds.

Many problems in physics and mathematics have
              solutions that are 
obtained via an optimization procedure.  In this project
              we will study 
a minimizing procedure in differential geometry.  We minimize
              volume 
among generalized surfaces (immersed submanifolds) that satisfy a
              
geometric constraint (that are lagrangian).  Because we require our
              
generalized surfaces to satisfy this constraint many new difficulties
              
arise.  However our solutions often have interesting and important
              
geometric properties.  This problem has many features in common with
              
problems in nonlinear elasticity.  It is hoped that our techniques 
will be
              of use in that subject.  However it should be emphasized that 
optimization
              procedures in the presence of geometric constraints have 
not been studied
              before.  This idea will eventually be useful in many 
different contexts.

