Title       : New and Export Productivity Regulation by Si and Fe in the Equatorial Pacific
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9802060

Award Number: 9802060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Dugdale rdugdale@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances P. Wilkerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     To  identify  and  quantify the principal processes  that  control  the
              partitioning  of carbon among oceanic reservoirs and between the  ocean  and
              atmosphere  on focal and regional scales, with a view towards  synthesis  and
              prediction on a global scale, is a specific goal of the  U.S. JGOFS Synthesis
              and  Modeling Project. As a contribution towards  achieving this  goal,  Drs.
              Barber,  Peng,  Chai  and Dugdale will develop  an ecosystem  model  for  the
              equatorial  Pacific Ocean, with a focus on  how silicate and iron affect  new
              and   export  productivity  and  the  partitioning  of  carbon  between  the
              atmosphere, surface ocean and deep  ocean.  The study  will use an  ecosystem
              model  embedded  in  a state-of-  the-art general circulation  model  for  the
              equatorial  Pacific  Ocean to  investigate how new  and  export  productivity
              responds to changing  physical and chemical forcing. The domain of the  model
              is between 30+S  and 30+N, 120+E and 70+W, with real geometry and topography,
              but analysis  will focus on the equatorial region from 5+N to 5+S. The recent
              upgrade  of  supercomputers at North Carolina Supercomputing  Center  (NCSC) 
              (CrayT90) and Arctic Region Supercomputing Center (ARSC) (Cray-YMP) and  the
              award of several hundred hours of CPU time to Peng, Chai and Barber  make  it
              possible  to  embed  an  ecosystem model with modest complexity  in  a  high
              resolution,  three  dimensional  prognostic  ocean  model,  and  to  conduct
              numerous  experiments on the ecosystem model structure  and parameters  in  a
              timely and efficient manner.       Phase  1  of  the  project  will  modify an 
              existing  five-  compartment ecosystem  model  by adding three more
              compartments (silicate,  diatoms  and mesozooplanktonic  grazers) following the
              approach of  Dugdale  et  al.  The preliminary  objective  of this
              three-dimensional  Si/N/light  model  is  to reproduce  High  Nitrate-Low
              Silicate-Low  Chlorophyll  (HNLSLC)  conditions. With size-dependent growth
              rate  responses in small phytoplankton and diatoms and  varying  grazing 
              vulnerability, the  role  of  new  diatom  production regulating  on Si  and Fe
              can be thoroughly investigated.  Also in  Phase  1, 2:CO2 and total  alkalinity
              () ALK) will be added in order to calculate pCO2. The  pre-  industrial 
              atmospheric CO2 (280 1latm) will be  used  to  hindcast air-  sea flux of CO2
              in the equatorial Pacific. New production regulating  on  silicate should
              provide a more accurate calculation of CO2 compared to  using nitrate as a
              regulating nutrient. In Phase 2 the effect of iron is  added  to the  model 
              making a, the initial slope of the photosynthesis  vs. irradiance curve,  a 
              function  of  iron.  The values of  a  are  based  on  equatorial observations 
              of natural and experimental iron  additions. Independently,  Ks for  Si(OH4) 
              is  made  a  function of iron,  an effect  that  involves  only diatoms.  The
              `balance to bloom`  transition will be simulated with  the  two iron  effects
              to reproduce the  IronEx 1 and 2 phytoplankton responses  to  a transient iron
              addition.  This modeling study will provide estimates  of  new and export 
              productivity, and a formal description of Si and Fe as regulating  mechanisms
              in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. When new and export  productivity is  modeled
              accurately and validated with JGOFS studies, it  will possible to predict with
              increased confidence how climate change may  alter, via biogenic export, 
              maintenance of the air-sea ApCO2 and hence  the ocean's  uptake  and release of
              CO2.                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
