Title       : Nonlinear Wave Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9802713

Award Number: 9802713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111001             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Rodolfo Rosales rrr@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1324,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work supported under this grant will address problems in 
Nonlinear Wave
              Dynamics, which will be studied using a combination 
of analytic and numerical
              methods. For example: 
(I) Nonlinear interactions of large scale atmospheric
              waves 
in the Equator, which play a fundamental role in the global weather.
              
A new mechanism for nonlinear interactions of the waves via 
topography and
              convected properties (e.g.: potential vorticity, 
temperature and humidity)
              will be investigated. 
(II) Interaction of nonlinear hyperbolic waves with
              media nonuniformities. 
These waves distort as they propagate, leading to the
              formation of shocks, 
which are strongly dissipative. Past research shows that
              nonuniformities 
or interactions with other waves can stop this process. For
              example, 
a large class of new solutions to the Euler equations of Gas
              Dynamics 
was found and will be studied. These solutions are attracting for
              the 
time evolution and can achieve large pressure variations without
              
breaking and forming shocks. Their existence gives rise to 
interesting
              mathematical issues. A better understanding of this phenomenon 
could provide
              means to control (or at least diminish) the influence 
of shocks in some gas
              flows. 
(III) Focusing, reflection and refraction of weak shocks. 
Strong
              acoustical waves and weak shocks are ubiquitous. A better 
understanding of
              their behavior has considerable scientific 
significance and will shed light
              into many important practical problems. 
Many puzzling problems remain in this
              area. For example, in many 
situations experiments show three weak shock waves
              joining at a 
point in a nearly flat configuration, but theoretical
              calculations 
indicate that this is not possible, leading to a contradiction
              
with the experiments. A second related problem occurs with the 
prediction
              of infinities in the amplitudes of weak shock waves 
as they undergo focusing,
              reflection or refraction under 
appropriate conditions.

Waves occur in many
              fields --- such as Acoustics, Atmosphere 
and Ocean science, Gas Dynamics,
              Optics, Combustion Theory, etc. --- 
where they fundamentally affect the
              dynamics. Many advances have 
been made in the last few decades, but many open
              questions remain,
both concerning the applications and the mathematics that is
              used. 
This award will support research on mathematical models for wave-like
              
phenomena in the global weather, processes in gas dynamics that 
avoid the
              formation of shock waves, and the mathematical modeling of 
complex shock wave
              interaction.

