Title       : Purchase of an Ultraviolet-Visible-Near-Infrared Spectrophotometer for
               Reflectance Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9802943

Award Number: 9802943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert E. Stiegman stiegman@chem.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Schlenoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus-Hermann M. Dahmen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802943
Stiegman
This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a
              new Ultraviolet-Visible-Near Infrared spectrophotometer for the Department of
              Chemistry at Florida State University.  This spectrophotometer will support the
              research activities of several extramurally funded researchers in the
              department and will provide essential measurement capabilities not currently
              available to them.  Specifically, this instrument will be equipped to perform
              high-resolution reflectance spectroscopy in both diffuse and specular
              collection modes.  This capability is essential for investigators whose
              research focuses on solid-state materials which are not amenable to routine
              transmission-mode measurements.

The instrumentation to be acquired will be a
              new spectrophotometer operating in the UV-Vis-NIR region of the spectrum.  This
              instrument will be equipped with an integrating sphere with center mount sample
              holders for collecting diffuse or total (diffuse + specular) reflected light. 
              It will also be accessorized with variable-angle relative specular and
              grazing-angle relative specular sample holders.  These capabilities will
              facilitate the measurement of electronic spectra of diffuse powdered samples,
              the determination of band-gaps of semiconductor materials and the thickness of
              vapor-deposited thin films.  It will also be used to measure the spectroscopic
              properties of polymer multilayers and gold-thiol self-assembled
              monolayers.
%%%
***

