Title       : Synthesis and Self-Assembly of Helical Conjugated Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9802316

Award Number: 9802316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Katz tjk1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,  
              Professor Thomas J. Katz, of the Department of Chemistry at Colmbia  
              University, explores the synthesis and self-assembly of helical   conjugated
              molecules.  Professor Katz is exploring the self-assembly of   helicenes into
              multimolecular aggregates of corkscrew-like structure.    These materials,
              which spontaneously organize in the form of fibers,   display an astonishing
              ability to rotate the plane of polarization of   plane polarized light. 
              Through development and exploitation of new and   versatile techniques for the
              synthesis of helicenes, Professor Katz   addresses the factors responsible for
              the aggregation of helical   conjugated molecules and the maximization of the
              rotatory power of these   aggregates, as well as the influence of aggregation
              on the circular   dichroism, optical activity, and morphologies of these
              materials.  Although `aromatic` compounds are typically planar, chemical
              synthesis   can be used to prepare aromatic structures which are more stable in
              a   helical conformation.  The synthesis and properties of such `helicenes`  
              are studied by Professor Thomas J. Katz, of the Department of Chemistry   at
              Columbia University, with the support of the Organic and   Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program.  Professor Katz is exploring the   self-assembly of
              helicenes into multimolecular aggregates of   corkscrew-like structure, which
              are found to assemble spontaneously in   the form of fibers.  These materials
              display unusual properties,   including a remarkable ability to alter the
              orientation of light which is   polarized in a single plane.  Through the
              synthesis of derivatives of the   helicenes bearing a variety of groups,
              Professor Katz explores the   fundamental factors controlling their chemistry
              and physical properties   as well as their use in the fabrication of new
              materials displaying new,   unusual, and significant properties.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
