Title       : Seiberg-Witten and Instanton Floer Homologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9802480

Award Number: 9802480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz S. Mrowka mrowka@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matilde Marcolli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal: DMS 9802480  Principal Investigators:  Tomasz Mrowka and
              Matilde Marcolli    The research project consists of three parts. The first
              goal is the  construction of an equivariant version of Seiberg-Witten Floer 
              homology, which is an invariant of the differentiable structure of the 
              underlying three-manifold and avoids the problem of metric dependence  that
              arises in the non-equivariant theory.  The second part of the  project consists
              of deriving the exact triangles formulae that detect  how the Seiberg-Witten
              Floer homology changes when the three-manifold  is modified by surgery and a
              suitable cutting and pasting technique  that relates the Seiberg-Witten
              invariants of four-manifolds and  three-manifolds. The remaining part of the
              project is dedicated to the  investigation of the relation between the
              Seiberg-Witten Floer  homology and the instanton Floer homology associated to
              Donaldson  theory.    The discovery of the Seiberg-Witten invariants, as an
              outcome of  recent developments in string theory, has had a tremendous impact
              in  the field of low dimensional topology. The rich interplay of geometry  and
              theoretical physics has allowed a deeper understanding of the  geometric
              structure of three and four-dimensional manifolds.  The  topology and geometry
              of three and four-dimensional manifolds is known  to be especially rich of
              interesting phenomena and open problems: the  failure of the classification
              methods used in higher dimensions makes  it particularly important to construct
              computable invariants, hence  the need to investigate the properties of the
              Seiberg-Witten  invariants and their relation to the previously known 
              Yang-Mills-Donaldson theory.
