Title       : Contact and Symplectic Structures and Holomorphic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a9802154

Award Number: 9802154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helmut H. Hofer hofer@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    Proposal:  DMS-9802154  Principal Investigator:  Helmut Hofer   
              In this project Hofer studies the dynamics of Reeb vector fields.  The   main
              tool is a particularly adapted theory of holomorphic curves,   which has been
              developed by the principal investigator and his   co-workers in recent years. 
              The fact, that there is a such a close,   but completely unexpected,
              relationship between some important class   of dynamical systems and a suitable
              theory of holomorphic curves has   deep implications.  Immediately it makes it,
              in principle, feasible to   relate questions about an important class of
              dynamical systems to   recent mathematical theories like quantum cohomology,
              Gromov-Witten   invariants, and in low dimensions even to Seiberg-Witten
              invariants.    The fact, that two intersecting holomorphic curves in a  
              four-dimensional space have always a positive intersection number   implies
              that these new methods are most powerful for Reeb vector   fields on a
              three-dimensional space.  The main goal of this project   will be the
              development of a mathematical machinery for constructing   global surfaces of
              section for three-dimensional Reeb flows and   generalisations thereof.  In
              practice this means that the study of   certain three-dimensional dynamical
              systems can effectively be reduced   to two dimensions.    The importance and
              scope of Reeb dynamics is illustrated by the   following examples.  The motion
              of a satellite in the presence of the   gravitational forces of the sun, the
              planets and the moon is described   mathematically as the dynamics of a Reeb
              vector field.  A charged   particle moving in an electrical and a magnetic
              field is described by   a Reeb vector field if the magnetic field is not too
              large or the   kinetic energy of the particle is sufficiently large.  The
              motion of   the particles of an ideal incompressible fluid in some system of
              pipes   is, if the motion is in an equilibrium (steady) state, described by a  
              Reeb vector field if the pressure is not too far f rom being constant.    Also
              many evolution equations of mathematical physics, which describe   systems, in
              which energy is preserved, can sometimes be approximated   by
              finite-dimensional dynamical systems, which are described by a Reeb   vector
              field.  Such approximations are of course necessary if one   tries to find
              solutions for such equations by using a computer.
