Title       : U.S.-Australia Collaborative Research on Biogeochemical Pro-cesses in the
               Subantarctic Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9802132

Award Number: 9802132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13310              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hutchins dahutch@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Hutchins  9802132    The Subantarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean plays a
              critical  role in both past and present global climate change, and is 
              therefore of considerable interest to the international  science community.
              This proposal seeks funds to support a  unique collaboration with Australian
              marine scientists to  investigate biogeochemical cycling in this oceanic
              region.  The prinicipal investigator, Professor David Hutchins of the  College
              of Marine Studies of the University of Delaware, in  collaboration with Dr.
              Giacomo Di Tullio of the Department  of Geology, University of Charleston, and
              Australian  counterpart, Dr. Peter N. Sedwick, of the Cooperative  Research
              Center for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean  Environment, University of
              Tasmania, will conduct an  interdisciplinary study of the physiological status
              and  response of the whole microbial community to growth  limitation by iron
              and major nutrients. Experiments will  examine the possibility that iron may
              control Si:N  utilization ratios by the biotas (including implications for 
              species dominance), heterotrophic/autotrophic    competition  for iron, and
              iron and major nutrient effects on production  of the radiatively important gas
              dimethylsulfide (DMS) and  its precursor DMSP. The field program and research
              cruise on  the Australian vessel RSV Aurora Australis will involve  Australian,
              New Zealand, and French researchers as well as  the American researchers
              supported under this project.  Results will contribute to our understanding of
              factors  affecting global carbon cycling, and will further the  exchange of
              ideas and encourage cooperation between the  marine science communities of the
              United States, New  Zealand, France, and Australia.
