Title       : Acquisition of a High Vacuum Freeze-Fracture System for Microstructural
               Characterization of Complex Fluids and Biomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9802591

Award Number: 9802591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Zasadzinski gorilla@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Pine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Galen D. Stucky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cyrus R. Safinya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob N. Israelachvili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802591
Zasadzinski
Characterization of complex fluids and biomaterials from
              the micron to nanometer scale is extremely important for the design and
              optimization of novel drug delivery systems, new mesoporous materials,
              polymer-surfactant phases and other self-assembling and soft material systems. 
              While more commonly used techniques such as x-ray, neutron, and light
              scattering reveal much about the averaged structural features over these length
              scales, it is difficult to examine the range from nanometers to hundreds of
              microns with a single experiment or even a single scattering technique. 
              Imaging complex fluids and biomaterials with electron microscopy is a necessary
              complement to scattering studies, especially as microscopy directly addresses
              the main limitations of scattering.  However, high resolution imaging has its
              own experimental limitations: the fluid sample must be replaced by a solid,
              conductive, low vapor pressure version of the original material to be
              compatible with the requirements of electron or scanning tunneling microscopy. 
              Experience has shown that the best method of making samples for TEM of STM is
              by rapid freezing, followed by freeze-fracture replication.  In freeze-fracture
              replication, the rapidly frozen specimen is fractured at low temperature and
              high vacuum to expose the interior structure of the fluid.  The fracture
              surface is then replicated by evaporation of a metal shadowing film to provide
              contrast in the TEM image or conductivity for STM, followed by a carbon backing
              film to provide sufficient strength for subsequent processing and imaging.  The
              resolution in the technique is about 2 nm lateral and 0.5 nm vertical.  The
              technique has proven to be ideal for a range of complex fluids and biomaterials
              including polymer and surfactant gels, surfactant micelles and microemulsions,
              biomembranes, lamellar, hexagonal and cubic surfactant liquid crystals,
              vesicles, liposomes, themotropic liquid  crystals, etc. and can simultaneously
              resolve nanometer sized particles and their order, orientation and defects to
              100 micron length scales.

This award provides support for a new
              Freeze-fracture System which will significantly improve the throughput of
              samples, decreasing the turnaround times from about 8 hours to about 1 hour per
              sample run.  In the new equipment, the samples are loaded through a vacuum
              airlock, and the electron beam evaporation sources can also be externally
              adjusted via airlocks.  Hence, the main vacuum chamber is never vented.  On our
              current instrument, vacuum must be broken to introduce the specimen, replace
              the evaporation sources, and to remove the specimen after processing.  Each
              sample run requires that the main chamber be vented at least 3 times, with the
              necessary pump down time in between.  The faster turnaround will allow us to
              examine more samples more efficiently and the better vacuum will give higher
              resolution and less artifacts due to contamination.  The evaporators on the new
              equipment are externally controlled to provide higher resolution replicating
              films with less down time.

The freeze-fracture equipment will be available
              to other researchers in the department and the University.  The instrumentation
              at the University of California at Santa Barbara is heavily used by a
              collaborative group of scientists studying complex fluids and biomaterials, and
              by industrial and academic collaborators in California (Depotech, Alliance
              Pharmaceuticals) and elsewhere (U. Delaware. Dow Chemical).
%%%
***




              

