Title       : Development of Materials-Based, Reduced-Design-Cycle Instrument for Acoustical
               String Instruments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a9802656

Award Number: 9802656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369769             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Bissinger bissingerg@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Biwu Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Khan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802656
Bissinger
This award provides partial support for the development of a
              computer based application system (VIOCAD) to be used for acoustical string
              instrument design using a materials based program.  VIOCAD will be used to
              measure acoustical string instruments with varied materials, mechanical
              designs, and acoustic properties, and will be capable of predicting sound
              quality through measurement of elastic moduli, density, geometry, and damping
              properties of materials used to make the instruments.  The VIOCAD will be used
              to measure a violin designed with new materials such as composites, laminates,
              metal materials, or combinations, involving the basic materials properties of
              the instrument, and the fundamental production of sound in the materials from
              which the instrument is constructed.  Acoustic simulations will be compared
              with measurements on violins. In principle, this project will attempt to
              quantify the quality of sound produced by a violin made of varied materials. 
              There is industrial interest and support, as well as international interest. 
              Part of the project involves setting up a database by making measurements of
              instruments.  Potential uses of VIOCAD include materials applications and
              investigations of new materials, design of instruments, and testing of the
              mechanical-acoustical properties of instruments.  VIOCAD will be accessible
              through campus computer terminals and will be used by students and faculty at
              East Carolina University.
%%%
***

