Title       : Exploratory Synthesis of Complex Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1998   
File        : a9802488

Award Number: 9802488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur W. Sleight arthur.sleight@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802488
Sleight

This project, which is a continuation of highly successful
              work on the solid-state chemistry of complex oxides, aims to investigate areas
              that include thermal expansion, exploratory synthesis, and thin film synthesis.
               A goal of the exploratory synthesis area is to escape the intellectual
              confines of our knowledge base and to discover the unexpected.  There has been
              much emphasis recently on the development of new materials by design.  Indeed,
              our present understanding is such that many important materials problems can be
              addressed using this rational approach.  However, it would be intellectually
              arrogant to believe that the most spectacular new properties of materials will
              be confidently predicted from our present knowledge base.  Exciting classes of
              materials that have eluded us likely require special synthesis techniques or
              have complex structures and compositions.  Oxides generally have advantages
              over other materials both in ease of synthesis and in terms of high stability
              in the presence of air.  A new aspect of this program will be the exploratory
              synthesis of oxides as thin films.  When a significant discovery is made,
              exploitation of that discovery will begin immediately.  This exploitation could
              include systematic and applied studies.  In the case of materials showing
              negative thermal expansion, a systematic approach to their discovery is being
              developed and actively pursued.  Students will be trained to understand the
              interrelationships of chemistry, structure, properties, and
              applications.
%%%
It is the goal of this project to discover new materials
              that are useful, inexpensive, nontoxic, and easy to manufacture.  Many new
              compounds will be prepared in the course of this project, but only a small
              percentage will have potentially useful properties.  Some of the new materials
              will have a significant impact on science, technology, and society.
***

