Title       : Acquisition of an Ultra-High Vacuum System for the Physical Vapor Deposition of
               Thin Conducting Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9802917

Award Number: 9802917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Porter lporter@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802917  Porter    This award provides support for the acquisition of an
              ultra-high  vacuum system with the capability of multiple techniques for the 
              controlled deposition of many types of thin conducting films.  The deposition
              system will have a rare combination of techniques  and attributes that will
              allow for the growth of a variety of  conducting films, ranging from ultra-pure
              elements to refractory  compounds, in a highly controlled environment.  This
              system will  permit leading research involving studies of the physics and 
              electrical, chemical, and microstructural properties of materials  at
              conducting-to-semiconducting interfaces.  Some of the existing  and planned
              research programs include an NSF-supported study of  thermally stable contacts
              to SiC and GaN for high temperature  electronic applications and the
              development of contacts for both  SiC-based solar probes and SiC-, GaN-, or
              BN-based radio isotope  batteries.  Additional programs that will benefit
              include  "Surface Phase Transitions in Alloys", "Stability of Fine 
              Microstructures in Thin Films", and the "Mesoscale Interface  Mapping Project".
               %%%  While all of these research programs involve the fabrication of 
              conducting contacts on semiconducting or insulating substrates,  the nature of
              conducting films varies in terms of the techniques  which are most appropriate
              for depositing the films.  The system  addresses these differences in its
              inclusion of two sources for  dc sputtering, a multi-pocket electron-beam
              source for  evaporation, and the future capability for the addition of an ion 
              source for ion-beam assisted deposition.  The sputtering and  evaporation
              techniques will allow for easier deposition of most  types of the films which
              are being studied, while the ion-  assisted process will be used in the future
              to introduce more  control over the parameters for depositing compound
              materials.  ***
