Title       : The Cosmic History of Baryons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9802568

Award Number: 9802568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242607             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Weinberg dhw@astronomy.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal S. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lars E. Hernquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                AST 98-02568  David H. Weinberg    Dr. Weinberg proposes to work with Dr. Katz
              (University of Massachusetts) and Dr. Hernquist (University of California,
              Santa Cruz) to conduct numerical simulations that model the cosmic history of
              the baryon component of the universe from z ~ 8 to the z=0, with particular
              attention to the Ly a forest, high redshift galaxies and the distributions of
              galaxies and intergalactic gas in the local universe.  They plan to use TreeSPH
              - a numerical simulation code that combines a hierarchical tree N-body
              algorithm for gravitational components with smoothed particle hydrodynamics
              (SPH) for the gas component.   The code now exists in parallel form.   
              According to the leading cosmological theories, the galaxies and large scale
              structure that we observe today grew by gravitational instability from
              small-amplitude fluctuations in the early universe.  Gravitational clustering
              of collisionless dark matter drives the evolution of the mass distribution on
              large scales, but astronomical observations reply almost exclusively on
              electromagnetic radiation that has been emitted (or in some cases absorbed) by
              stars or gas.  Hydrodynamic simulations, which incorporate the
              non-gravitational physics that influences the evolution of the cosmic baryon
              distribution, dramatically enhance the predictive and explanatory power of
              cosmological theories.    Preliminary results from the simulations show that a
              substantial population of high redshift galaxies is predicted by several
              variants of the cold dark matter scenario.  The team is studying the clustering
              of Lyman break galaxies in different scenarios.  Hydrodynamic simulations show
              that the low column density Ly a forest arises primarily in diffuse, smoothly
              fluctuating, intergalactic gas.  The physics of this medium is remarkably
              simple, allowing the simulations to make robust, quantitative predictions given
              a specified cosmological model.  Simulations of high redshift structure,
              supported by QSO absorption data, indicate that most of t he high redshift
              baryons reside in the diffuse medium that produces the Ly a forest, with
              smaller fractions in galaxies and hot gas halos.   ***
