Title       : Numerical Studies of Tropical Cyclogenesis and Hurricane Andrew (1992)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9802391

Award Number: 9802391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Da-Lin Zhang dalin@atmos.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Adequate understanding of the genesis and inner core structure of tropical
              cyclones is a high priority research area under the U.S. Weather Research
              Program.  Although there have been numerous studies of tropical cyclogenesis in
              the past decades, little work has been done to investigate cyclogenesis from
              mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) and the inner-core structures of
              hurricanes. Thus, the objectives of this research are to a) test the hypothesis
              that convectively generated mid-level mesovortices could induce tropical
              cyclogenesis under optimum environmental conditions; and b) simulate and
              investigate the inner-core structures and evolution of Hurricane Andrew (1992).
              

To gain insight into the nature of tropical cyclogenesis, emphasis will be
              placed on a) the processes leading to the generation and amplification of
              lower-level cyclonic vorticity in tropical storms in relation to mid-level
              mesovortices, and b) the mechanisms responsible for the transformation from
              MCSs with a low-level cold pool into intense mesocyclones that are
              characterized by deep warm-cored structures. Finally, model-based diagnosis
              will be performed to examine the roles of air-sea interaction, cloud-radiation
              interaction and meso-larger scale interaction in the transformation from MCSs
              to tropical storms.

For the second objective, numerical studies of hurricane
              intensity will be performed. Specifically, 1) aircraft observations during the
              rapid intensification of Andrew and SSM/I data will be used to help understand
              the predictability of the inner-core structures by nudging the model
              integration towards the observations during a pre-forecast period; 2) higher
              resolution (i.e.  2 - 3 km) explicit simulations will be conducted to
              demonstrate the capability of reproducing inner-core structure and intensity
              and, thereby, gain insight into the double eyewall cycle that is associated
              with the rapid decay followed by explosive deepening of the storm; 3) an
              advanced oceanic and atmospheric mesoscale model will be coupled in order to
              study the impact of local sea-surface temperature changes on the development of
              inner-core structures; and 4) various sensitivity simulations will be performed
              to examine the effects of different cumulus parameterization schemes, shallow
              convection, cloud microphysical processes (water vs. ice), cloud-radiation
              interaction and air-sea interaction on the simulation of the
              storm.

Successful completion of the proposed tasks will provide a better
              understanding of the dynamic effects of MCSs on larger-scale flows, the
              processes leading to tropical cyclogenesis from MCSs, the inner-core structures
              of hurricanes and various processes during rapid deepening.  Satisfying results
              may open a new important era for tropical cyclogenesis research and for
              improving the numerical prediction of hurricanes and their structure at
              landfall.


