Title       : Reliability of Computational Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9802367

Award Number: 9802367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivo M. Babuska   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9802367  Babuska    The project will address the following topics:  1) A
              posteriori error estimation in the finite element method.  It will focus   on
              the error estimation of the values of engineering interest as error in the  
              solution, the gradients (stresses) in the entire domain as well as  
              subdomains, the values of the functionals, etc.  The upper and lower a- 
              posteriori bounds will be addressed.  The effectivity and robustness of   these
              estimates will be theoretically and computationally investigated.    The linear
              elliptic equations and problems occurring in engineering   practice will be
              focussed on and also the nonlinear and parabolic ones will   be investigated. 
              The results will also be applied in the adaptive procedure.   2) The
              generalized finite element method.  A flexible form of FEM   allowing one to
              use special shape functions will be designed and   theoretically analyzed.  The
              classical h- and p- version is a special case.    The method will be
              implemented in two dimensions and possibly later,   three dimensions as well. 
              This method can typically be applied for   solving problems of heterogeneous
              material, solutions with boundary   layers and oscillatory character. 3) The
              problem of composites.  This is a   multi-scale problem with particular focus
              on composite fibrous materials.    The main interest will be on a fiber scale. 
              The study will be both   deterministic and stochastic. The stochastic
              formulation is essential   because the position of the fiber scale statistical
              character.  The work will   be performed in collaboration with the Aeronautics
              Institute of Sweden. 4)   The p-version of FEM.  This work will be focused on
              resolving various   aspects of the p-version in 3 dimensions although first the
              methodology   will be used on the two-dimensional setting.  The theory will
              utilize new   functional spaces which are needed for addressing the problems
              occurring   in engineering.  The work is a continuation of the results of
              results   obtained in the past.    The planned  research addresses problems
              with a high level of importance   in the engineering computations.  It will
              focus on the reliable and accurate   a-posteriori error estimations and
              adaptive procedures in the Finite   Element Method, which are essential for
              confidence in the computed data.    In this way, various accidents could be
              avoided.  Although the finite   element method is a major tool in engineering
              computations, various   important problems are practically unsolvable by the
              standard approach.    Hence a new generalized flexible finite element method
              will be designed   with the goal to increase the effectivity of the method when
              solving   unusually difficult problems. The problem of the composite material
              with   the focus on the fiber scale is one of these types of problems when  
              millions of fibers are present with only statistical character in regard to  
              knowledge of their position.  Here new approaches which are very tight to   the
              experimental studies are needed and will be addressed.
