Title       : CONTROL for Data-Intensive Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9802051

Award Number: 9802051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Hellerstein jmh@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Stonebraker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Despite significant advances in data processing over the years, many
              data-intensive applications still run in batch mode: they require a long period
              of time to execute, and during that time they provide neither feedback nor
              control to the user. This state of affairs holds in a number of important
              domains, from the desktop (e.g., spreadsheets) to the back office (e.g.,
              decision support) to new high-end applications (e.g., data mining and
              visualization tools). In each of these domains, batch processing is frustrating
              or even unacceptable for serious users. In order to investigate large data
              sets, users require on-line behavior: they need to get meaningful feedback
              while the system runs, and they need to be able to act on the feedback by
              controlling the system while it runs. The goal of this research project is to
              explore and develop techniques to make long-running, data-intensive operations
              have on-line functionality. This includes new research into algorithms and
              systems for query processing, user interfaces, data visualization, and data
              mining. The results of this work should allow for a much tighter loop between
              users and software during the process of data analysis and data exploration.
              This can lead to significantly enhanced power for users, and enable significant
              leverage of human intelligence in the data mining process.  
              http://control.cs.berkeley.edu
