Title       : Rheo-Optics of Stress-Structure Coupling in Complex Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9802610

Award Number: 9802610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan W. van Egmond vanegmon@spock.ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS-9802610    Principal Investigator:  van
              Egmond    This is a grant to develop a better understanding of the coupling
              between rheology and the development of structure, especially in soft materials
              that undergo phase transitions and other morphological changes.  These
              materials include polymer systems such as compatible and incompatible blends,
              solutions, and gels.  Other important materials include liquid crystals (LC's)
              with applications such as polymer dispersed LC droplets for LC display screens
              and micellar systems with a wide variety of applications in controlled drug
              delivery, as drag reducing agents in pumped fluids, and as templates for the
              manufacture of mesoporous silica-based sieves of unprecedented selectivity. 
              Further, it is also important that real-time, on-line instruments that can
              measure structure during processing be developed.  This technology would be of
              immense value in assuring product quality and reducing waste through a
              combination of simulation and model-based control schemes.    Two key
              objectives are addressed by this research: (1) the development of novel optical
              instruments that are crucial for the detection of real-time three dimensional
              structure and stress in flowing multicomponent polymeric materials; and (2) the
              characterization of mechanisms through which rheology interacts with phase
              transitions, structural fluctuations and fluid mechanical instability in model
              multicomponent polymer and micelles systems.  These objectives will be achieved
              through a combination of non-intrusive optical techniques (birefringence,
              dichroism and light scattering) to measure molecular and mesoscopic structural
              evolution, mechanical rheometry to measure macroscopic stress, and modeling. 
              This array of instrumentation will be used to study flow instabilities that
              occur in complex materials such as polymer solutions that undergo apparent
              "flow-induced phase separation".  According to preliminary results, the driving
              mechanism for these instabilitie s is the coupling between viscoelastic
              stresses, convection, and stresses associated with anisotropic meso-structure. 
              The relevance of this work rests on the need to understand instabilities and
              heterogeneities that occur during the processing of complex materials such as
              polymer blends.  2      1
