Title       : Cobordism of Configuration Spaces and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9802616

Award Number: 9802616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Morava jack@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802616  Morava       In previous work, the author showed that Witten's
              tau-function  for topological gravity in two dimensions has a
              homotopy-theoretic  interpretation as a kind of topological field theory taking
              values  in a category of modules over a ring-spectrum.  This ring-spectrum  is
              a large-genus completion of the moduli space of stable algebraic  curves; it is
              constructed by homotopy-theoretic methods from spaces  of configurations of
              smooth points on such curves.  Its cohomology  has many features reminiscent of
              a vertex operator algebra, which is  in turn connected to the theory of
              symmetric functions.  The methods  of cobordism theory have not been
              systematically applied to the study  of configuration spaces, but questions in
              a variety of areas suggest  that this merits investigation.  It is particularly
              important to extend  the results mentioned above to topological gravity coupled
              to a  sigma-model, to encompass quantum cohomology along the lines suggested 
              by T. Eguchi and his school.        The interest of physicists in
              two-dimensional gravity has shed  more light on the topology of the moduli
              space of Riemann surfaces than  all previous research in this very classical
              subject combined, but their  work answers questions that are not, at first
              sight, what a  mathematician might want to ask, and it has been difficult to
              understand  these new results in terms of the traditional mathematical approach
              to  this subject.  It is becoming increasingly clear that configuration  spaces
              and cobordism techniques are at the geometric heart of the  physicists'
              constructions, and that their intersection lies in a rich  part of algebraic
              topology that has till now escaped systematic study.  In physics, it is always
              taken to be an encouraging sign when  `experimental' applications suggest new
              `theoretical' questions for  investigation; this is what seems to be happening
              here in mathematics.      ***
