Title       : Key Physics Issues of Compositionally-Tuned Correlated Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9802513

Award Number: 9802513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sang-Wook Cheong sangc@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802513  Cheong    This proposal by Professor Sang-Wook Cheong of the Department
               of  Physics  of Rutgers University describes a multifaceted  research  program
               in  solid  state  physics and  materials  science.   The  research  is 
              largely  concerned with the behavior  of  materials  which  exhibit 
              superconductivity  or  giant  magneto  resistance  (GMR).   Four specific
              topics will be studied: the nature of  the  charge and spin stripe correlations
              in doped Mott insulators; the  nature of the microscopic mechanisms that
              underlie the physics of  Mn  perovskites  with  respect to their GMR behavior; 
              the  half-  metallic properties of the perovskites will be investigated;  and 
              a study will be initiated into the properties of magnetic systems  with
              topological frustration.  These topics are currently at  the  forefront of
              contemporary research in solid state physics and the  results  of  the work
              will have implications in the technological  application of the various
              materials studied.  This research will  be  performed  by the PI together with
              his own research  team  as  well  as  in  collaboration  with others  who  are 
              equipped  for  performing  neutron scattering, microstructure 
              characterization,  crystallographic, and photoemission investigations.  %%% 
              This proposal by Professor Sang-Wook Cheong of the Department  of  Physics  of
              Rutgers University describes a multifaceted  research  program  in  solid 
              state  physics and  materials  science.   The  research  is  largely  concerned
              with the behavior  of  materials  which  exhibit  superconductivity  or  giant 
              magneto  resistance  (GMR).   Four specific topics will be studied: the nature
              of  the  charge and spin stripe correlations in doped Mott insulators; the 
              nature of the microscopic mechanisms that underlie the physics of  Mn 
              perovskites  with  respect to their GMR behavior;  the  half-  metallic
              properties of the perovskites will be investigated;  and  a study will be
              initiated into the properties of magnetic systems  with topol ogical
              frustration.  These topics are currently at  the  forefront of contemporary
              research in solid state physics and the  results  of  the work will have
              implications in the technological  application of the various materials
              studied.  This research will  be  performed  by the PI together with his own
              research  team  as  well  as  in  collaboration  with others  who  are 
              equipped  for  performing  neutron scattering, microstructure 
              characterization,  crystallographic, and photoemission investigations.  ***
