Title       : Bayesian Analysis, Decision Theory, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9802261

Award Number: 9802261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374471             (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berger berger@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1308,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James O. Berger
DMS-9802261

Five research areas in Bayesian analysis and
              statistical decision theory are addressed.  The greatest effort is in model
              selection, in particular the development of automatic Bayesian methodology for
              choosing between models.  This is based on construction of automatic prior
              distributions.  Other problems in model selection that are considered include
              the question of optimal choice of a model when prediction is the goal; study
              and comparison of large sample approximations in Bayesian model selection; and
              development of Bayesian measures of criticism of a single proposed model.  The
              second area of research is conditional frequentist testing, and its unification
              with Bayesian testing, especially as applied to clinical trials.  Using a
              modification of the approach to developing automatic priors for model selection
              that was mentioned above, the mixture modelling problem is also addressed. 
              Quite general mixture models, involving populations with differing (and
              unknown) orientation and measurement errors are considered.  A fourth area of
              research is the development of good prior distributions for covariance matrices
              and hierarchical models, in part through the concept of decision-theoretic
              admissibility.  The final area of research is Bayesian analysis involving large
              data sets.

The advances in model selection methodology are used to study
              global change problems such as detection of climatic changes due to causes such
              as greenhouse warming.  The developments in mixture modeling are applied to
              astronomical problems, in particular the problem of modeling the source of
              gamma ray bursts.  The work on covariance matrices is used to study detection
              of patterns, such as El Nino, in climatological fields.  The investigations in
              Bayesian analysis of large data sets span these problems, finding general tools
              for analyzing such data sets.  The research benefits education and human
              development through the training of graduate studentsm and the incorporation of
              the developed methodology in statistics courses at Duke University and
              elsewhere.

