Title       : SGER: Iterative Cloning: A Novel Approach to Quantitative Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9802818

Award Number: 9802818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. McCusker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        McCusker  9802818  The primary objective of this Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research is to develop iterative cloning, a novel cloning approach
              for quantitative trait loci, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and to develop this
              species as a microbial model for quantitative genetics. The secondary objective
              of this research will be to initiate the molecular analysis of the cloned
              quantitative trait loci. This is being done with the intention of illustrating
              the power of a microbial (and in particular an S. cerevisiae) model for
              quantitative genetics and building the groundwork for long range plans for
              dissecting quantitative traits.  This research involves the following steps:
              1.) the construction of a novel set of cloning and control plasmids through the
              use of Polymerase Chain Reaction, 2.) the cloning of quantitative trait loci
              required for growth at high temperatures using a novel plasmid enrichment
              scheme, and 3.) the initiation of detailed genetic and molecular analysis of
              the cloned high temperature growth           quantitative trait loci.    The
              significance of this research is that it deals with quantitative traits
              (polygenic, with primarily additive interactions), one of the most complex and
              least understood problems in biology today. Quantitative traits have been
              worked on for some time in higher eukaryotes, primarily through genetic
              mapping, but are not understood in anything approaching precise genetic and
              molecular terms. The prospects are dim for a full understanding of quantitative
              traits in higher eukaryotes because of the genetic complexity of quantitative
              traits, the large population sizes necessary for mapping quantitative trait
              loci and, relative to microorganisms, the large genome size and genetic
              intractability of higher eukaryotes. A microbial model for quantitative
              genetics will improve our understanding of quantitative traits, and S.
              cerevisiae is the ideal microorganism for this purpose because of the ease of
              manipulating S. cerevisiae (transformation, gene replacem ent, stable haploid
              and diploid forms) and the immense species database, which includes the
              complete genome sequence. The goal of this work is to develop S. cerevisiae as
              a microbial model for quantitative genetics, to develop novel technology to
              clone quantitative trait loci and, in the long term, to understand how
              quantitative trait loci interact to produce a particular phenotype in precise
              genetic and molecular terms. The iterative cloning strategy for quantitative
              trait loci has a number of advantages over the mapping of quantitative trait
              loci. A full understanding of quantitative genetics in a eukaryotic microbial
              model system will provide an intellectual framework for the understanding of
              quantitative genetics in higher eukaryotes. The iterative cloning approach
              could be modified for work in other microorganisms and could be adapted for the
              interspecific reconstruction of quantitative traits. The interspecific
              reconstruction of quantitative traits would be particularly valuable when
              dealing with microorganisms that are difficult to manipulate and/or lack a
              sexual cycle, where mapping of quantitative trait loci is not possible.
