Title       : Cycles, Residues & Global Problems in Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9802054

Award Number: 9802054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228216             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Blaine Lawson blaine@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie-Louise Michelsohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal:  DMS 9802054
Principal Investigators:  H. B. Lawson, Jr.
              and M.-L. Michelsohn

This multi-part project is concerned with the study of
              cycles and
residues in geometry.  One part concerns the groups of
              algebraic
cycles and cocycles on a projective variety X and aims to relate
              these
groups to the global structure of X.  A theory of homology type
              for
algebraic varieties based on homotopy groups of cycle spaces has
              been
developed, and will be used to study concrete questions about
algebraic
              spaces.  A second part of the proposal concerns cycles in
projective space,
              which have surprizing connections to fundamental
constructions in algebraic
              topology.  Some of the resulting questions
concern spaces of real and
              quaternionic cycles related to
characteristic classes and representation
              theory.  Others concern
cycles under the action of a finite group.  Here the
              spaces have led
to new equivariant cohomology theories whose development
              and
application will be explored.  A third area of investigation
              concerns
singular connections and characteristic currents, a generalization
              of
classical Chern-Weil theory which relate singularities of mappings
              to
characteristic forms in a canonical analytic way; applications
              and
developments of the theory include a new approach to Morse Theory. 
              A
fourth area concerns calibrated cycles in geometry: special
              Lagrangian
cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, cycles related to existence
              of
p-Kaehler spaces, and cycles appearing in M-brane theory.  This
project is
              also concerned with graduate student development,
especially interaction at
              the research level among graduate students.

This project concerns questions
              of global structure in geometry and
has several interrelated parts.  The first
              aims at furthering our
understanding of the spaces which arise as solutions of
              systems of
algebraic equations (so called ``algebraic cycles'').  These
              spaces
have a long history and play a central role in many areas
              of
mathematics, applied mathematics and physics.  Breakthroughs over the
past
              ten years have given fresh insights into the subject and a richly
structured
              theory has emerged.  The proposed research will forge new
links between
              algebra and geometry/topology, and lead towards settling
some important
              conjectures in the field.  Another area of
investigation is concerned with
              relations between cycles and geometry
which arise from connections. 
              Connections are fundamental in
mathematics, where they constitute
              differentiation laws, and in
physics, where they represent the fundamental
              forces of nature at the
classical level.  The investigators have developed a
              theory of
singular connections which encompasses many previously
              unrelated
phenomena and has applications to several areas of geometry. 
              This
project will continue this work with emphasis on applications. 
              In
studying the least area problem one of the investigators developed
              a
theory of calibrated cycles which currently plays an important role
              in
physical theories.  This new relationship has raised some
              important
questions and conjectures that will be studied.

