Title       : Meeting: Mechanisms of Nucleic Acid Enzymes, June 13-18, 1998, at Saxton's
               River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9802699

Award Number: 9802699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marlene Belfort   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9802699  Belfort      This meeting will cover the structure, mechanism, and
              biological roles  of enzymes that act on DNA and RNA. Included are both protein
              and RNA enzymes that act on nucleic acids. The meeting is designed to attract a
              broad cross-disciplinary spectrum of scientists from the U.S. and abroad. These
              include chemists, biochemists, structural and molecular biologists, geneticists
              and cell biologists. This meeting will be the third held by the Federation of
              American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) on this general topic, the
              last having been in 1996.  Since then, the understanding of the structure,
              mechanism and regulatory potential of these molecules has expanded greatly .
              This  FASEB meeting is therefore both timely and topical.  The organizers have
              selected discussion leaders for the nine sessions and a keynote speaker for an
              additional session. Speakers range from Nobel prize-winners at the forefront of
              their fields to accomplished young scientists destined to make inroads in their
              specialities.The topics to be covered at the meeting include nuclease structure
              & function; synthetic enzymes and novel activities; endonucleases and
              integrases of mobile elements; catalysis of and by RNA; recombination and
              repair; ligases, topoisomerases, and capping enzymes; replication proteins; and
              genomics.  In addition, there will be a poster competition; students and
              post-docs with winning posters will be given the opportunity to present a talk.
                    The meeting will provide a focus for powerful and fruitful approaches to
              studying fundamental features of nucleic acids and  will serve as a
              multidisciplinary forum for the study of enzymes which interact with nucleic
              acids.  Although meetings centering on various specialities of this general
              field are also held, this particular interdisciplinary mix of topics is
              unprecedented and promises a unique opportunity for fertile scientific exchange
              among scientists with interests in basic research and biotechnology.
