Title       : Transition Metal-Nitrogen Multiple Bonds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2000   
File        : a9802822

Award Number: 9802822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Lichtenberger dlichten@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Wigley  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David Wigley, Chemistry Department, University of Arizona, is supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies
              of the chemistry of transition metal-nitrogen multiple bonds. Organoimido
              ligands have long been used as ancillary groups to variable degrees of steric
              protection and to support metals in their highest oxidation states. However,
              highly reactive metal-imide moieties are not well known. The overall objective
              of this research is to gain a better understanding of transition metal-nitrogen
              multiple bonding and to develop new methods for utilizing metal-imido moieties.
              To extend the range of their reactions new metal-mediated alkene aziridination
              reactions will be developed using d2 metal-nitroso and -azo complexe with both
              stoichiometric and catalytic processes that involve imido intermediates being
              investigated. The probable metallacyclic intermediates in these aziridinations
              will be prepared by independent routes and examined as mechanistic probes. New
              imido complexes of ruthenium will be prepared and their utility as nitrene [NR]
              transfer reagents will be explored. Finally, metal-imido complexes will be
              developed as reagents for electrocyclic rearrangements of value to synthetic
              organic chemistry.

Highly reactive metal-imide groups, which are composed of
              a transition metal bonded to a nitrogen that bears a single additional
              substituent, can be generated under certain conditions. These metal-imido
              complexes activate C-H bonds in methane; play a central role in the
              industrially important hydroamination of olefins and olefin aziridination; and
              have been used to model steps in hydrodenitrogenation, propylene ammoxidation,
              and nitrile reduction catalysis. Despite the importance of reactive metal-imido
              complexes, their numbers remain small and their properties are not well
              systematized. In this research a number of new imido complexes will be
              prepared, new methods for activating metal imido groups will be developed, and
              the range of their reactions will be extended.  
