Title       : First Principles Theory of Complex Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9802076

Award Number: 9802076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren E. Pickett pickett@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802076  Pickett  This award is in support of theoretical research on the 
              electronic structure and properties of various materials of  current interest. 
              Examples of recently discovered materials  that have generated great activity
              include: the compund Sr14-  xCaxCu24O41, which has Cu-O chains and ladders but
              no  layers, yet superconducts for a narrow range of x in a  specific range of
              pressure; the class of spin-1/2 layered  vanadates CaVnO2n+1, which show
              spin-Peierls behavior (n=3)  or spin-gap behavior with a wide range of gaps
              (n=2 and  n=4); the Fe-Si system FenSim, for which the n=1, m=2 and  n=2, m=1
              members are rather standard metals whereas the  n=m=1 member is a very unusual
              `Kondo insulator' with an  energy gap of 60meV; and the filled skutterudite
              systems  such as Ce1-xLaxCo4Sb12 which show superb thermoelectric  behavior for
              heat management applications.  The high  temperature superconducting cuprates,
              of course, continue to  cause fascination due to apparent d-wave order
              parameter,  the complex flux lattice behavior arising in part from their  short
              coherence length, and in no small part due to the  continuing elusiveness of
              the microscopic pairing mechanism.  A widespread fascination has arisen from
              the so-called  `colossal magnetoresistance' manganite materials which show 
              numerous charge, spin, and structural orderings, and unusual  field-driven
              reentrant behavior.  In several cases the  development of novel materials has
              resulted from close  interplay between theory and experiment, with not only 
              interpretation of properties being the role of theory but  also the direct
              indication of what promises to be  interesting, where to look for it, and so
              on.     Features that are common to many of these novel materials  are: (1)
              they are multicomponent, with properties being  strongly dependent on
              stoichiometry; (ii) their crystal  structures have low symmetry, indicative of
              unusual chemical  bonding patterns; (iii) their properties are unconventional, 
              and often vary considerably wit h small changes in material  parameters (doping
              level, temperature, pressure, even ionic  size is sometimes crucial); and (iv)
              they involve the  interplay of itinerant carriers and states which are in some 
              sense localized.    It is this last feature, in concert with the other 
              complications, that provides the peculiar behavior.  Complexity of the unit
              cell alone usually does not cause  fundamental difficulty for theorists trying
              to descibe the  systems.  Complex intermetallics, quaternary semiconductors, 
              and semiconductor superlattices can usually be handled well  by a combination
              of phenomenological methods and the local  density approximation within density
              functional theory.  Likewise, localized atomic states in simple cell lattices 
              (viz. NiO in the rocksalt structure) may lead to very  interesting correlated
              electron behavior, but they simply do  not possess the degrees of freedom that
              are present in more  complex lattices.    In many of these systems model
              Hamiltonians will continue to  be required to address their thermodynamic and
              spectral  properties.  There is however serious need to address the 
              complexities of the unit cell concomitantly with the  correlated electron
              behavior that arises in combined  itinerant/loccalized carrier systems from
              first principles.  The work proposed here will apply a combination of methods -
               parametrized tight-binding Hamiltonians, precise local spin  density
              calculations, `beyond LDA' innovations, and exact  diagonalization methods - to
              such complex compounds with the  expectation of simultaneously increasing
              understanding of  the observed behavior and extending the capabilities of 
              first principles methods.  %%%  This theoretical research will investigate
              complex materials  of current interest which display a competition between 
              electrons which are localized, i.e., fixed to atoms or  molecules, and ones
              which are not.  This competition, along  with other materials properties such
              as temperature,  pressure and concentration, can produce highly unusua l 
              effects which are of fundamental interest and which may lead  to technological
              applications.  ***
