Title       : Research in Random Matrices and Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9802122

Award Number: 9802122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Tracy tracy@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Random matrix theory has had remarkably wide applicability. 
The spacing
              distributions arising in random matrix theory have 
over the past few years
              been
shown to have deep applications in number theory; 
there are
              applications in numerical analysis and computational 
complexity where
              condition numbers of random matrices are important; 
random matrix theory has
              motivated developments
in the Riemann-Hilbert method which in turn finds
              applications 
to a variety of problems in integrable systems and inverse
              scattering. 
In physics the applications range from  many-body systems 
(both
              atomic and nuclear), to quantum chaos to quantum transport 
in mesoscopic
              systems.  Four areas for research are
specified. The first is related to the
              fact that in certain random 
matrix ensembles the measure describing the
              eigenvalue distribution 
is the Gibbs measure for charges interacting via a
              potential at inverse 
temperature beta equal to one, two or four
              (corresponding to orthogonal, 
unitary and symplectic ensembles,
              respectively). The limiting spacing 
distributions for these ensembles are now
              quite well understood but 
the methods are applicable to these values of beta
              only. The question 
for general beta, while quite difficult, is mathematically
              interesting 
and quite important in statistical physics. A new approach looks
              
promising and we intend to pursue it.  The second area of research
is the
              question of universality of the limiting distribution of the 
largest
              eigenvalue in matrix ensembles.  This would be analogous to 
the universality
              of the Gaussian distribution for sums of independent 
random variables, the
              famous Central Limit Theorem.  Thirdly, we propose 
to study the order
              statistics of the spacings between eigenvalues (which 
is different from the
              spacing distributions between consecutive 
eigenvalues mentioned above).  For
              example, what is the probability
distribution for the largest or smallest
              spacing?  There are known 
results for independent random variables but none
              yet for for random matrices,
whose eigenvalues are far from independent. 
              Finally, we expect to complete earlier
work on the asymptotics of solutions to
              the periodic Toda equations by 
determining the asymptotics on the so-called
              critical curves, where the 
asymptotics will take a very different form.  The
              theory of Wiener-Hopf operators
and operator determinants should play a
              decisive role in this investigation. 
No doubt the pursuit of these four
              questions will lead to others.


In the 1950s Eugene Wigner, in his now
              classic study of highly excited 
states of large nuclei of atoms, introduced a
              mathematical model
to describe the spacing between these states. 
This model
              goes under the name of random matrix theory.
Since Wigner's work in nuclear
              physics, it has been shown that the 
mathematics of random matrix theory has
              far-reaching applications to 
condensed matter physics, atomic physics and the
              new area of quantum chaos. 
In mathematics itself, random matrix theory has
              begun to appear in such 
diverse areas as number theory, combinatorics and
              numerical analysis. 
It is natural to ask why there is such wide applicability
              of random 
matrix theory.  In probability theory the bell-shaped curve is
              widely 
applicable because of a theorem which says roughly that when one
              
adds quantities which are random and independent,  the sum follows 
the bell
              shaped curve regardless of the distribution of the random
objects being added.
              The distribution functions of random matrix theory 
appear to have a similar
              universality for a class of problems where 
there is a high degree of
              dependence in the underlying processes. 
In the present project the
              mathematics of random matrix theory will be 
further developed with an eye
              kept on possible applications. 
In earlier work a general mathematical
              framework was developed that 
related the distribution functions of random
              matrix theory with 
solutions to certain equations which are said to be
              integrable. 
This mathematical theory gives exact formulas for distribution
              functions 
in random matrix theory and provides efficient numerical methods
              for 
their computation.  Computing these distribution functions will allow
              one
to compare them with experimental data.

