Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Correlation of Stress with Hydrogen Microstructure and
               Photodegradation in Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a9802430

Award Number: 9802430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daxing Han daxing@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802430
Han

This award provides funds to support a 3-month research visit by
              Dr. Daxing Han, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of North
              Carolina at Chapel Hill, for collaboration with Dr. Shoji Nitta, Department of
              Electrical Engineering, Gifu University, Japan.  These two collaborators will
              investigate the photo-induced changes on stress and its correlation with
              hydrogen microstructure as well as the density of electronic defect states in
              hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H).  This material, a-Si:H, is a leading
              candidate for thin film transistor arrays to drive large-area flat panel
              displays and for the development of clean energy from solar cells, as well as
              for large-area photo-sensor arrays.  It has been found that the conventional,
              non-hydrogen diluted glow discharge intrinsic material has very high stress. 
              This material shows photo-degradation, but its stabilized properties are still
              quite good for large area devices such as solar cells.  It has been unclear,
              however, whether the stress is correlated with the light-induced metastability,
              or whether there is a correlation of stress with hydrogen microstructures in
              a-Si:H.  Recent results indicate that significant improvement in stability of
              a-Si:H solar cells has been made by hydrogen dilution during the conventional
              glow discharge and by the hot filament assisted chemical vapor deposition
              technique.

The research group at Gifu University recently developed an
              innovative tool, the atomic-force-microscope, utilizing a bending-beam method,
              that is sensitive to weak stress such as the light-induced changes of the
              stress in a-Si:H deposited on thin quartz.  These more stable "new"
              amorphous-silicon materials and the innovative tool offer a unique opportunity
              to elucidate the correlation between the stress and hydrogen microstructure as
              well as the electronic properties in a-Si:H.  The proposed investigations will
              help provide an insight into the microstructure origin of the metastability and
              enhance the evidence for the correlation between structural and electronic
              states in this amorphous silicon network.  This project is supported under the
              Science Fellowship Program between the National Science Foundation and the
              Japan Foundation Center for Global Partnership.
***

