Title       : AMP: CSU Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a9802113

Award Number: 9802113
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfonso F. Ratcliffe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9802113  Ratcliffe    The California State Alliance for Minority
              Participation (CSU AMP) proposes to continue its  successful comprehensive,
              state-wide effort to increase significantly the number of minority students 
              who receive a baccalaureate degree in science, mathematics, engineering and
              technology (SMET).  By  the end of the new grant period (2003-2004), the CSU
              AMP, through its enhanced efforts in Phase  II, will again double the number of
              SMET degrees awarded to minority students, a figure that is  quadruple the
              benchmark established in Phase I (750).    In Phase I, we successfully focused
              on the critical transition points from high school-to-college and 
              lower-division to upper-division status.  In Phase II, we will enhance our
              program by increasing our  attention on community colleges.  Our specific
              objective is to dramatically improve SMET advising at  the community college
              level by developing CSU/Community College advising teams and by developing  and
              implementing strategies for  institutionalizing the advising approaches
              developed by these teams.   Twenty-four community colleges-with a total
              enrollment of more than 400,000 students-have been  identified as active
              participants in this activity.  In addition, we will create a large number of
              paid  academic year research opportunities to provide junior- and senior-year
              students on-campus  experiences that are directly related to their SMET goals. 
                An important goal of Phase II is state-wide institutional reform.  The CSU
              will join with the  University of California AMP program (CAMP), to take a
              leadership role in developing intersegmental  committees composed of faculty
              and administrators from the University of California, California State 
              University, and California Community College systems.  Examples of issues that
              these committees  will address are:  SMET advising, electronic transcript
              transfer from community colleges to CSUs  and UCs, and mechanisms for sharing
              effective teaching strategies.    The CSU AMP statewide Governi ng Board is
              composed of key leaders in K-12 education, higher  education, and the private
              sector.  It is chaired by the Chancellor of the CSU and oversees general 
              projects operation and provides direction and assistance in broadening support
              for the Alliance among  academic, industrial, and governmental sectors.    The
              Chancellor of the CSU committed $800,000 per year in support of student
              stipends associated  with the summerbridge, academic year workshop, and
              research opportunity components of Phase II.   This commitment combined with 
              the commitment of the 22 participating CSU and 25 Community  College of $2
              million/year, represents a 3-to-1 match of our requested support from the NSF.
