Title       : Submicron Scale Studies of Optical Anisotropy in Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9802634

Award Number: 9802634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia W. Hsu jhsua@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802634  Hsu    This project aims to use scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) for 
              the characterization of submicron inhomogeneities in several  materials
              systems, including heteroepitaxial quantum dots, Si3N4  membranes, GeSi buffer
              layers, SrRuO3, YBCO, and copolymer films.  The goal of the project is to gain
              detailed understanding of the  effect of defects and inhomogeneous strain on 
              electrical(transport) and optical anisotropies, potentially  providing valuable
              information to aid in the tailoring of  materials properties for particular
              functions/applications. The  approach is to map optical anisotropies with sub
              wavelength  resolution using NSOM to determine the role of strain and defects 
              in producing these anisotropies, and then to correlate these  strains with
              growth/synthesis parameters for development of  understanding of their origins
              and how to achieve desired strain  levels and patterns.  The program is
              collaborative involving  Lucent Technologies(GeSi), Cornell University(Si3N4
              membranes),  and Duke University (YBCO films), along with the University of 
              Virginia.  %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of  materials science having high potential technological relevance.  The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at  a fundamental
              level to new aspects of electronic/photonic  materials.  Experimental tools are
              now available to allow optical  observation of elementary surface processes and
              related phenomena  which when better understood allow advances in fundamental 
              science and technology. The basic knowledge and understanding  gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to improving  the performance and stability
              of advanced devices and circuits by  providing a fundamental understanding and
              a basis for designing  and producing improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  An  important feature of the program is the integration of
              research  and education through the training of students in a fundamentally 
              and technologically  significant area.  ***
