Title       : Electronic Structure of Pristine and Highly Doped Conducting Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9802300

Award Number: 9802300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miklos Kertesz kertesz@guvax.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802300  Kertesz  This is a theoretical research grant which is funded jointly 
              by the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry.  The  research focuses on
              two fundamental aspects of conducting  conjugated polymers.  First, theoretical
              guidelines will be  developed in order to answer the question: Is there a 
              minimum bandgap in this family of novel materials? Despite  worldwide efforts
              to attain a bandgap of 0.5eV or less in  conjugated polymers, very few examples
              of bandgaps exist  that are significantly below 1 eV.  While attaining a small 
              bandgap in a conducting polymer will probably lead to  interesting
              applications, this problem presents a profound  challenge in its own right
              which is of broad interest.  The  design of new materials with the desired
              small bandgap will  be possible only through systematic determination of the 
              factors influencing the structure and electronic properties  of electroactive
              polymers including the contributions of  heteroatoms and side groups, the
              effects of topology  (ladders, rings, etc), the influence of coplanarity and 
              other conformational degrees of freedom.    This leads to the second aspect. 
              The effects of interchain  interactions are notoriously difficult to treat 
              theoretically.  In this research a fundamental aspect of  this problem will be
              attacked in a novel fashion: the  experimental vibrational spectra will be used
              to obtain the  value of interring torsion that would be too sensitive to 
              calculate purely theoretically, but cannot be obtained from  experiment. 
              Accurate modeling of IR and Raman spectra,  including intensities, as a
              function of interring coupling,  will allow the determination of critical
              structural data,  such as interring bond distances and torsion.    Currently,
              there is a lack of a unified approach in the  theoretical modeling of the
              structure, vibrational spectra  and electronic structures of conducting
              polymers.  This  project will provide a versatile testing ground for the 
              critical evaluation of various non-local densit y functionals  and their
              applications to organic polymeric materials.  Applications include the main
              types of conjugated polymers.  %%%  This is a theoretical research grant which
              is funded jointly  by the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry.  The 
              research focuses on two fundamental aspects of conducting  conjugated polymers.
               First, theoretical guidelines will be  developed in order to answer the
              question: Is there a  minimum bandgap in this family of novel materials?  Also,
              the effects of interchain interactions are notoriously  difficult to treat
              theoretically.  Thus, second, in this  research a fundamental aspect of this
              problem will be  attacked in a novel fashion: the experimental vibrational 
              spectra will be used to obtain the value of interring  torsion that would be
              too sensitive to calculate purely  theoretically, but cannot be obtained from
              experiment.  The  results of this research should lead to a better 
              understanding of an important class of materials.  ***
