Title       : How Important are Regional Processes in Determining the Local Species Diversity
               of Marine Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9802343

Award Number: 9802343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43722              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron J. Etter ron.etter@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This study investigates the relationship between the number of species in
              biogeographic regions (spatial scale of 10' to 1W kms ) and the number
              occurring in local communities (spatial scale of < 1 to 10'm's) of sessile
              epifaunal invertebrates from 11 biogeographic regions comprising at least 33
              local sites. The main predictions to be tested are: if local communities are
              simply a sink from the biogeographic (regional) species pool, then local
              species richness will be positively and linearly related to regional species
              richness over a broad range of diversities. Alternatively, if ecological
              interactions limit the number of species coexisting in local habitats, then
              regressions of local richness on regional richness will level off or saturate.
              We propose to test these hypotheses by sampling the species richness of
              epifaunal communities in different biogeographic regions with quantitative
              photographic techniques. Local diversity will be quantified from 35 mm photo
              quadrats (0.25m ) taken at random locations along transects placed horizontally
              across subtidal rock walls at approximately 10 m depth. Quadrat photos will be
              analyzed until a plot of the cumulative number of species at each location
              asymptotes, which will comprise our measure of local species richness. Regional
              species richness will be estimated from published species lists and by
              consulting local experts at each site. Regression techniques are developed
              herein to test the predictions of regional influence vs. local saturation. In
              addition, four related questions will be investigated to increase our
              understanding of 1) the relationship between body (or colony) size and local
              species richness 2) the ability of larval dispersal mode to explain the degree
              of regional influence an local richness, 3) the relation between species
              density, local species richness and regional species richness and 4) how the
              nature of the relationship between local and regional richness varies among
              different taxa.  The preservation of biological diversity is one of the most
              pressing environmental issues of the present and next century. Accurately
              identifying the nature of threats to Earth's biotic diversity and designing and
              implementing sound conservation strategies requires an understanding of the
              forces that shape spatio temporal patterns of biodiversity. The results of the
              proposed research will greatly enhance our ability to critically assess the
              importance of regional processes in structuring shallow marine hard substrate
              communities.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
