Title       : Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with Applications to Nonlinear
               Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9802423

Award Number: 9802423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris L. Rozovsky rozovski@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Tartakovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Remigijus Mikulevicius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802423  Rozovskii   Each time an outfielder tracks and catches a fly ball, he
              intuitively solves  a   problem of target tracking. That problem has stymied
              engineers,  mathematicians, and   computer scientists for years. Two great 
              mathematicians, American, Norbert Wiener and   Russian, Andrey Kolmogorov, 
              first approached the problem during World War II. Rather   than catching fly 
              balls, Kolmogorov and Wiener were trying, in the days before   computers, to 
              develop mathematical algorithms that would help to track enemy aircraft   by 
              radar. The research started by Kolmogorov and Wiener has developed into a 
              thriving   area of applied mathematics known as Filtering Theory.  Filtering, 
              estimation of a signal   or an image from noisy data, is the basic component 
              of the data assimilation in target   tracking. It is of central importance in 
              navigation, image and signal processing, control   theory, automatic tracking 
              systems and other areas of engineering and science. This   research is a joint
              collaborative effort between researchers at the Institute of  Mathematics   and
              Informatics, Vilnius, Lithuania, and researchers at the University of Southern 
               California. The project is devoted to  applications of stochastic partial
              differential   equations to nonlinear filtering. The focus of the research is
              twofold: (1) Cauchy-  boundary  problems for parabolic partial differential
              equations arising in nonlinear  filtering   of stochastic processes evolving
              under some constraints; and (2)  nonlinear filtering with   distributed
              observation and applications to  tracking of low-observable targets in images. 
               The research will also consider the  numerical aspects of nonlinear filtering.
              It is expected   that relatively simple nonlinear filtering algorithms which
              are not too demanding in    computational and memory requirements for on-line
              implementation and yet  are nearly   optimal from a statistical viewpoint will
              be developed for a wide variety of applications.   The applications include air
              traffic  control,  human-computer interfaces based on motion-  capture, and
              advanced optical and  magnetic registration systems.
