Title       : Dynamics of Nonlinear Waves in Optical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9802920

Award Number: 9802920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Nathan Kutz kutz@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the study of nonlinear waves and their 
applications
              in nonlinear optical systems.  Using a combination 
of modern perturbation
              methods, rigorous analysis, and scientific 
computation, a wide variety of
              optical models will be explored 
and developed.  In conjunction with
              significant modeling 
efforts, the mathematical objectives will be to further
              develop and 
extend the methods utilized for quantifying and understanding the
              wave 
dynamics of nonlinear, dispersive partial differential equations
which
              arise in the study of optical soliton transmission, modelocked 
fiber lasers,
              and optical fiber network devices and applications.  
In particular, a variety
              of analytic methods will be pursued with the goal
of reducing the governing
              equations in Hamiltonian and integrable systems 
to more readily handled
              systems of partial differential equation that still 
retain the fundamental
              characteristics of the full governing equations.  
The resulting dynamics will
              be completely classified with particular attention 
given to parameter regimes
              for which periodic or chaotic dynamics may 
arise in the system.  Comparison
              between the reduced models, numerical 
simulations of the governing equations,
              and experiments will be performed 
whenever possible.  

The goal of this
              research is to identify, classify, and model physical systems 
of current
              interest in the optics community.  Particular interest will be given 
to
              applications of greatest interest to industrial partners at Bell 
Laboratories
              (Lucent Technologies), Tyco Submarine Systems International, 
the 3M
              corporation, Hughes Research Labs, and Honeywell Inc.  With the 
increased
              importance of optical fiber technology, fiber optic 
applications have
              broadened from mere high data-rate communications 
(soliton transmission) to
              inexpensive optical fiber laser sources, 
local area network design and
              applications, and all-optical network 
devices and components.  The proposal
              covers all areas of current research 
efforts in these areas.  In particular,
              the close working relations 
with industrial partners ensures timely research
              in the most important 
areas of application.  And with the readily available
              experimental 
studies provided by these industrial partners, accurate
              mathematical models 
can be constructed and developed to capture the
              fundamental aspects
of each optical system:  thus providing the potential for
              the mathematical 
models to have a significant impact on design and
              implementation of 
realistic and physically realizable systems.




