Title       : Algebraic Geometry and String Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9802456

Award Number: 9802456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Donagi donagi@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      Donagi  9802456      This  project  attempts  to  explore  some of the 
              deep and beautiful   interrelationships   discovered   and  developed recently
              between algebraic geometry and high energy physics. The PI will study  three 
              issues,  each  involving  a combination of ideas from algebraic  geometry, 
              algebraically integrable  systems, quantum field theory and string theory. Of
              these, the first is  concerned  with  applications  of an algebro-geometric 
              idea  to  a  string  duality  conjecture, suggesting   along   the  way  a  new
                description   of  an algebro-geometric   moduli  space;  the  second 
              explores  a construction  of  integrable  systems  which is motivated by
              stringy  ideas and which is expected  in turn to lead to new descriptions  for 
              certain   supersymmetric   quantum  field theories;  and  the  third 
              investigates  a  problem  within algebraic  geometry in light of recent 
              insights from string theory.   (1)  Principal  bundles  on  elliptic 
              fibrations,  spectral covers, and  Heterotic/F-theory  duality.  It is proposed
              to apply  and  adapt  previous  results  on  spectral   covers, obtained  in
              the  context  of  integrable  systems,  to  the description  of the moduli
              space of principal  bundles on an elliptically  fibered variety, and to the
              comparison of both the  moduli  spaces  and the  superpotentials  arising  from
              compactifications  of the Heterotic string with those coming from F-theory. (2)
               Calabi-Yau  vs.  Seiberg-Witten   integrable   systems. Ideas  from  string 
              theory  suggest  a   construction   and classification of Seiberg-Witten
              integrable systems in terms of  degenerations  of the Calabi-Yau  system 
              constructed by Donagi and Markman.  It is  hoped  that  this  in  turn  will 
              allow  the construction of the missing SW systems,  including  those of the
              theory with adjoint matter for an arbitrary gauge group. (3)   The   Geometric 
               Langlands   Conjecture.  A   partial construction due to the PI, based on
              "classical"  integrable systems,  will be  compared in detail to another, 
              based on a quantized  analogue,  and the  possibility  will be explored that a
              certain  "stringy" system provides the correct common extension   of  both  
              constructions,   producing   all  the automorphic  sheaves  required  by the 
              geometric  Langlands conjecture.      This is research on the boundary of
              algebraic  geometry  and string  theory.  Algebraic  geometry  is one of  the 
              oldest parts  of  modern  mathematics,  but  one  which  has  had a
              revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century.  String theory  is the 
              newest  and most  exciting  candidate  for a physical  theory  unifying  the
              four  fundamental  forces of nature.  In  the  last  few  years,  the  two 
              fields have interacted  at great  depth and across a broad  frontier  of
              problems of common interest.  These interactions have led to some of the  most 
              exciting  recent  breakthroughs  in  both fields,  and hold  the  promise  of 
              leading  to a  physical "theory of everything"  as well as to an algebraic 
              geometry which fully incorporates quantum and stringy phenomena.
