Title       : Continuing Solar Neutrino Observations with the Homestake Chlorine Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9802863

Award Number: 9802863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Lande klande@pennsas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1295      PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1204,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 98-02863
Lande, Kenneth E.


This award provides support for the
              continued operation of the Homestake chlorine solar electron neutrino detector.
               This detector was the first detector to provide experimental evidence for
              nuclear fusion reaction in the solar core and simultaneously established that
              the observed solar electron neutrino flux is much smaller than that predicted
              by the standard solar model.  The result obtained by experiment is about 27%
              that predicted by the theory of stellar evolution.

In the light of this
              pioneering work, other groups around the world have built their own detectors,
              and all have confirmed this initial result.  The consequences have been of high
              significance.  Many now believe that these results can only be explained if the
              neutrino has mass.  Recent work at another solar neutrino detector in Japan
              seems to have provided the first evidence for massive neutrinos.  

The
              support provided in this award will phase out NSF support of the Homestake Mine
              experiment.  This experiment is going to be superceded by other experiments
              currently under construction in Italy and in other countries.  Until such time
              as these experiments are in operation, it of great importance that the
              measurements at Homestake continue.

This project is being jointly supported
              by the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.  DOE will be
              providing partial support of the first year of operational costs.  NSF will
              provide the costs of equipment and the remaining costs for operations of the
              first year.  The final two years of support of operations will be provided by
              NSF.  NSF support is provided through participation by the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences, the Division of Physics, and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.



