Title       : Big Sky Conference on Discrete Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9802078

Award Number: 9802078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer McNulty mcnulty@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erin R. Spicer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evan B. Wantland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin J. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Mark Kayll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        9802078  McNulty    This award provides support for the Big Sky
              Conferences on Discrete Mathematics. This is a series of three conferences to
              be held at the University of Montana. The goals of the Big Sky  are  (1) to
              bring together researchers from the geographical area with interests in
              discrete mathematics in order for them to meet, share research interests, and
              present recent results, and (2) to provide an opportunity for students,
              teachers, and other mathematicians in the region to learn more about
              contemporary mathematics. The conference will begin with a keynote address by a
              prominent mathematician that will be aimed at a general audience. During the
              conference, there will be an invited lecture from a successful researcher in
              discrete mathematics as well as contributed talks by regional participants. In
              addition, there will be special activities organized for undergraduate students
              giving them the opportunity to interact with active researchers.      This
              conference is in the general area of combinatorics. One of the goals of
              combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
              of objects can be arranged or effectively enumerated. The behavior of discrete
              systems is  extremely important to modern communications. For example, the
              design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the
              design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects,
              and this makes use of combinatorial research.
