Title       : Acquisition of a New Mossbauer Spectrometer and Associated Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1998      
File        : a9802376

Award Number: 9802376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Long glong@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oran A. Pringle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802376
Long
This award provides partial support for instrumentation for the
              Mossbauer-effect laboratory at the University of Missouri-Rolla.  The
              instrumentation to be acquired can be divided into three parts, a Mossbauer
              spectrometer, a liquid helium cryostat, and a mechanical refrigerator for work
              down to 15 K, and will be used for materials research and education of
              students.

Over the past several years, through NSF funded research,
              significant progress has been made in understanding the strutural, electronic,
              and magnetic properties of the nitrided R2Fe17 compounds, compounds with
              potential as hard magnetic materials.  As a part of this work, a model has been
              developed for the analysis of the Mossbauer spectra of both R2Fe17 and R2Fe17Nx
              compounds, a model which is based on both the iron near-neighbor environment
              and the Wigner-Seitz cell volume of the individual crystallographic sites in
              these materials.  The influence of a tertiary atom on the electronic and
              magnetic properties of the R2Fe17 compounds has also been studied.  In these
              materials the tertiary atom has resulted in a dramatic increase in the Curie
              temperature and the room temperature magnetic moments.  Both these increases
              are important in developing new permanent magnetic materials.

The long-range
              goal of this research is to intercorrelate, for a variety of materials, the
              microscopic electronic and magnetic properties of specific iron sites which
              have well-defined Wigner-Seitz cell volumes, near-neighbor environments, and
              Mossbauer spectral hyperfine parameters.  This requires a careful, consistent
              analysis of complex well-resolved Mossbauer spectra, a capability which we have
              demonstrated in our work on the R2Fe14B and R2Fe17 compounds.  As this work is
              extended to the new systems, it is anticipated that useful correlations between
              the different iron sites in different series of compounds will be developed,
              correlations which will prove invaluable in understanding both current and
              future iron-containing hard magnetic materials.

In addition to work on
              intermetallic compounds, the new Mossbauer spectrometer will also be used for
              studies in several other fields.  These studies include detailed investigation
              of the lattice dynamic properties of a series of filled skutterudites,
              CeFe4-xCoxSb12, materials with very promising thermoelectric properties.  Other
              work will deal with organoiron complexes and will investigate systems with
              variable rates of electron transfer and with ferrocene-containing thermotropic
              liquid crystals.  Other future work will deal with extremely fine particle iron
              oxyhydroxides, materials that are important in new drug delivery systems. 
              Initial work has indicated that these compounds are, as expected,
              superparamagnetic with blocking temperatures which are very sensitive to the
              methods of preparation of the materials.  The Mossbauer effect will be used to
              determine the specific blocking temperatures and/or the range of blocking
              temperatures associated with the different preparations, a result that is
              expected to be related to the efficacy of the drug delivery.  Many other
              projects dealing with iron oxides, geologic materials, coordination compounds,
              and metallurgical problems will ensure that the new spectrometer will receive
              intensive continued use into the foreseeable future.
%%%
***           

