Title       : Enumeration of Perfect Matching of Graphs with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9802390

Award Number: 9802390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihai A. Ciucu ciucu@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        Ciucu  9802390    This project is concerned with the enumeration of
              perfect matchings of certain special graphs that turn out to be closely related
              to several important problems in combinatorics (enumeration of spanning trees,
              plane partitions, alternating sign matrices), and also have strong connections
              with interesting questions in probability (rapidly mixing Markov chains)  and
              statistical physics (dimer models and vertex models). Specifically, based on
              the solution the PI found for an open spanning tree enumeration problem posed
              by Stanley, the PI intends to extend the ideas in his previous work on the
              factorization theorem for perfect matchings of symmetric graphs to obtain
              similar factorizations for characteristic polynomials of graphs and, as a
              consequence, for spanning trees. Furthemore, the  PI intends to use ideas from
              his work on the complementation theorem for perfect matchings to classify
              periodic weightings of the Aztec diamond that lead to nice enumeration
              formulas. This would give a unified perspective on several results of Elkies,
              Kuperberg, Larsen and Propp, B. Y. Yang, Stanley and the  PI. In addition to
              the core research program outlined above, the  PI intends to pursue three
              additional problems. First, the  PI will pursue extending comparison results of
              Diaconis and Saloff-Coste to non-reversible Markov chains. This would allow one
              to deduce the rapid mixing of the elementary move Markov chain on certain three
              dimensional ``lozenge'' tilings, considered by the  PI as an analog of the two
              dimensional situation studied by Luby, Randall and Sinclair. Second, the  PI
              will continue his investigations of the three dimensional dimer problem by
              considering, besides the simple cubic lattice, other lattices of comparable
              interest (e.g., the body-centered cubic lattice or the face-centered cubic
              lattice), as well as some other problems likely to be suitable for such an
              analysis (e.g., three-colorings of the cubic lattice). And third, the  PI
              intends to extend his joint work w ith C. Krattenthaler on enumeration of
              lozenge tilings of certain regions of the triangular lattice to more general
              (possibly weighted) regions relevant to plane partition enumeration.       
              This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
              Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
              of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
              important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
              such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
              computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
              combinatorial research.
