Title       : Complex Hyperbolicity, Value Distribution and Non-Positive Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9802720

Award Number: 9802720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sai Kee Yeung   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is on the research of complex hyperbolicity and
              non-equidimensional value distribution theory, both of which study the
              behaviour of the image of an entire holomorphic map from the complex line to a
              complex manifold.  It is generally conjectured that such entire holomorphic
              curves in a negatively curved manifold or a variety of general type are greatly
              constrained.  In several recent joint papers with Yum-Tong Siu, the
              investigator has solved a conjecture of Lang about the value distribution of an
              entire holomorphic curve with respect to an ample divisor, and in dimension two
              essentially solved a conjecture of Kobayashi about hyperbolicity of the
              complement of a curve in the complex projective plane; research in this
              direction will be continued.  A long term goal is to understand the relation of
              complex hyperbolicity to diophantine approximation theory.  In the second part
              of the proposal, the author considers several aspects of manifolds with
              negative curvature.  In the past the author has studied several aspects of
              uniformization of such manifolds with different conditions attached.  He
              proposes to work on several directions related to his earlier research
              projects, including study of geometric and analytic aspects of such a manifold
              and their relations to its universal covering, fundamental group and Betti
              numbers.           In geometry, people study models which on one hand should be
              elegant and relatively simple to discribe and on the other hand should display
              rich geometric structures.  A well chosen negatively curved space happens to be
              a good candidate to study.  The study of curved or non-flat spaces is very
              natural from a physics point of view because as a result of general relativity,
              people realize that the model of the universe itself is not flat.  The area of
              the study of negatively curved geometric structures is very fertile in the
              sense that ideas from different branches of mathematics can be applied to
              produce beautiful results.  Most of the projects pro posed in this proposal
              concern the clarification and classification of such spaces.
