Title       : Computability Theory and Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9802619

Award Number: 9802619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95079              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert I. Soare soare@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project Soare will study computability theory, particularly relative
              computability (Turing reducibility) of one set from another.  The first
              objective is to study computability on the computably enumerable sets, and to
              relate their algebraic structure to the degree of information they encode and
              to the speed with which they can be enumerated with respect to some measure of
              computational complexity.  Here attention is focused on the computably
              enumerable sets because they are generated by an algorithm, and hence most
              easily approximated by a computable function.  The second objective is to study
              the relationship of computability to other mathematical objects, for example to
              models of Peano arithmetic, and to algebraic structures, such as Boolean
              algebras, and models of special theories like totally transcendental ones.  For
              algebraic structures, the general problem is to determine exactly what
              information can be coded into the isomorphism type of that structure.    The
              fundamental aim is to deepen our understanding of computability and its
              relation to structures in mathematics and computer science.  In the 1930's
              various definitions of computable function were proposed by Turing, Church,
              Kleene, Goedel, and others.  They were soon proved equivalent and they
              (particularly Turing's model) contributed during the war to the development of
              high speed digital computers.  These models can be restricted with respect to
              computing resources such as time and space and give rise to computational
              complexity, an important part of modern computer science.  Computability and
              algorithms now permeate many aspects of our lives.  Modern researchers in
              computability and complexity are heirs to the founders like Turing and Goedel
              in that they are trying to classify the computable content of modern
              mathematics.
