Title       : Statistical Physics and Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9802468

Award Number: 9802468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Huse huse@puhep1.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802468  Huse    This award involves research in condensed matter theory.  Huse
              plans to study:  critical points with quenched disorder, the Josephson  plasmon
              in layered superconductors, kinetics and phase  transitions in superconducting
              wire arrays, frustrated  magnets and hard sphere crystals.   The scaling
              properties of the distributions of quantities  at and near the critical points
              of systems with quenched  disorder will be investigated.  One focus is to
              determine  whether the very different scaling of the average and median 
              behavior that is seen in some one-dimensional models can  occur in two- or
              three-dimensional systems.  We will attempt  to develop a scaling theory for
              such systems, and will  investigate what aspects of the distributions can be
              seen by  different sorts of experiments.  The frequency and linewidth of the
              Josephson plasmon in  layered superconductors will be studied as a unique probe
              of  interlayer superconducting correlations, which vary strongly  with
              temperature and applied magnetic field.  The  inhomogeneous broadening of this
              mode by quenched disorder  and quasi-static thermal disorder in both the vortex
              liquid  and glass regimes of the phase diagram will be studied.  The conditions
              under which equilibrium can be achieved in  exotic superconducting phases of 
              Kagome lattice  superconducting wire arrays will be studied.  %%%  This award
              involves research at the cutting edge of  condensed matter theory. Huse will
              focus his study in three  areas: (1) phase transitions in disordered materials,
              (2)  charge oscillations in layered superconductors such as the  high
              temperature superconductors, and  (3) superconducting  phases in novel
              superconducting networks.  Studies in these  areas seek to resolve fundamental
              issues at the forefront of  condensed matter physics.  ***
