Title       : Research on Sieve Approximations to Non and Semiparametric Models, Hidden Markov
               Models and Comparison of Phylogenetic Tree Biologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9802960

Award Number: 9802960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bickel bickel@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS-9802261  PI: Peter Bickel  Institution:   Project:
              Research on sieve approximations to non and semiparametric      models, Hidden
              Markov models and comparison of phylogenetic tree      biologies.     
              Abstract:    A theoretical investigation of the "plug in" property in the
              context of  non and semiparametric models.  The intention of the investigators
              is   to characterize non and semiparametric models in which the outcomes of  
              appropriate fitting procedures can be safely plugged in for a broad   range of
              uses, and the study of model selection criteria when the loss   function
              reflects the goal of fitting some features of the data well   rather than a
              global fit.    This project includes:    *Further development of a theory for
              testing parametric or   semiparametric hypotheses in a semi or non parametric
              context.    *Further development of the theory of inference for Hidden Markov  
              Models.  The investigators propose extension to state space models.   
              *Development of new procedures and analysis of existing procedures for  
              estimating fixed effects and prediction of random effects using  
              semiparametric models for longitudinal and/or "pharmacokinetic" data.   
              *Further development of the theory and practice of selecting m in the  m out of
              n bootstrap     *An examination of the sensitivity to choice of stochastic
              model in the  construction of phylogenetic trees    Tests and diagnostics for
              semiparametric models such as those the   investigators intend to continue to
              develop are useful in a number of   areas.  For instance, the Black Scholes
              option pricing formula is   widely used in finance.  One of the methods the
              investigators have  already developed show the invalidity of the formula for
              large data   set and points to plausible more realistic models.  Phylogenetic
              trees  are used not only for representing evolutionary relationships among 
              species of animals and plants but also, as in the case we are g oing  to study,
              important families of proteins.  Studying the types of  models that lead to
              plausible evolution trees should also lead to  pattern recognition algorithms
              which will be useful in classifying  protein families and hence to relating new
              proteins to families whose  properties are known.  This is a major activity in
              the search for new  bioactive compounds in biotechnology.
