Title       : Gromov Invariants and Enumerative Invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9802459

Award Number: 9802459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz S. Mrowka  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal: DMS 9802459  Principal Investigators:  Tomasz Mrowka and
              Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel    The first project is a continuation of joint work with
              T. Parker on gluing   formulas for the Gromov invariants of symplectic connect
              sums.  We have   been working on a degeneration formula that describes what
              happens to   holomorphic curves as one `pinches the neck' and explains how to
              compute   the Gromov invariants of the symplectic connect sum from the limiting
                curves.  This degeneration formula has several applications that we would  
              like to explore.  First, one can construct new `exotic' symplectic   manifolds
              by cut-and-paste techniques and compute their Gromov invariants   by the
              degeneration formula.  This gives a practical technique for probing   how much
              more complicated the symplectic classification of manifolds is   compared to
              the smooth classification.  Secondly, the degeneration formula   leads to
              recursive formulas for the Gromov invariants; these could provide   answers to
              several old unsolved problems in enumerative algebraic geometry.    The final
              project suggests a method for extending Gromov-type invariants to  
              `nongeneric' situations.  This would provide more refined information about  
              the symplectic manifold.      Most of the problems in enumerative algebraic
              geometry are more than a   hundred years old.  The questions are easy to ask,
              but the progress in   solving them using classical methods has been quite slow.
               Recently, the   same kind of questions arised in two dimensional topological
              quantuum field   theories from high energy physics.  Inspired by these
              theories, new methods   lead in the past couple of years to amazing progress in
              the field.  The   proposal explores two new ways of approaching these old
              problems that would   further clarify the structure of the two dimensional
              topological quantuum   field theories.
