Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray CCD Detector System for Materials Research at Advanced
               Photon Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9802643

Award Number: 9802643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haydn Chen h-chen2@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tai C. Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hawoong Hong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802643
Chen
This award provides partial support for the acquisition of an
              analytical x-ray CCD system, complete with a 2K x 2K pixel CCD camera, a 3-axis
              goniometer, a computer workstation and a comprehensive software package for
              data acquisition and crystal structure determination.  This CCD system will be
              used at the UNICAT undulator beam line at the Advanced Photon Source (APS),
              Argonne National Laboratory, as a common facility available to both UNICAT
              members and Independent Investigators.  Training for the use of this CCD system
              will be carried out by UNICAT scientific staff via a sector-specific training
              program already in existence as a part of the UNICAT management plan that was
              approved by APS.

UNICAT is a University-National Laboratory-Industry
              Collaborative Access Team including the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), the National
              Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the UOP Research and
              Development.  The UNICAT consortium is presently funded to construct one
              sector, i.e. two beamlines, at the Advanced Photon Source.  The Bending Magnet
              beamline will have experimental capablilities for x-ray adsorption
              spectroscopy, for x-ray topography imaging and for general purpose x-ray
              diffraction.  The UNICAT Insertion Device beamline will have two experimental
              stations: a high-resolution x-ray diffractometer and a dedicated
              surface/interface diffractometer.  The UNICAT Insertionn Device beamline and
              its two experimental stations have been in preliminary commissioning operation
              since August 1997; the anticipated date for a full operation is December
              1998.

The x-ray CCD system will be principally utilized by UIUC and UOP
              scientists to carry out scientific projects in three main areas: (1)
              microcrystal diffraction for structure determination, (2) small-angle x-ray
              scattering, and (3) time-resolved surface/interface scattering.  For
              microcrystal diffraction, projects encompass structure determination from
              micron-sized single crystals such as zeolites and single fiber filaments. 
              Small-angle x-ray scattering portion of the work includes transmission and
              grazing-incidence geometry to study problems such as crystallization kinetics
              measurements of zeolites from solutions, 2-dimensional epitaxial nucleation and
              growth mechanism based on self-affine fractal geometry and scaling concept of
              MOCVD-derived oxide thin films, etc.  The third research area is in
              time-resolved surface/interface scattering for which kinetic roughening,
              interface strain and growth, and evolution of surface/thin film morphology will
              be investigated using surface-sensitive scattering techniques.  All proposed
              scientific programs represent topics of scientific and technological challenges
              which can greatly benefit from the use of a 2-d CCD detector in conjunction
              with the high-brilliance synchrotron radiation produced by the undulator
              insertion devices of the third-generation source at APS.
%%%
***

