Title       : Mathematical Studies of Short-Ranged Spin Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9802153

Award Number: 9802153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72784              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Stein dls@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work that is supported under this grant addresses the mathematical
              
foundations of the theory of disordered magnets known as spin
              glasses.
Although there exist proposed solutions of idealized 
(and
              unrealistic) spin glass models, we are interested 
in answering fundamental
              statistical mechanical 
questions that bear on the behavior of real laboratory
              spin glasses.  
These questions, many of which remain controversial
              despite
two decades of intensive study, include the nature of ordering in
              
the spin glass phase, the number of ground states (and low-temperature pure
              phases), 
the nature of the spin glass metastate (an ensemble of thermodynamic
              
phases), understanding anomalous dynamical behavior such as slow relaxation
              and 
aging, and proving the presence or absence of a phase transition.  
The
              methods used and concepts introduced should be 
relevant not only for spin
              glasses but should also be applicable 
to other disordered systems, many of
              which remain poorly understood.

Our deep physical and mathematical
              understanding of ordered systems in 
the solid and liquid state - for example,
              crystals, ferromagnets, 
superconductors, liquid crystals, and many others -
              has been of 
fundamental scientific and technological importance throughout
              the second 
half of this century.  However, there exist many systems, both
              familiar 
and unfamiliar in everyday use, in which randomness or disorder
              plays
a key role, and in which our mathematical and physical understanding
              remains 
comparatively primitive.  One familiar example is ordinary window
              glass, 
where the atoms or molecules are "stuck" in random locations (as
              opposed to a 
regular crystalline array as would be found, for example, in
              ice).  Spin glasses 
are disordered magnetic systems which are thought to be
              prototypes for
this kind of macroscopic "frozen-in" disorder, and they may be
              more amenable 
to mathematical analysis than other materials in this class. 
              Nevertheless, 
little fundamental progress has been made even here.  This work
              is aimed at 
resolving basic mathematical and physical issues
              concerning
these materials and at providing a general theoretical approach for
              
a wide variety of disordered systems.






