Title       : Optimal Judgment Sample Sizes for Distribution-Free Ranked -Set Sampling
               Procedures, Effects of Imperfect Judgment Rankings, & Extensions of K-Sample
               and Correlation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9802358

Award Number: 9802358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Wolfe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802358  Douglas A. Wolfe    Ranked-set sampling is an approach to collecting
              data that has been shown to lead to substantial improvement over simple random
              sampling in the properties of statistical inference procedures for both the
              one-and two-sample settings.  The development of nonparametric ranked-set
              sample procedures has been relatively recent in the literature and there is
              much yet to be completed.  Such development is vital, however, since often the
              type of data for which measurement is difficult is also likely to be data which
              have a distribution that is not Gaussian.  This research involves three major
              thrusts.  First, the investigators study the all-important optimal choice of
              ranked-set judgment sample size, concentrating not only on the relative costs
              of measurements versus judgment orderings but also on the effect of imperfect
              judgment rankings on the entire process.  In most cases, the optimization
              criterion is taken to be the Pitman asymptotic relative efficiency of the
              associated procedures.  A second part of this research deals with the dual
              question of which order statistics should be measured in the ranked-set samples
              and  then how best to differentially weight those that are measured.  This
              portion of the study also investigates the potential gains from collecting more
              than a single order statistic from each judgment sample.  Finally, the
              investigators extend nonparametric ranked-set sample procedures to other
              statistical problems, such as development of ranked-set sample analogs to the
              k-sample Kruskal-Wallis test and the Spearman and Kendall correlation
              procedures.    In situations where measurements are costly and/or difficult to
              obtain but ranking of the potential sample data is relatively easy and
              accurate, the use of statistical methods based on a ranked-set sampling
              approach can lead to substantial improvement over analogous methods associated
              with more standard simple random sampling schemes.  Ranked-set sampling
              utilizes information gained without formal measurement  to provide more
              structure in the eventual measured data than is available in a corresponding
              simple random sample of the same size.  This enables investigators to obtain
              the same information from fewer observations at less cost.  This is
              particularly important in areas such as ecological and environmental studies
              where assessment of collected samples can be quite expensive or in medical
              studies where utilizing the additional judgment ranking in ranked-set sampling
              leads to fewer subjects involved in the development and testing of new
              medications or procedures prior to FDA approval.  There is also tremendous
              potential for this sampling approach in economic predictions and auditing
              procedures, where the information of interest is often very time-consuming to
              collect and ranked-set sampling can help guide the search for those judgment
              ordered observations (fewer of them) which are best to quantify.
