Title       : Dye Probe Studies of Spin Coating of Sol-Gel Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9802334

Award Number: 9802334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dunbar P. Birnie birnie@AML.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802334  Birnie    Sol-gel chemistry is a popular technique for making new
              materials  and high technology coatings of a wide variety of types.  Because 
              of the ever-expanding importance of sol-gel synthesis, and  because of the need
              to make high quality coatings with a high-  throughput industrial procedure, it
              is important to understand  the fundamentals of spin coating when performed
              using sol-gel  solutions.  This project will monitor and understand, in real 
              time, the coating formation and drying of sol-gel solutions  during spin
              coating.  Dye molecules will be incorporated into the  sol-gel solutions to
              help sense the chemical and physical changes  taking place during spin coating.
               Two fundamental processes are  critical in controlling coating formation
              during spin coating in  general: 1) viscous flow and 2) evaporation.  Early
              stages are  dominated by the viscous behavior, i.e. relatively smooth fluid 
              flow radially outward on the substrate.  As the fluid layer gets  thinner the
              outward flow rate reduces until the second process  (evaporation) takes over as
              the dominant process.  This  transition corresponds to a "setting" point for
              coating  formation.  When spin coating is performed on sol-gel solutions  then
              extra complexities arise including accelerated chemical  reaction caused by
              solvent evaporation and viscosity changes  being driven by the hydrolysis and
              condensation reactions in  solution.  Thus, sol-gel solutions may be
              particularly sensitive  to the conditions that are imposed by the spin coating
              process.  Carefully designed optical measurements will be carried out which 
              would allow in-depth study of the dynamical and chemical effects  that are
              occurring in sol-gel solutions during spin coating.  Small concentrations of
              dye molecules would be incorporated into  the sol-gel solutions for use as
              structure/chemistry probes  during the spinning process.  The primary focus
              will be on  molecules that change their absorption spectra depending on the 
              characteristics of the local envir onment.  Therefore, equipment  would be set
              up to allow absorption characteristics to be  measured during spin coating
              processing.  In addition, laser  interferometry would be used to dynamically
              monitor the rapid  fluid thinning process occurring during spinning.  %%%  It
              is anticipated that increased understanding of this important  technological
              process would lead to new methods for improving the  quality of spin coated
              sol-gel layers, thus allowing the  production of materials with higher
              reliability and increased  manufacturing yield.  For example, since the
              evaporation of the  most volatile solution component will dominate during
              coating  formation, then sol-gel scientists would learn to focus  particularly
              close attention to the chemical effects caused by  early and rapid removal of
              this component, especially with  respect to premature gelation.  And
              conversely, since the  chemical condensation reactions can cause profound
              viscosity  changes, then coating developers would seek to understand more 
              about the rheological characteristics of their sol-gel solutions,  even before
              coating quality issues arise.  ***
