Title       : Disorder and Correlation Effects Examined Through Electron Drag Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9802109

Award Number: 9802109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Gramila   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                         9802109  Gramila    This condensed matter physics project
              investigates the influences  of disorder and correlation effects on electron
              systems. The  experiments depend on measurement of electron drag, which 
              directly determines electron-electron scattering rates between  closely spaced
              but electrically isolated two-dimensional (2D)  gases. The experiments will
              investigate the influence of atomic  disorder in the 2D planes on the
              electrical transport, and will  probe exchange and correlation effects via
              determination of the  spin polarization of 2D electrons subject to an in-plane
              magnetic  field. The research is unique in providing direct measurements of 
              parameters that can be directly compared with important  theoretical
              predictions for the behavior of electrons in low-  symmetry environments. The
              work will deepen our understanding of  disorder and correlation effects that
              are of fundamental  importance in the microelectronics and magnetism
              industries. The  work provides a valuable arena for training graduate students
              in  both advanced technology and fundamental physics.  %%%  This condensed
              matter physics project investigates the influences  of disorder and correlation
              effects on electron systems. The  experiments depend on measurement of electron
              drag, which  directly determines electron-electron scattering rates between 
              closely spaced but electrically isolated two-dimensional (2D)  gases. The
              experiments will investigate the influence of atomic  disorder in the 2D planes
              on the electrical transport, and will  probe exchange and correlation effects
              via determination of the  spin polarization of 2D electron subject to an
              in-plane magnetic  field. The research is unique in providing direct
              measurements of  parameters that can be directly compared with important 
              theoretical predictions for the behavior of electrons in low-  symmetry
              environments. The work will deepen our understanding of  disorder and
              correlation effects that are of fundamental  importance in the microelectronics
              a nd magnetism industries. The  work provides a valuable arena for training
              graduate students in  both advanced technology and fundamental physics.  ***
