Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Reaction Kinetics and Mechanisms for the Reduction of a
               Copper Oxide Surface with H Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9802702

Award Number: 9802702
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miles J. Weida   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802702  Weida    This award provides funds to support a 24-month research visit
              by  Dr.  Miles J. Weida, postdoctoral fellow, Indiana University, for 
              collaboration  with Dr. Hrvoje Petek, Senior Research  Scientist,  Hitachi 
              Advanced Research Laboratory, Hatoyama, Saitama,  Japan.  These collaborators
              will perform a detailed study of the reaction  kinetics  and  mechanisms for
              the reduction  of  a  copper  oxide  surface by hydrogen atoms.  Copper can be
              viewed as a good  model  for  more complicated transition metals.  This
              suggests that  the  oxygen-hydrogen  reaction on copper, as a  model  system, 
              should  provide  new  insight into heterogeneous catalysis on  transition 
              metals.    Although  the  study  of catalytically useful  transition  metals 
              stems  in  part  from their practical importance,  the  study  of  hydrogen 
              and  oxygen on copper surfaces has  several  advantages  which make it a system
              of fundamental interest.  One advantage is  the  fact  that  the  adsorbate
              structures  of  both  oxygen  and  hydrogen  on  copper have been extensively
              characterized.   Given  the  level  of  understanding of the  adsorption  of 
              oxygen  and  hydrogen  on  copper surfaces, it seems natural to  extend  these 
              studies  to the interaction of these species on copper  surfaces.  This 
              research may shed light on such topics of current  interest  as  self 
              organization of adsorbates on surfaces  and  adsorbate-  induced  metal  atom
              transport in heterogeneous catalysis.   This  project is supported under the
              Science Fellowship Program between  the  National Science Foundation and the
              Japan Foundation  Center  for Global Partnership.  ***
