Title       : RUI: Resonance Rings Bars: Keys to Galaxy Disk/Halo Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9802918

Award Number: 9802918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86343              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tarsh Freeman tfreeman@bscc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene G. Byrd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bevill State CC
	      Box 800
	      Sumiton, AL  351480800    /   -

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1206,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-9802918  Freeman    About two-thirds of  spiral galaxies are observed to be
              barred spirals.  One type of ring, the inner resonance ring, appears in 76% of
              SBabSBc type galaxies.   Thus rings are important in at least half of all
              spiral galaxies.   Analytic studies and computer simulations of these rings
              will be carried out to see what they can also tell us about the pattern speeds
              of the bars and the disk/halo properties of galaxies.  The latter are relevant
              to the dark matter problem.  An analytic formulation permits determination of
              properties of resonance ring galaxies using basic observations of the rotation
              curve and an image of the galaxy.  The disk gas clouds and stars' motion is
              reduced to a damped harmonic oscillation about a circular orbit.  Rings occur
              near resonances of this oscillation with turning bars.  Matching the analytic
              model to the morphology of the rings in a galaxy gives the galaxy's
              inclination, line of nodes, bar strength and pattern speed.  Velocity data can
              also be used for more inclined galaxies.   A variety of resonance ring galaxies
              will be modeled for which the data is available.  Besides pattern speed and bar
              strength, we propose to use the matches to study whether four-fold resonances
              are important for outer  as well as inner rings.    Resonance rings appear to
              be a very good star formation laboratory.  Star formation is promoted in rings
              when gas clouds are crowded near the end of the bar.  As these stars orbit away
              from the bar, they age and their colors change.  In contrast to difficulties in
              observing this effect across spiral arms, the change in color with increasing
              angle away from the bar is clear in the galaxy NGC 3081.   Methods will be
              developed by using analytic theory and simulations to determine bar pattern
              speeds relative to the rotation curve.  The change in color index with angle
              can thus be calibrated in years.  This relation should be an alternative to and
              a test of theoretical color models versus ages in years of star formation
              complexes.   These age determinations are important for star formation studies
              in other galaxies.  ***
