Title       : Defect Characterization and Engineering in Semi-Insulating II-VI Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9802712

Award Number: 9802712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelvin G. Lynn kgl@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Csaba Szeles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9802712  Lynn    This University/Industry collaborative GOALI project aims for
               greater understanding of the nature and properties of the defects  governing
              the electrical and carrier trapping properties of semi-  insulating(SI) CdZnTe.
              The approach involves systematic study of  lattice defects in high-purity SI
              CdZnTe grown from melt by  Bridgman techniques in order to understand their
              role in  electrical compensation and carrier trapping. Doping and growth 
              experiments with thermally stimulated and positron annihilation  spectroscopies
              will be combined to identify defects and determine  their trapping parameters.
              The incorporation of selected  impurities and the formation of defects as a
              function of growth  conditions will be studied to determine key thermodynamic 
              parameters controlling defect formation and incorporation. The  concentration
              of impurities will be measured by glow-discharge  mass spectroscopy and
              resonance-ionization enhanced mass  spectroscopy and correlated with thermal
              spectroscopies and  positron annihilation. Infrared microscopy and absorption
              will be  used to study the formation of Cd and Te precipitates and their 
              effect on the incorporation of impurities and the formation of  defect
              complexes. Annealing experiments will be conducted to shed  study diffusion
              properties of dominant defects and provide a  better understanding of defect
              diffusion and formation during  cooling of the crystals following
              solidification. The project is  co-supported by the DMR Electronic Materials
              Program and the MPS  OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).  %%%  Basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science  having technological
              relevance are addressed by this project. The  basic knowledge and understanding
              gained from the research is  expected to contribute to improving the
              performance and stability  of advanced devices by providing a fundamental
              understanding and  a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and 
              materials combinations.  An important feature  of the program is  the
              integration of research and education by providing an  important educational
              opportunity through the GOALI aspect of the  project for academic personnel to
              experience both academic and  industrial research approaches and environments. 
              ***
