Title       : SGER: Microbial Genomes Compared by a Back-propagating Neural Network and
               Cluster Analysis of Tetranucleotide Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2000     
File        : a9802342

Award Number: 9802342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Noble   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1107,9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genome sequences of a bacterial species are relatively similar in terms of their
              tetranucleotide frequencies owing to biases associated with many processes,
              such as DNA replication and repair systems, DNA restriction enzyme systems, and
              coding preferences, as well as physical constraints such as dinucleotide
              stacking energies, curvature and superhelicity of DNA.  However, some regions
              of genomes, such as those encoding ribosomal RNA and ribosomal proteins, and
              those bearing foreign DNA, are notably different in their tetranucleotide
              frequencies, variances of the tetranucleotide frequencies, and G+C content.  In
              comparing the heterogeneity of genome sequences, it is often difficult to
              determine if subtle fluctuations of tetranucleotide frequencies in different
              regions of a genome are due to natural variation within the genome, or if they
              are due to the mechanisms of genetic change such as deletions, insertions,
              transpositions, inversions, duplications and recombinations of genetic
              material.  Heterogeneity among and within genomes will be examined by comparing
              the tetranucleotide frequencies of sections (3000 bp) of microbial genomes.
              Methods have been developed for identifying variable and conserved regions of
              microbial genomes by constructing composite portraits using tetranucleotide
              frequencies of sections of genomic DNA and by computing the variance of
              tetranucleotide frequencies.  A novel approach for analyzing complex, nonlinear
              data by using neural computing in concert with cluster analyses has been
              developed by the principal investigator.  The composition of microbial genomes
              is being explored by training a back-propagating neural network (NN) to
              recognize the tetranucleotide frequencies of sections of genome DNA.  This is
              being accomplished by converting tetranucleotide frequency data to binary
              format for transmission to a NN, and using the NN to relate these data to the
              G+C content and/or the variance of tetranucleotide frequencies for each genome
              section.  Once trained, data from the NN will be used to compare sections of
              microbial genomes.  These analyses will make it possible to determine the true
              relatedness of regions of genomes which would otherwise appear to be similar
              due to biases associated with DNA replication and repair systems, DNA
              restriction/modification enzyme systems, and coding preferences.  Dendrograms
              will be produced by using Euclidean distance and average and Ward's linkage
              methods.  The validity of the cluster analysis will be assessed by determining
              the robustness of cluster memberships using different linkage methods and
              independently trained NN data.  This information is necessary for understanding
              how microbial genomes evolve,  since bacteria maintain relative constancy in
              the tetranucleotides of their genomes while at the same time changing their
              genetic composition.  
