Title       : Acquisition of State-of-the-Art Size Exclusion Chromatography/Multi-Angle Laser
               Light Scattering (SEC/MALLS) Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9802853

Award Number: 9802853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58660              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy W. Mays jmays@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802853  Mays  This award is for the purchase of a state-of-the-art size 
              exclusion chromatography (SEC) instrument for use in  characterizing polymers
              that are synthesized at the  University of Alabama at Birmingham.  To maximize
              the  utility of this instrument for accurately and rapidly  characterizing a
              wide range of synthetic materials, we will  equip the instrument with superior
              flow rate stability and  with multiple detectors:  refractive index,
              ultraviolet  (photodiode array), and multi-angle laser light scattering 
              (MALLS) detectors.  The dual concentration detectors are  useful in examining
              compositional variations in many  copolymers, while the MALLS detector allows
              determination of  absolute molecular weights without reliance on calibration 
              curves (standards of the same type as the polymer being  analyzed are often not
              available).  SEC/MALLS also allows  conformational characteristics of polymers
              to be determined.  Use of the MALLS detector along with the differential 
              viscometer that is already available in our laboratory will  allow for rapid
              detection and quantification of long chain  branching in polymers.  The
              combination of these various  detectors is especially useful in our work with
              graft  copolymers, which combine copolymer character with  branching.  %%% 
              This project supports equipment used in the development of  advanced polymeric
              materials leading to better paints,  improved ceramics, lighter faster
              electronics, and low cost  biodegradable plastics from renewable resources.  It
              will  involve the integration of education and research through  the
              participation and training of students, including  students from under
              represented groups through participation  in the NSF Alliance for Minority
              Participation  Program.  *  *  *
