Title       : Engineering Foundation Conference: "Realizing the New Paradigm for Engineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9802123

Award Number: 9802123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest T. Smerdon                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Ernst   (Principal Investigator current)
              Irene C. Peden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802123  Ernst    The conference will explore what an individual institution
              does to change from   its present approach to engineering education to the new
              engineering education.    One that seeks to develop students as emerging
              professionals with the   motivation, capability, and knowledge base for
              life-long learning; one that   helps students see the whole world and sense the
              coupling among seemingly   disparate fields; one that incorporates a diversity
              of backgrounds and   approaches; and one that enhances student capability to
              build connections   between the world of learning and the world beyond.    The
              conference will, of necessity, include a brief discussion of how one  
              describes, in broad terms, the New Engineering Education.  Most of the  
              conference sessions will examine what changes the engineering school makes to  
              realize the new paradigm for engineering education:    * How does a college
              determine its own version of the new paradigm?  * What are some enabling steps
              for a college in the process of change?  * Who are the key players and what
              might the critical mass of such a group be?  * ABE Engineering Criteria 2000:
              Do the new criteria help or hinder change?  * How can the college use
              assessment processes to guide the change process as   well as to determine how
              well the steps taken have achieved the results   expected?  * What lessons can
              we learn from institutions who have made these kinds of   changes, the paradigm
              shifters?    An important part of the conference will be presentations by those
              involved as   paradigm shifters in engineering education to share what they
              did/how they did   it as well as what they should have done and how they should
              have done it.
