Title       : Problems in Low-Dimensional Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a9802945

Award Number: 9802945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235587             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl Cooper cooper@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darren Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hessam H. Tehrani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin G. Scharlemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802945  Cooper       Cooper will be working in collaboration with Kerckhoff
              (Stanford)  and Hodgson (Melbourne) on a proof of the Orbifold Theorem of
              Thurston  as well as connections between combinatorial group theory and
              Kleinian  groups.  Long's projects include the continuation of joint work with 
              Cooper on results concerning incompressible immersed surfaces in  3-manifolds
              and on braid group actions on buildings.  In addition, he  plans to study the
              questions that arise from trying to understand  which number fields can be
              trace fields for finite volume manifolds.  Scharlemann's main interest now
              centers on the structure of Heegaard  splittings of 3-manifolds, particularly
              their characterization in the  presence of geometric or other large-scale
              structures, and with  problems of uniqueness and stabilization.       The
              orbifold theorem describes the ``shape'' of certain ``spaces.''  An analogy is
              the shape of crystals studied in chemistry.  Besides the  specific chemical
              properties, there are certain geometric properties  that control much of the
              crystal's properties.  The field of  crystallography uses the mathematical
              theory developed by Bieberbach  at the turn of this century that describes the
              possible shapes for  crystals.  The orbifold theorem describes what crystals
              are possible in  non-Euclidean geometry.  As a result of Einstein's theory of
              general  relativity, we know that our universe has a non-Euclidean geometry, 
              but at the comparatively small scale of human existence, this geometry  is very
              nearly Euclidean.  The orbifold theorem is therefore not of  interest to
              chemists, but it may one day perhaps help shed light on the  large-scale
              structure of our particular universe.  ***
