Title       : Network of Neuronal Oscillators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a9802339

Award Number: 9802339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118034             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Terman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Terman  9802339       The investigator and his colleagues develop mathematical 
              tools for analyzing the population rhythms of biophysical models  for neuronal
              networks.  These models exhibit a rich structure of  oscillatory behavior.  The
              dynamics of even a single cell can be  quite complicated; it may, for example,
              fire either periodic  spikes or bursts of action potentials that are followed
              by a  silent phase of near quiescent behavior.  Examples of population  rhythms
              include synchronous behavior, in which every cell in the  network fires at the
              same time, and clustering, in which the  entire population of cells breaks up
              into groups; cells within a  single group fire synchronously and different
              groups are  desynchronized from each other.  Activity may propagate through 
              the network in a wave-like manner.  A network's population rhythm  results from
              interactions between three separate components: the  intrinsic properties of
              neurons, the synaptic properties of  coupling between neurons, and the
              architecture of coupling.  Each  of these components may include numerous
              parameters and multiple  time scales.  The mathematical techniques that are
              developed by  the investigator can help determine the role each of these 
              components plays in shaping the emergent network behavior.  This  may lead to a
              classification of the possible rhythms that can  emerge from a given network
              and help determine how complicated a  model must be in order to display some
              observed dynamics.       The types of rhythms that the investigator studies
              arise  throughout the central nervous system.  Consider, for example,  thalamic
              networks: these have been implicated in the generation  of sleep rhythms,
              certain forms of epilepsy, and Parkinson  tremor.  The investigator studies how
              the same set of neurons can  exhibit the very different rhythms that take place
              during  different stages of sleep and what changes must occur in the  networks
              during the transition from one stage of sleep to  another.  Recent experiments
              have demons trated that neurons in  the basal ganglia exhibit quite different
              population rhythms in  normal and parkinsonian animals.  The investigator
              develops and  analyzes biophysical models for these networks in order to 
              determine factors responsible for the generation of these  rhythms.
