Title       : New Problems in Homotopy, K-Theory, and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a9802493

Award Number: 9802493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Kuhn njk4x@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802493
Kuhn
     Professor Kuhn has a long record of developing both
              homotopy- 
theoretic and representation-theoretic methods to solve problems in
               
both areas.  More recently, some of these methods have led him also  
in
              algebraic K-theoretic directions, and his research and techniques  
are being
              used extensively by others.  The largest part of this  
project is directed
              towards connecting classic loopspace theory with  
the more recent
              developments of `S-module' and `Goodwillie calculus'  
technology, with the
              focus of these efforts aimed towards  
establishing new conjectures concerning
              well known and much studied  
topological objects: Eilenberg-MacLane spaces,
              Hopf invariants, and  
combinatorial function space models.  A second part of
              the work is  
part of the rapid development being made now in algebraic
              K-theory  
and generic representation theory over finite fields by Professor 
              
Kuhn, K-theorists Eric Friedlander and Andrei Suslin, and their 
              
collaborators.  Finally, Professor Kuhn and his students are  
continuing
              work on topological realization problems, using both new  
homotopy theoretic
              and algebraic techniques, following the direction  
of earlier work by
              Professor Kuhn and Lionel Schwartz of Paris.
     Homotopy theory, K-theory,
              and representation theory are
mathematical subjects in which one is trying to
              discover, and
ultimately classify, fundamental ``building blocks'' of various
              sorts
of mathematical structure.  (This is quite analogous to a
              chemist's
studying simple molecular configurations, and how these can
              be
assembled in more complex ways.)  Homotopy is concerned with
deformations
              of geometric objects such as higher dimensional surfaces.
Representation
              theory is concerned with the algebraic symmetries of
more rigid and discrete
              objects such as configurations of lines and
planes.   Finally K-theory is a
              hybrid of the two.  Professor Kuhn is
studying intriguing new connections
              relating these subjects, using a
variety of state-of-the-art algebraic and
              homotopy theoretic tools,
many developed by himself.
***

