Title       : Dissertation Research: Architectural Evolution and Chronology at Chavin de
               Huantar, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9802307

Award Number: 9802307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Rick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John Rick, MS Silvia Kembel will collect data for her
              doctoral dissertation. She will continue her archaeological fieldwork at the
              site of Chavin de Huantar, located in the highlands of Central Peru.  Although
              the dates are not precisely known - their determination forms one aspect of MS
              Kembel's research - the site was occupied for over a millennium, from
              approximately 1,800 to 200 BC. Peru is one of the few areas in the prehistoric
              world where the transformation from hunting and gathering societies to empires
              took place and it has, therefore, provided a focus for archaeological
              attention. Scientists wish to understand the basic processes which underlay
              this cultural evolution. Chavin is particularly important in this context
              because it is the first center which spread its influence across most of the
              Andean region. Thus it laid the groundwork for the series of true empires which
              succeeded it, the latest and best known of these founded by the Inca. From the
              data available, it appears that Chavin influence spread not through direct 
              physical conquest, but rather was ideological in nature. It may best
              approximate a powerful religious movement.  The site of Chavin contains a large
              temple constructed primarily of stone. From the arrangement of the structure
              and `joins` between segments it appears that the temple was constructed in
              stages, perhaps over hundreds of years. In the Andes, buildings themselves
              serve symbolic functions and their shape and arrangement provide insight into
              cosmological beliefs. Therefore if one can reconstruct the construction
              sequence at Chavin and determine how temple form evolved over time, insight can
              also be gained into the belief system which underlay it. MS Kembel and her
              colleagues have developed a three dimensional computer mapping program which
              allows them to fix multiple points within the sprawling complex of chambers and
              galleries and to produce an accurate map. With these data and other information
              provided by iconography and contained archaeological remains, it will then be
              possible to set the structure into a chronological context.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will further develop a computer mapping
              technique of potential widespread archaeological utility. It will provide data
              about an important archaeological site and shed additional light on the process
              of Andean state development. It will also assist in training a promising young
              archaeologist.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
