Title       : RUI-IMR: Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffraction Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9802781

Award Number: 9802781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayne R. Giniewicz jayneg@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan M. Craven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Hovan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Woolcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muhammad Z. Numan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802781
Giniewicz
This award provides support for a powder x-ray
              diffractometer to be used for research and education in the College of Natural
              Sciences and Mathematics at the Indiana University of Pennsylvania, through the
              Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) activity.  The diffractometer will
              be used by physics, chemistry and geoscience faculty and students on the campus
              and from local colleges, to characterize the structures of new materials with
              applications for semiconducting films, semiconductor heterostructures, marine
              samples of clay minerals, and transition metal fluorides.  This instrument will
              enable undergraduate and graduate students who participate in research projects
              to receive more advanced instruction in the characterization of materials
              through this sophisticated technique.
%%% 
This award provides support for a
              powder x-ray diffractometer to be used for research and education in the
              College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics at the Indiana University of
              Pennsylvania, through the Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
              activity.  The diffractometer will be used by physics, chemistry and geoscience
              faculty and students on the campus and from local colleges, to characterize the
              structures of new materials with applications for semiconducting films,
              semiconductor heterostructures, marine samples of clay minerals, and transition
              metal fluorides.  This instrument will enable undergraduate and graduate
              students who participate in research projects to receive more advanced
              instruction in the characterization of materials through this sophisticated
              technique.
***

