Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Full-spectrum Optically Detected Resonance
               Spectroscopy of Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9802875

Award Number: 9802875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. McCombe mccombe@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Athos Petrou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802875
McCombe
Semiconductor quantum wells (QWs), quantum wires and quantum
              dots are currently of great interest, and optical and infrared (IR) techniques
              have been central to developing an understanding of the electronic states,
              excitations and interactions in these low-dimensional semiconductor structures.
               Optically detected resonance (ODR) spectroscopy, an approach which combines
              the sensitivity of visible/near IR photon detection with far IR excitation, and
              which alleviates many of the problems alluded to above, has recently been
              developed, and extended and used for the first time by the co-investigators to
              study neutral and negative donor ions in doped QW's and internal transitions of
              photocreated excitons in QWs.  These results demonstrate the promise of ODR
              spectroscopy for studies of low-dimensional semiconductor structures.

Based
              on our experience with the conventional ODR approach and our recent
              demonstration experiments with a borrowed spectrograph/CCD array system, we
              will acquire a high sensitivity, high resolution mated spectrograph/CCD array
              system with acquisition and analysis software for full-spectrum ODR
              spectroscopy studies of semiconductor nanostructures.  This system will be used
              to investigate several basic issues related to the electronic states of
              low-dimensional semiconductor structures in high magnetic fields.  The project
              involves the collaboration of two senior investigators whose combined expertise
              spans optical studies of low-dimensional semiconductor structures in the III-V
              and II-VI materials systems from the far IR to the visible.  Specific problems
              to be investigated include:  internal states of negatively and positively
              charged excitons and cyclotron resonance of charged excitons; effects of excess
              electrons and holes on the excitonic states and the metal-insulator transition;
              many-body effects in the integer and fractional quantum Hall effect regimes;
              and application of ODR to the study of impurity and free carrier electronic
              states in quantum wires and quantum dots. We anticipate that the proposed
              system will greatly enhance both the quantity and quality of these experiments,
              and the education and training of our students.
%%%
*** 

