Title       : Dynamical Systems, Stochastic Approximation and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9802182

Award Number: 9802182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris W. Hirsch hirsch@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802182
Hirsch

This project will study dynamical systems enjoying a strong
              comparison 
principle, and their applications to evolutionary stochastic
              approximation 
processes. The structure of invariant subsets will be
              investigated, 
especially attractors and attractor-free sets.  New means of
              ascertaining the 
existence, stability and periods of periodic and subharmonic
              trajectories of 
monotone systems of ordinary and partial differential
              equations will be 
obtained.  These results will be applied to stochastic
              processes in which 
long-term behavior of sample paths is closely related to
              asymptotic 
behavior of an associated deterministic vector field that points
              in the 
direction of expected changes in state vectors.  In some cases the
              
dynamics of the vector field is simple enough that one can derived precise
              
information on clustering of sample paths as certain parameters (e.g.,
              
population, in epidemic models) becomes large.  Specific applications
              
include models of spread of infection disease, price adjustment, and
              
repeated adaptive games.

For many real world phenomena it is useful to
              have precise mathematical 
models capturing a few important features.  In
              order to manage the spread 
of an infectious disease, for example, it is
              important to know whether it is 
better to budget for increasing cure rates,
              reducing contact rates, or 
isolating the most infected subgroups. 
              Mathematical models are used to 
give precise theoretical answers to such
              questions; if the model has been 
validated by observation or experiment,
              specific practical steps can be 
taken. This project will investigate, on a
              theoretical level, mathematical
systems of this type.  The technical results
              apply  also  to other situations.  
One of these is price adjustment and
              stability of markets; it will be shown 
that prices can be expected to
              stabilize when goods are similar, price 
changes are small and sellers have
              good estimates of the intrinsic marginal 
demand for their own products.
              Another is to repeated games where 
information is uncertain; such systems are
              often used to model bargaining between individuals, corporations or
              governments.  The project will show that certain types of long-term strategies
              lead to convergence of behavior.

