Title       : International Conference on Molecular Electronics - Science and Technology,
               Palmas del Mar, Puerto Rico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9802997

Award Number: 9802997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Freiman engfnd@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Ratner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9802997  Freiman    A conference will be held December 14-18, 1997 on 
              theoretical and experimental aspects of molecular  electronics with an emphasis
              on material science  considerations. As the microelectronics field looks beyond
               silicon to evaluate different emerging fields for possible  future technology,
              and as atomic level resolution probes  have become available for accessing and
              manipulating  individual molecules and molecular assemblies, molecular 
              electronics has become a timely topic. New techniques will  be discussed for
              making precise size oligomers, as well as  new techniques for attaching them to
              designed surfaces. The  conference will also concentrate on possible techniques
              for  creating molecular circuits and methods needed to be able to  interact
              with single molecules. The program is organized  around 31 invited speakers,
              and both contributed papers and  posters are scheduled. Special efforts have
              been made to  recruit a diverse group of participants, including foreign  and
              American scientists, younger and older researchers, and  industrial, national
              laboratory and academic researchers.  Objectives are to stimulate
              communications among the  chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science
               communities working in this and related fields, and to  formulate and
              delineate critical research necessary to move  molecular electronics concepts
              closer to technological  success. The conference is expected to provide an
              effective  forum for discussion of critical scientific issues and  directions
              in Molecular Electronics. Along with the  opportunity to assess the field and
              future directions, it is  expected that new ties will be established between 
              universities, research institutions, and industry.  %%%   An evaluation of the
              progress and status of Molecular  Electronics and related materials issues,
              especially  critical materials and device related research areas, and  the
              relationship of materials research to device fabrication  along with current
              assessments of the most importan t  developments in this field will be of great
              value to the  understanding and enhanced utilization of materials in 
              computing, data processing, and communications.  ***
