Title       : Analysis and Geometry of Certain Markov Chains and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9802855

Award Number: 9802855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurent Saloff-Coste lsc@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802855  Saloff-Coste   This research focuses on certain Markov processes that
              evolve in a geometric   environment. The relations between the long time
              behavior of the process and the   geometry are studied. In the context of
              finite Markov chains, analytic and geometric tools   are developed to obtain
              quantitative results concerning ergodicity. The role of Sobolev   type
              inequalities is investigated. For random walk on finite groups, the relation
              between   the behavior of the walk and the structure of the group is studied.
              The behavior of random   walk on infinite Cayley graphs and its relation with
              isoperimetric inequalities are   investigated. Examples showing exotic
              behaviors are produced by considering wreath   products and studying the
              Laplace transform of the number of visited points and other   related
              functionals. In the context of Brownian motion on Riemannian manifolds, the  
              investigator will study two-sided global heat kernel bounds on manifolds with
              ends. This   requires hitting time estimates for compact regions and bounds on
              the Dirichlet heat kernel   of unbounded regions. Some problems concerning
              Gaussian measures on locally compact   groups will also be investigated.     
              This research is concerned with basic properties of certain random processes. A
                familiar yet typical example is the question of how many times a deck of
              cards must be   shuffled to be mixed well. Random processes similar to card
              shuffling are used in   computer programs to perform tasks for which no
              efficient deterministic algorithm   is known. Understanding how well these
              stochastic algorithms work is important and calls   for precise mathematical
              studies. Different generalizations of card shuffling lead to the   study of
              random processes on different types of mathematical structures. The
              investigator   will study the long time behavior of these processes.
