Title       : Manipulation, Assembly, and Electronic Properties of Carbon Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9802560

Award Number: 9802560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan T. Johnson johnson@dept.Physics.Upenn.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Luzzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene J. Mele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Kane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Fischer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9802560 
              Johnson    This  experimental focused research group project is  devoted  to 
              manipulation,  assembly  and  electronic  properties  of   carbon  nanotubes. 
              The goals are to find ways to fabricate and  assemble  simple  circuits  from
              nanotubes, and to assess  the  properties.  Samples of single wall nanotubes
              will be synthesized and supplied  for  these studies by research groups at Rice
              University and  the  CNRS  group at Montpellier, France. The experimental
              program will  structurally  characterize samples using  X-ray  diffraction  and
               electron  microscopy,  explore  modification  of  the  electronic  properties 
              by  chemical doping, and develop  new  protocols  for  separation,  
              manipulation,  and  assembly  of   nanotube-derived  structures using advanced
              electron microscopy and scanning  probe  manipulation. New methods for
              establishing electrical contact  to  tube-derived  structures  will  be 
              developed.  Theory   of   the  electronic phenomena in these structures willl
              be studied with an  emphasis  on  understanding the effects of intertube
              interactions  in  tube  clusters and tube bundles, and the effects of  contacts
               and   linkages  between  tubes  on  the  experimentally  observed  electronic
              properties. This research program is interdisciplinary  in  nature  and 
              involves one or more postdoctoral  and  graduate  students,  who  receive 
              excellent training  in  preparation  for  careers in industry, government
              laboratories or academia.  %%%  This experimental focused research group
              project seeks to explore  ways   of   making  nano-meter  -scale  electron  
              devices   from  "nanotubes".  Nanotubes  are hollow cylinders  of  carbon 
              atoms,  arranged  in chemical bonds similar to those in graphite  (pencil 
              lead).  Nanotubes are closely related to "buckyballs", which  are  hollow 
              balls composed of 60 carbon atoms, arranged in a  fashion  resembling a
              (nano-meter-scale) soccer ball. A nanometer  is  one  bil lionth  of a meter,
              or about 10 atomic diameters or  about  20  millionths  of  the  diameter  of a
               human  hair.  Nanotubes  are  electrical conductors and are considered to have
              potential for  a  nano-meter  scale  electronics technology  of  the  future. 
              This  research  project  is  devoted  to  manipulation,  assembly   and 
              electronic properties of carbon nanotubes. The goals are to  find  ways  to 
              fabricate and assemble simple circuits from  nanotubes,  and  to  assess the
              properties. Samples of single wall  nanotubes  will  be  synthesized and
              supplied for these studies by  research  groups  at  Rice University and by the
              CNRS group at Montpellier,  France.  The  experimental program will
              structurally characterize  samples  using X-ray diffraction and electron
              microscopy, explore  modification of the electronic properties by chemical
              doping, and  develop  new protocols for separation, manipulation, and assembly 
              of nanotube-derived structures using advanced electron microscopy  and 
              scanning  probe manipulation. New methods  for  establishing  electrical 
              contact to tube-derived structures will be developed.  Theory  of the
              electronic phenomena in these structures willl  be  studied  with  an  emphasis
               on  understanding  the  effects   of  intertube interactions in tube clusters
              and tube bundles, and the  effects   of   contacts  and  linkages  between 
              tubes   on   the  experimentally  observed  electronic  properties.  This 
              research  program  is interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or  more 
              postdoctoral   and  graduate  students,  who  receive   excellent  training  in
               preparation  for careers  in  industry,  government  laboratories or academia.
               ***
