Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: SimMillennium: A Large-Scale System of Systems
               Organized as a Computational Economy for Simulation and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9802069

Award Number: 9802069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1699711            (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Culler culler@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Demmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9802069
Culler, David E.
Demmel, James W.

University  of
              California-Berkeley

SimMillennium is a large cluster-of-clusters supporting
              research in novel techniques for Computational Science and Engineering and for
              the design of complex systems.  It convenes an interdisciplinary community to
              work, think, and study in a computationally rich environment with deep
              information stores and powerful services, where ideas are tested through
              simulation and data is shared and visualized through natural actions. 
The
              project leverages major donations from Intel, IBM, Microsoft, Sun,  and Bay
              Networks to construct a testbed extending researcher desktops to SMP servers,
              group  clusters, a large campus cluster, and novel data-interaction devices
              through gigabit networking.  This distributed pool of well-connected resources
              will be managed as a computational economy, which adapts automatically to
              changing user demand, system configuration, and component failures.  It should
              enable advances in the computational algorithms and programming environments
              for solvers used in the simulation and modeling of earthquakes, star formation,
              and technology CAD on systems with deep memory hierarchies.  It will address
              system design challenges of emerging high-speed networking technologies while
              developing foundations for the design of large, complex systems.  It will
              motivate new ways of assimilating and interacting with large volumes of
              information and with each other.
