Title       : Acquisition of a Microwave Network Analyzer System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9802900

Award Number: 9802900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60218              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoxing Xi xxx4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qi Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802900
Xi
This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a
              Microwave Network Analyzer System to support basic materials research by
              faculty members in the Physics, Chemistry, and Materials Science and
              Engineering Departments at the Pennsylvania State University.  This equipment
              will enhance research in a number of areas including the following: (1)
              Dielectric nonlinearity and loss in ferroelectric thin films for tunable
              microwave devices; (2) characterization of high temperature superconductors by
              microwave penetration depth measurement to study insulator-superconductor
              transition by electrostatic charging; (3) study of two dimensional properties
              of high temperature superconductors concerning dynamics of vortex-antivortex
              pairs by frequency dependent measurements; (4) effects of spin injection on
              superconductivity in colossal magnetoresistance/high temperature superconductor
              multilayers; (5) single electron tunneling system  produced by chemical
              self-assembly; (6) growth of metastable oxides by epitaxial  stabilization
              using molecular bean epitaxy, including new artificial materials with
              ferroelectric and superconducting properties.  Besides the four faculty
              members, these research projects currently involve 31 graduate students,
              postdoctoral fellows, and research associates.  The microwave network analyzer
              system enables researchers to measure the magnitude, phase, and group delay of
              two-port networks to characterize their linear behavior from 45MHz-26.5GHz.  It
              is a versatile system that can be used and configured for many different types
              of microwave measurements required by the various research projects.  For
              example, it can be used for coplanar microstrip resonator, near-field microwave
              microscope, and normal metal or superconductor cavity measurements.  In the
              proposed research, the network analyzer will be used to measure dielectric loss
              of ferroelectric thin films at microwave frequencies, the superfluid density in
              two-dimensional superconductors, and a full impedance analysis of single
              electron tunneling junction arrays to test quantum effects in these devices. 
              In each of the research projects, the microwave frequency capability is
              crucially needed, but is not available at Penn State to these projects.  The
              proposed network analyzer will tremendously enhance the effectiveness for the
              faculty members to carry out their projects and make big impact in their
              respective research fields.  The instrument will also enhance the education
              activities in an NSF/CAREER project which aims to incorporate research
              experiences into the undergraduate curriculum by developing an experiment,
              Ferroelectric Thin Films, for the undergraduate laboratory course.  This is
              part of the effort by the Physics Department at Penn State University, in
              particular the newly-established Center for Materials Physics, to reform
              physics education.  Adding a microwave network analyzer to the existing
              facilities will expend the capability to offer students materials research
              experience through the undergraduate curriculum.
%%%
***

