Title       : Dissertation Research: 14th-century Ceramic Design Change and Reorganization in
               East-Central Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9802381

Award Number: 9802381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7617               (Estimated)
Investigator: J.  Jefferson Reid jreid@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. J. Jefferson Reid, Mr. Scott Keuren will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will use an innovative technology to examine
              whole ceramic vessels recovered from archaeological sites in east-central
              Arizona. All date from a limited time period, between ca 1275-1325 AD and
              document the change from the Pueblo III to IV period. The Southwest occupies an
              important place in Americanist archaeology because this region saw the rise of
              complex Anasazi civilization in a harsh semi-arid region. Lacking the wheel or
              domesticated animals Anasazi peoples constructed roads hundreds of kilometers
              in length and large multi-story apartment houses. Archaeologists wish to
              understand how this society developed and changed over time. The Pueblo III/IV
              transition is important because it marks major changes in population
              distribution. Many areas were abandoned and tighter and more centralized
              pattern appears. Preliminary data indicate that trade and other interactions
              between villages were altered as well.  Mr. Keuren will use ceramic data in an
              attempt to trace the movement of people, their amalgamation and changes in
              production and trade strategies. Based on his own preliminary work he argues
              that through a very detailed analysis of designs painted on ceramic vessels, it
              is possible to identify micro styles each of which indicates a single shared
              learning pattern. By examining these styles closely, it is possible to
              determine how many groups are present in a village and the degree of
              interaction among them. Through comparison across sites, one can hopefully
              determine how people and the ceramics they produce moved over space. Mr. Keuren
              has developed computerized techniques which allow for easy storage and ready
              access of the ceramic designs and which facilitate their analysis.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will produce results of interest
              to many archaeologists and will increase our understanding of United States
              prehistory. The techniques which Mr. Keuren is developing, if successful, will
              have widespread applicability. This project will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
