Title       : Fixed-Structure Methods in Robust Estimation and the Control of Nonlinear and
               Parameter Varying Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9802197

Award Number: 9802197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel G. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This IIA project deals with fixed-structure methods in robust  estimation and
              control of nonlinear and linear parameter varying  systems. Estimation
              techniques such as the Kalman filter have  application in applications such as
              navigation, industrial  processes, power systems and fault detection and
              isolation.  However, the performance of standard estimators is limited due to 
              the lack of robustness to modeling errors, and although some  aspects of robust
              estimation theory have been developed, the  power of mixed structured singular
              value (MSSV) theory has not  yet been applied. Hence, research in the
              development of robust  estimation techniques using the MSSV is pursued. Three 
              performance criteria are considered:H2, Hoo, and l1. This  research also
              considers issues in fixed-structure control design  for nonlinear systems. In
              particular, automated techniques for  the design of output feedback control
              laws and Lyapunov functions  that yield large domains of attraction about an
              equilibrium point  are developed. Fixed-structure techniques are applied to
              control  design for linear parameter varying (LPV) systems. LPV control  theory
              was developed to provide a more rigorous and effective  means of designing gain
              scheduled control laws for nonlinear  systems. This research focuses on the
              development of fixed-  structure methodologies corresponding to the two main
              approaches  to control design for LPV systems. The LPV design techniques are 
              applied to pointing problems which are being considered at the  Hughes
              Mechanisms, and Cryogenics.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
