Title       : Ergodic and Topological Aspects of Linear Dynamically Varying (LDV) Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9802594

Award Number: 9802594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmond A. Jonckheere jonckhee@eudoxus.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802594
Jonckheere
When confronted with the problem of controlling a nonlinear
              dynamical system with unknown parameters, it is tempting to compute a family of
              linearized approximations, derive the LQ, H-infinity or  Mu controller around
              each operating point, and then "stitch  together" all of the locally
              stabilizing compensators in a globally working scheme.  One such approach has
              recently been referred to as Linear Parametrically Varying (LPV) control where
              the parameters are of unknown dynamics, but constrained to lie in a bounded
              set, in which their variation should be slow enough to ensure stability of the
              adaptive scheme.  Motivated by problems as tracking of transitive orbits, this
              proposal develops the so-called Linear Dynamically Varying (LDV approach, in
              which the parameters are dynamically modeled, the dynamics of the variation of
              the parameters is incorporated in the linear LQ or H-infinity design, resulting
              in a design that need not be locally stable, but that is guaranteed to be
              globally stable.  Mathematically, in discrete-time (rep. continuous time),
              approach is characterized by functional (rep. partial differential) Riccati
              equations and linear matrix inequalities in sharp contrast with the "state
              dependent" Riccati equation of the traditional LPV theory.  The major focus of
              attention is on the case of parameters running in a compact set and this quite
              naturally endows the LDV svstem with ergodic properties.  Ergodic theory is
              "put to work" to develop a computational scheme for solving functional Riccati
              equations that relies crucially on the Poincare recurrence scheme.  Other fixed
              point, continuous and differentiable selections, and Leray-Schauder degree
              methods are proposed as well.  An example of the manifestation of the ergodic
              properties of the design is a "self-similar" solution to the functional 
              Riccati equation.  Next, while the LPV approach has focused on parameters
              running in a subset of the Euclidean space where the reference axes are taken
              for granted, the LDV approach on the other hand focuses on parameters running
              on a nontrivial (incontractible) manifold, and existence of the reference axes
              cannot be taken for granted.  The relevant global topological property is
              parallelizability, that is, existence of a smooth orthonormal reference frame
              in the tangent space to the manifold, relative to which the linearlized state
              space equation are written.  In case the state manifold is not parallelizable,
              the guiding idea to find parallelizable covering manifold on which the LDV
              system runs.  Finally, an attempt to classifly these kind of control problems
              using the Godbillion-Vey characteristic classes of higher-codimenional
              foliation is proposed.  Finally, the Gelfand-Feigin-Fuks theory of variation of
              characteristic classes is proposed to measure robustness and control authority.
               
***  

