Title       : Shock Waves and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9802473

Award Number: 9802473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116999             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Temple temple@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research under this award investigates connections between geometry 
and
              the mathematical theory of shock waves.  This includes a continuation 
of the
              authors' recent work on developing a mathematical theory of 
shock-waves that
              applies to the Einstein equations - the equations 
that describe the time
              evolution of spacetime curvature, the gravitational 
field according to
              general relativity.  Shock waves are relevent here 
because the compressible
              Euler equations appear as a subsystem of the 
Einstein equations, and emerge
              exactly in the limit of low velocities 
and weak gravitational fields.  The
              work includes the construction of a 
new cosmological model in which the
              expansion of the universe, 
(as measured by the Hubble constant), is modeled
              as the effect of a great 
explosion that generates a shock wave at the leading
              edge, something 
like a nuclear explosion into a static background, except on
              an enormous scale, 
instead of by the standard cosmological model in which it
              is assumed 
that the entire universe is expanding at a rate measured by the
              Hubble law.   
If successful, the results will provide the first and simplest
              model for 
cosmology under the assumption that the Hubble constant measures
              only a 
localized expansion, and consistent with the energy density and
              background 
radiation levels observed in the universe today. This research
              also has an 
interesting philosophical implication in that, if there were a
              shock wave present 
from the Big Bang, then, in contrast to the standard model
              of cosmology, 
there would be an associated loss of information that would
              make it 
impossible to reconstruct the details of the initial event from
              
present data.  In addition, a covariant version of Glimm's Method will be
              developed 
in an attempt to provide the first general existence theory of
              shock wave 
interactions for the Einstein equations.  This is a step toward
              developing 
principles that can be applied to the numerical simulation of
              shock waves 
in general relativity.  These studies will also have implications
              for 
classical fluids because the Einstein equations provide a unique setting
              in 
which natural geometrical constructs put a handle on the 
fluid dynamics.
               This work dovetails with ongoing research 
into how the large time behavior
              of shock wave solutions is related to the 
geometry of the Lie Algebra that
              gives the scattering picture for
shock wave interactions. Thus this research
              connects the theory of  
shock waves and geometry on several levels.
              

Einstein's equations of general relativity describe the large scale
              development
of the universe.  Although they were first proposed more than
              eighty years ago,
they still pose formidable mathematical challenges.  This
              research will continue  
earlier work in which exact shock wave solutions of
              these equations were found.
A mathematical theory will be developed that leads
              to alternatives of the standard
"Big Bang" theory and that allows a general
              theoretical treatment of shock waves 
within the general theory of relativity.
               Since these equations contain the 
classical fluid dynamics equations as a
              special case, the research will also lead 
to new insights for these more
              familiar problems. 
 

