Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Space Very-Long-Baseline Interferometrywith the HALCA
               Satellite and the VSOP Mission Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9802463

Award Number: 9802463
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian M. Avruch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Avruch  9802463    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Ian Avruch at the
              Institute of Space and Astronautical  Science (ISAS), Sagamihara, Japan.  Dr.
              Avruch will work  with Dr. Hirabayashi, VSOP Mission Project Scientist, ISAS, 
              on a research project entitled, "Space Very-Long-Baseline  Interferometry with
              the HALCA Satellite and the VSOP  Program."    The proposed research project
              will make use of a new  capability in radio astronomy, the HALCA satellite, a 
              project of ISAS with significant participation by NASA. The  general scientific
              goals of the mission include performing  the highest resolution observations of
              the cores of Active  Galactic Nuclei (AGN), monitoring superluminal structures
              in  AGN, and determining distances to galaxies by the motions of  their water
              masers.  The established technique of Very-Long-  Baseline Interferometry
              employs fixed radio telescopes  around the earth observing a celestial object 
              simultaneously, each writing data to high density storage  media. 
              Interferometric baselines as long as an earth  diameter can be formed when the
              data are brought together  and reduced appropriately; the angular resolution on
              the sky  approaches that of an equivalent single antenna the size of  the
              earth.  The HALCA satellite is an orbiting radio  telescope that extends
              baselines up to three earth radii,  for a resolution of 55 microarcseconds. 
              ***
