Title       : The Metal-Nonmetal Transition in Magnetic Local Moment Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9802126

Award Number: 9802126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dowben pdowben@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sy-Hwang Liou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shireen Adenwalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                       9802126  Dowben    This is a collaborative focused research group
              proposal involving  three  principal  investigators with  complementary 
              experimental  skills.  The  research  investigates the surface  electronic  and
               structural   properties  of  manganese  oxides  and  rare   earth  pnictnides 
              (nitrides). These materials of considerable  interest  because  they  have a
              ferromagnetic transition  that  appears  to  accompany  the  non-metal  to 
              metal  transition.  However,   the  relation   between  the  magnetic  behavior
               and  the  electrical  transport  properties is now well understood. The  goals
               of  the  program  are to understand the nature of the non-metal  to  metal 
              transition  near the ferromagnetic transition, and to investigate  how  the 
              surface  ferromagnetic properties and metallically  may  differ  from the bulk
              properties in these materials. The  program  will   address  important  issues 
              such  a  whether  the  surface  magnetism  precisely  follows that  of  the 
              bulk  material.  The  program  employs a large number of spectroscopic 
              techniques  and  characterization   tools  to  elucidate   the   electronic  
              band  structure,  bulk transport properties and magnetic properties  of  the 
              oxide  and  nitride  materials. While  this  is  fundamental  research  program
              the results of the project will be relevant  to  the  general  fields  of 
              magnetism  and  superconductivity.  For  example,  surface  magnetism and
              transport  properties  of  oxide  materials  are  fundamental issues in the 
              field  of  information  storage technology.  %%%  This is a collaborative
              focused research group proposal involving  three  principal  investigators with
               complementary  experimental  skills.  The  research  deals with the
              relationship  between  the  surface  and  bulk properties of manganese oxide
              and  rare  earth  nitride  materials. In these materials, rapid changes in
              magnetic  properties  can  occur simultaneously with large changes  in  the 
              electrical  conductivity  are  ob served.  However,  the  relation  between
              these two phenomena is  not well understood. Further, the  relation between the
              surface properties of the materials and  the  bulk  properties  is  also  an
              open question.  This  effort  will  combine   a   range  of  surface 
              spectroscopic  and   structural  techniques to obtain new information about
              magnetic and transport  properties of these materials. Close collaboration with
              theorists  at  U  Nebraska - Omaha, U Nebraska - Lincoln, and  South  Dakota 
              School  of  Mines,  and Case Western Reserve  U  will  facilitate 
              interpretation  of  the measurements. While this  is  fundamental  research 
              program the results of the project will be relevant  to  the  general  fields 
              of  magnetism  and  superconductivity.  For  example,  surface  magnetism and
              transport  properties  of  oxide  materials  are  fundamental issues in the 
              field  of  information  storage technology.  ***
