Title       : Development of Si Light Emitting Devices for Enabling Optical Interconnect
               Technology in Si Integrated Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9802270

Award Number: 9802270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Agis A. Iliadis agis@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nariman Farvardin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802270
Iliadis
The development of a novel light-emitting device in Si is
              proposed [I], which is fully compatible with CMOS technology and processing,
              and provides light emission under standard analog/digital biasing conditions. 
              The device uses a different approach to the standard forward biased p-n
              junction light emission recombination processes, and this proposal seeks to
              explore the development of the device and in the process of this development,
              understand better the mechanisms of light emission.

For the development of
              this technology, planar p-n junction diodes and micron and submicron IC MOSFET
              arrays will be fabricated, and shallow implantations will be performed to
              define the optically active areas.  Electrical and optical evaluation will be
              performed to examine the resultant properties of the device and develop an
              understanding of the parameters critical to the light emission processes. 
              Auger and SIMS analysis will be employed to define the implant profiles and
              correlate with observed properties.

Implantations will be performed by a
              standard broad area implanter and by a focused ion beam implanter (FIBI) at the
              University of Maryland Focused Ion Beam facility.  Processing of micron MOSFET
              devices, electrical (parameters, DLTS) and optical (luminescence spectroscopy
              and wafer imaging) evaluation will also be done at the University of Maryland. 
              Sumbicron processing, and Auger/SIMS analysis, will be done at the Army
              Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, through the ongoing collaborative program, at
              no cost to this proposal.

The development of such light emitting device,
              will have a significant impact in developing viable fully CMOS compatible Si
              OEIC technology, with optical interconnects for on-chip guided and freespace
              optical processing and transmission.
***


