Title       : Novel Single-Domain YBCO Materials and Devices for Telecommunications
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9802281

Award Number: 9802281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donglu Shi dshi@uceng.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Mast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Altan M. Ferendeci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802281  Shi  The application of high temperature superconductors (HTS) to high
              frequency components used in mobile and personal communication networks, will
              result in substantial improvements in spectrum utilization and signal
              filtering.  The proposed work is a novel and an effective alternative to the
              thin film synthesis of HTS materials for telecommunications applications. 
              Using a seeded-melt-growth (SMG) method, we have developed large (> 50 mm)
              single-domain YBa2Cu3Ox bulk materials with ultra-low surface resistance (0.03
              m( at 77 K and 13 GHz).  The advantages of this approach include inexpensive
              and high volume processing, easy manipulation of geometry, elimination of grain
              boundaries, better control of crystal orientation and the elimination of high
              loss dielectric materials from the high frequency components.    The proposed
              research is a fundamental study on the effect of materials parameters on
              microwave properties of SMG YBa2Cu3Ox.  First, the SMG method will be used to
              produce a single-domain structure with ultra-low surface resistance.  Second, a
              relationship will be established between the surface resistance and materials
              parameters such as second phase concentration and morphology, crystal
              orientation, and oxygen homogeneity.  Upon optimization of these parameters,
              various new approaches will be used to fabricate materials of required geometry
              for a specific RF component design.  Finally, a high-Q resonator, suitable for
              inclusion in existing telecommunications systems, will be constructed and
              tested for the overall performance of the materials.    The proposed program
              addresses both fundamental questions and critical issues in industrial
              applications.  The principal investigators have significant expertise in HTS
              materials processing and characterization, and an established reputation in
              superconductivity community.  The successful implementation of HTS RF
              components will revolutionize the telecommunications industry and have a strong
              impact on the economic growth of US.  ***
