Title       : DesCArtES: A Distributed Center for Advanced Electonics Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9802730

Award Number: 9802730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Hess k-hess@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Kerkhoven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Umberto Ravaioli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Pierre Leburton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1339,8888,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802730
Hess
A Distributed Center for Advanced Electronics Simulation called
              DesCArtES will be established to address the needs of predictive physical
              models and computational tools for future generations of nanoelectronic and
              optoelectronic devices.  The efforts will focus on several key research themes
              of highest priority, through the formation of a strong collaborative team
              linking four of the leading academic groups in Computational Electronics: the
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (acting as lead institution),
              Stanford University, Purdue University and Arizona State University.  These
              groups have each their own strengths, and at the same time sufficient overlap
              of interests and a track record of collaboration, so that joint research
              efforts on the proposed themes can be effectively pursued.

The research
              themes include:

a)	Continuum and Semi-Classical Simulation of
              Devices;
b)	Optoelectronics Simulation;
c)	Atomic-Scale Process Modeling for
              Nanoelectronics;
d)	Quantum Transport in Nanoscale Devices.

The goals of
              this research consortium impact applications on a very large computational
              scale.  While most of the development and testing can be conducted on typical
              workstations, realistic calculations, particularly in 3-D, will require
              considerable use of multiprocessor supercomputers.  DesCArtES will have key
              interactions with many industrial laboratories, e.g. the National Center for
              Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) in Illinois, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
              (JPL) and NASA Ames Research Center in California.  Through the close
              relationship with these centers, the consortium will gain access to the high
              performance computational infrastructure necessary for the research efforts
              proposed.  The collaboration with JPL and NASA also emphasizes goals that are
              new and in many ways complementary to the goals usually pursued in the
              industrial collaborations of this partnership.  From the variety of
              collaborations as well as the interdisciplinary emphasis of some of the
              proposed research, the center will derive a well-rounded and creative
              perspective of new and important applications in Computational Electronics,
              thus creating the necessary environment to pursue successfully the proposed
              research themes.
***


