Title       : Acquisition of a Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9802844

Award Number: 9802844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Josef W. Zwanziger jzwanzig@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Caulton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm H. Chisholm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrike Werner-Zwanziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802844  Zwangizer  This award provides partial support for a new nuclear 
              magnetic resonance spectrometer (NMR) optimized for solid  state materials
              experiments, for use by the Department of  Chemistry at Indiana University,
              Bloomington. In conjunction  with the spectrometer, support is provided for the
               acquisition of a triple resonance cross-polarization Magic  Angle Spinning NMR
              probe and  a high power probe for wide  line NMR.    Indiana University has a
              vigorous and widely known program  in solid-state and materials chemistry.  The
              proposed  instrument will complement and enhance this program by  providing the
              laboratories in this area with experimental  capabilities that are acutely
              needed but not currently  available.  Three areas of research are targeted in
              this  proposal:  development and study of new glasses and glass  ceramics, and
              their aging and fatigue behavior; dynamics and  reactivity of gases in
              molecular solids, in order to design  and optimize chemical sensors; and
              structural and  mechanistic studies of organometallic polymers and liquid 
              crystals.  In all three areas, solid-state NMR spectroscopy  can provide
              essential information on the synthesis,  structure and properties of the target
              materials.  The  proposed instrument has essential capabilities for study of 
              the above materials, including:  multi-channel heteronuclear  operation, fast
              sample spinning, simultaneous  proton/fluorine operation, and wide-line
              capabilities.  None  of these features are available in spectrometers currently
               in the department, but all are necessary to carry out the  proposed research. 
                Because solid-state NMR has become a powerful but still not  widely used tool
              in materials science, experience in its use  will be an important and unusual
              experience for the students  and postdoctoral researchers.  The instrument 
              will  immediately serve the needs of ten postdoctoral fellows, 16  graduate and
              three undergraduate students from the three  major user groups and will be
              available to some 170  ad ditional graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
              of the  Chemistry Department.  A staff member of the departmental  NMR
              facility, under the administration of the PI's, will  train and help the users,
              oversee the use of  the  instrument, perform routine maintenance, instrument 
              evaluation, and bookkeeping.  %%%  ***
