Title       : Invariants for Completely Positive Maps and Multivariable Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9802474

Award Number: 9802474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193246             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Arveson arveson@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              To: jjenkins@nsf.gov  Subject: abstract    Dear Joe,    Here is the abstract you
              requested.  Please let me know if it's   what you want.  Sorry about the delay
              in getting this back to you.    Because your note came during the holiday
              break, I put it  aside for awhile, and then forgot about it!  Thanks for
              sending the   reminder.  --Bill    TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION    This project
              concerns multivariable operator theory.  Specifically, we  are concerned with
              Hilbert modules over the algebra of polynomials   in several variables.  We
              seek concrete (numerical) invariants  for such objects.  The simplest of these
              is the curvature invariant.    The curvature invariant of a Hilbert module H is
              written K(H).    K(H) is analogous to the mean curvature of an even-dimensional
                Riemannian manifold, and there is an asymptotic formula which   allows one to
              compute its value in many cases.  K(H) has turned   out to be an integer in all
              cases we have been able to decide, and   in fact it obeys a form of the Gauss
              Bonnet theorem for the Hilbert   modules which admit a "finite free resolution"
              in the following   sense,     K(H) = b(1) - b(2) + b(3) - b(4) +....    where
              b(1), b(2), ... are the Betti numbers of the free resolution.    We conjecture
              that K(H) is always an integer.  Not every Hilbert   module (in the category we
              have) has a finite free resolution, and   we are developing appropriate tools
              for computing K(H) in general.      GENERAL DESCRIPTION    The flow of time in
              quantum theory is different from the flow of   time in classical physics, in
              that the observable quantities do not  commute with each other.  For example,
              Heisenberg's famous   equation relating the position and momentum observables
              of   a one-dimensional quantum system is essentially this: PQ - QP = 1.   
              During the past ten years, a small but determined group of   mathematicians has
              been working out the theory of "E_0 semigroups".    Among other things, these
              mathematical objects give the simplest   situations which describe the way the 
              flow of time behaves in   quantum theory.  The current project has grown out of
              our efforts  to find ways of distinguishing between different types of E_0  
              semigroups.  This is accomplished by computing certain numbers   associated
              with them that can take on different values.  When one   has two E_0 semigoups
              whose numbers are different, one can be   assured that he has two systems which
              are fundamentally different.    This project is concerned with the definition
              and calculation of   numerical quantities which are associated to simpler
              objects that   are closely related to E_0 semigroups.
