Title       : Symplectic, Contact and Low-Dimensional Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9802533

Award Number: 9802533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Gompf gompf@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9802533  Gompf       The focus of this project is on constructing symplectic,
              contact,   and 4-dimensional manifolds.  The principal investigator is
              attempting   to construct a symplectic structure on any manifold endowed with a
               Lefschetz pencil (a kind of singular fibration originally discovered  in
              algebraic geometry).  He has already solved the problem in  dimension 4; a
              solution in all dimensions, together with recent work  of Donaldson, will give
              a complete topological characterization of  those manifolds admitting
              symplectic structures: They are precisely  those that admit Lefschetz pencils. 
              (A key part of the problem is  suitably to define Lefschetz pencils in this
              generality.)  A related  topic concerns Stein surfaces (affine analytic
              varieties of complex  dimension 2).  There are many fundamental existence
              questions here,  for example, what 3-manifolds arise as boundaries of Stein
              surfaces,  how many Stein surfaces have a given 3-manifold as boundary, and how
               many contact structures are induced on a given 3-manifold by such  Stein
              surfaces?  These questions are amenable to the principal  investigator's
              current techniques of describing Stein surfaces as  handlebodies on Legendrian
              link diagrams in connected sums of copies  of S1 x S2.  The principal
              investigator is also currently writing a  graduate text on 4-manifolds and
              Kirby calculus with A. Stipsicz and  is advising two PhD students and an NSF
              Postdoctoral Fellow.       An n-manifold is a space that on small scales looks
              like Euclidean  space of dimension n.  For example, the space in which we live
              is a  3-manifold, and the universe (space-time) is a 4-manifold.  As such, 
              manifolds play a central role in mathematics, physics, and to some  extent,
              various other sciences.  Symplectic and contact structures  first appeared in
              classical physics (Hamiltonian dynamics) but have  since become important in
              pure mathematics (geometry, topology,  analysis) as well.  It is a basic
              unsolved problem to determine which  manifolds can have s ymplectic or contact
              structures.  This project  aims for a complete answer in the symplectic case
              and for additional  understanding of the contact case.  The project should also
              shed light  on basic unsolved problems regarding the possible shapes of 3- and 
              4-manifolds.  ***
