Title       : Nanoscale Controlled SrRu03-Insulator-SrRu03 Epitaxial Ferromagnetic
               Heterostructures for the Study of Spin Polarized Tunneling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9802444

Award Number: 9802444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang-Beom Eom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9802444  Eom    This University/Industry collaborative GOALI proposal aims for
               greater understanding of  barrier phenomena/physics in oxide 
              ferromagnetic-insulator-ferromagnetic trilayer junctions,  interfacial effects,
              and the electronic structure of (Sr,Ca)RuO3.  Professor Chang-Beom Eom at Duke
              University is collaborating with  Jonathan Z. Sun at the IBM Thomas J. Watson
              Research Center. The  approach involves the study and control of the growth
              mechanism  and domain structures of individual layers, and the investigation 
              of junction properties to obtain reliable and low defect density  interfaces
              and insulating layers. The project also addresses the  mechanism for
              spin-dependent transport across the barrier region,  the bias and temperature
              dependence of junction  magnetoresistance, and the relationships between
              transport  behavior, barrier synthesis/processing conditions, and chemical 
              compositions. The project is co-supported by the DMR Electronic  Materials
              Program and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities).    %%%  The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of  materials science
              having high technological relevance. The  research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a  fundamental level to important aspects of
              electronic/magnetic  devices.  Experimental tools are now available to allow
              atomic  level observation of basic surface and interface processes which  when
              better understood will allow advances in both fundamental  and technological
              arenas. The basic knowledge and understanding  gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving  the performance and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits by  providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing  and producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An 
              important feature of the program is the integration of research  and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally  and technologically
              significant area, and in providing an  impor tant opportunity through the GOALI
              aspect of the project for  students to experience both academic and industrial
              research  approaches and environments.  ***
