Title       : Analysis and Design of Flux Reversal Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9802454

Award Number: 9802454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155569             (Estimated)
Investigator: Syed A. Nasar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9802454  Nasar      The overall purpose of the proposed research is to
              develop methods of analysis and design of the flux reversal machine(FRM).  The
              FRM offers a potential for superior performance compared to existing
              permanent-magnet reluctance synchronous machines.  It has a simple and robust
              construction, relatively high power density, high efficiency, and is especially
              suited for high-speed applications.  Table I in the text of the proposal
              compares the FRM with other contenders.  Relative advantages of the FRM are
              also listed in the proposal.    Because the FRM is a recent invention,
              literature on the subject is virtually nonexistent.  The proposed research is
              targeted toward a definitive fundamental study of three-phase FRMs operating as
              generators and motors.  The approach to this research, however, is expected to
              be applicable to other types of permanent-magnet reluctance synchronous
              machines.  In general terms, the principal objective of the proposed research
              is to formulate the principles of analysis and design of the FRM.  This goal is
              expected to be achieved in the following steps: (i) Perform an in-depth finite
              element analysis(FEA) of fields and torque for various stator and rotor pole
              combinations(using a standard software). (ii) Derive expressions for the
              machine parameters and induced EMFS, including the effects of saturation. (iii)
              Digitally simulate the machine characteristics under steady-state and transient
              conditions. (iv) Obtain mathematical models for loss mechanisms. (v) Formulate
              design equations for the machine. (vi) Optimize the design for minimum mass and
              maximum efficiency constraints. (vii) Build and test a prototype. (viii) Design
              a control scheme for an optimal operation of the machine.    The proposed
              research will lead to the basic principles of analysis and techniques of design
              of the FRM, and thereby assess its potential for various applications.  These
              principles and techniques are expected to be applicable to other types of
              permanent magnet reluctance  machines, and herein lies the intrinsic merit of
              the proposed research.  Finally, at least two graduate students are expected to
              earn their MS/PhD while working on the project.    In terms of theoretical
              development, a thorough FEA of the fields and forces in the machine will be
              conducted.  FEA is expected to yield the machine parameters and aid in the
              evaluation of losses in the core and magnets.  Having determined the machine
              parameters, a digital simulation model will be developed and used to determine
              the machine steady-state and transient characteristics.  The design will
              proceed. initially, along classical lines in that design formulas will be
              derived and used to design a prototype.  Ultimately, the design will be
              optimized for minimum mass and maximum efficiency conditions(using a standard
              procedure such as the Hooke-Jeeves method).  Finally, a prototype will be built
              and tested(primarily with the help Of Stirling Technology Company).
