Title       : Self-Normalized Limit Theorems and Small Ball Probabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9802451

Award Number: 9802451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qi-Man Shao shao@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802451
Shao

This project focuses on  two topics in probability and
              statistics, namely, self-normalized limit theorems and small ball
              probabilities.  The first topic is devoted to the study of limit theorems for
              self-normalized processes in general, and for self-normalized partial sums in
              particular.  The normalizing constants in classical limit theorems are usually
              sequences of real numbers.  Moment conditions or other related assumptions are
              necessary and sufficient for many classical limit theorems.  However, the
              situation becomes very different when the normalizing constants are sequences
              of random variables.  The recent discovery of the self-normalized large
              deviations shows that no moment conditions are needed for a large deviation
              type result.  A self-normalized law of the iterated logarithm remains valid for
              all distributions in the domain of attraction of a normal or stable law.  This
              reveals that the self-normalization preserves much better properties than
              deterministic normalization does.  This also suggests many further questions,
              such as what is the rate of convergence of self-normalized approximation, what
              are necessary and sufficient conditions for the self-normalized law of the
              iterated logarithm, finding tail probabilities of self-normalized trimmed and
              censored sums, and finding self-normalized limit theorems for independent but
              not necessarily identically distributed random variables.  The second topic
              concerns small ball probabilities for Gaussian processes which serve as models
              in many applications.  Small ball probabilities provide sharp estimates for
              rare events.  A primary focus of this part of research is a better
              understanding of rare random phenomena related to Gaussian processes.

The
              self-normalized sums are closely related to the celebrated ``Student
              t-statistic" and studentized ``U-statistic".  This part of the  research is
              related to determining when the t-statistic and U-statistic can safely be used.
               This study will help to understand the behavior of large classes of
              statistical functionals since t- and U-statistics are their building blocks. 
              The small ball problems often arise in estimating the chances for rare events
              to occur in areas where such events are of fundamental importance, such as
              weather, economic indices, and epidemics.  The first part of this research may
              lead to the development of a new limit theory in probability and statistics
              while the second part of the research may provide  significant new knowledge
              about Gaussian processes as well as about our random environments.

