Title       : Mentoring Program for Women in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9802179

Award Number: 9802179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. MacPherson rdm@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chuu-Lian Terng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen K. Uhlenbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For many years now, the percentage of PhDs in mathematics granted  to women in
              the United States has been at least 20% of the total.  There are many colleges
              and universities in which half the  mathematics majors are women.  However,
              there is an observed lack  of women at the most visible, highest levels of
              research,  teaching and management.  This is often explained as a time-lag, 
              with the assumption that the numbers of women university  professors and
              mathematical leaders will come in the future to  reflect the demographics of
              the student populations.  There are  positive signs, as many mathematics
              departments now have one or  two female professors, there have been women
              presidents of all  the major professional organizations, and several of the
              most  renowned industrial research groups are headed by women.  At  least three
              of the twenty prestigious Sloan postdoctoral research  fellowships each year go
              to women, and the statistics of the  National Science Foundation postdoctoral
              fellowships are even  better.    There are, however, some signs that the
              situation overall is not  as healthy as it might be.  The numbers of women at
              research  institutes like the Institute for Advanced Study and the 
              Mathematical Sciences Research Institute are not up to the 20%  figure,
              probably partly as the most prestigious schools do not  uniformly have many
              women enrolled (we find that there are only  three women in graduate school in
              mathematics at Princeton  University right now.)  In particular, the IAS/Park
              City  Mathematics Institute Summer Session has had difficulty  attracting
              representative numbers of women.  The Mentoring  Program for Women in
              Mathematics is a ten-day workshop designed  to prepare students for the summer
              session of the PCMI.  The  workshop includes lectures, seminars, problem
              sessions and  exposure to a variety of scientists.  It is set up to encourage 
              both peer group mentoring and networking, as well as interaction  between four
              or five levels of participants.  The short-term  goal i s to gather young women
              mathematicians together in a  challenging and supportive environment.  This
              incidentally  provides a basis for an active women's network as well as an 
              introduction to the scholars in residence at the Institute for  Advanced Study
              of a spirited, serious and enthusiastic group of  young women.  The long-term
              goal is to help increase the number  of women professional mathematicians in
              this country by providing  information, senior role models and an excellent
              research  environment for young female mathematics students.    In the years
              1994, 1995, and 1996, the short-term goal of the  proposal has been realized
              very successfully.  The written  comments of participants in the program are
              overwhelmingly  positive and speak of concrete advantages provided to the 
              participants: intellectual advances, contacts with women  mathematicians,
              increased self-confidence and, in some cases, the  decision to pursue a
              professional career in mathematics.  It is  too soon to judge if the long-term
              goal of the program will be  realized, but we are encouraged by the number of
              participants who  have made a return visit to the program at a later stage of
              their  careers.          Chuu-Lian Terng, Northeastern University        Karen
              Uhlenbeck, University of Texas at Austin        Program Organizers
