Title       : Combinatorial Optimization and Integer Programming: Polyhedral Analysis and
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9802773

Award Number: 9802773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Egon Balas eb17@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Cornuejols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9802773  Balas   The research funded by this grant addresses some basic
              theoretical and  methodological aspects of integer and combinatorial
              optimization. Over the last few years the principal investigators have
              developed a technique called lift-and-project for solving mixed integer
              programs. When embedded in an enumerative framework, called branch-and-cut,
              this approach has shown itself to be highly robust and competitive with the
              best available alternatives. A major goal of the research is to consolidate
              these results and develop the approach in new directions, by solving several
              open problems concerning the properties of the cutting planes used; the way of
              generating and handling them; and, the interplay between cutting and branching.
              Part of this research will combine polyhedral methods with some tools borrowed
              from artificial intelligence. A closely related research topic is focussed on a
              heuristic procedure called OCTANE, which uses a neighborhood search defined by
              a construction based on polarity. Another topic involves ideal 0-1 matrices,
              which make certain integer programs defined by them solvable as linear
              programs. Finally, a substantial part of the research will focus on the
              traveling salesman problem, and some of its generalizations, focusing on a
              dynamic programming approach that can efficiently solve large classes of
              problems in this area.   The research envisaged here is expected to
              substantially enhance the state of the art in solving integer and combinatorial
              optimization problems in general, traveling salesman-type problems in
              particular. Some of the investigations are aimed at gaining new theoretical
              insights and a deeper understanding of the structures involved, but most of the
              research is methodological in nature and is therefore expected to result in
              more efficient algorithms and computer codes. The problems to which such
              algorithms may be applicable range from investment decisions, capacity
              expansion models, location and distribution problems, to industrial scheduling
              and  sequencing.
