Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Growth and Characterization of InGaN Active Layers for
               Improved Blue-Emitting Laser Diodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9802321

Award Number: 9802321
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Cheun-Lan Liu                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Hacke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hacke  9802321  This award supports a 24-month research visit by Dr. Peter  L.
              Hacke, currently a Postdoctoral Fellow, Institute of  Physical and Chemical
              Research  (RIKEN), Japan, for  collaboration with Dr. Toshiyuki Tanahashi,
              Electron Devices  and Materials Laboratories, Fujitsu Laboratories, Ltd., 
              Atsugi, Japan.  Their research is concerned with the growth  and
              characterization of InGaN active layers for improved  blue-emitting laser
              diodes.  Characterization of these  diodes is essential to finding solutions to
              problems which  limit the operation, performance, and lifetime of these 
              devices in commercial instruments.    The research will be conducted at Fujitsu
              Laboratories which  has a coherent group presently working on issues related to
               the operation of blue light laser diodes.  Fujitsu is one of  only a few
              companies worldwide reporting successful  operation of a nitride-based blue
              laser diode.  During his  previous work in Japan, Dr. Hacke has visited the
              Fujitsu  Laboratories and is aware of the research interests and  capabilities
              of this research group.  To this point in his  career, Dr. Hacke has been
              engaged in fundamental research.  The proposed research at Fujitsu Laboratories
              will provide  experience in product development.  This project is  supported
              under the Science Fellowship Program between the  National Science Foundation
              and the Japan Foundation Center  for Global Partnership.
