Title       : Acquisition of Tensile Rheometer for the Simultaneous 
Measurement of
               Viscoelastic and Optical Properties of 
 Polymer Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9802776

Award Number: 9802776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Grady bpgrady@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger E. Frech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Shambaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel T. Glatzhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802776
Grady
This award provides partial support for the University of
              Oklahoma to acquire a tensile rheometer for the measurement of polymer
              viscoelastic properties.  This instrument, termed a dynamic mechanical thermal
              analyzer (DMTA), measures storage and loss moduli for polymers ranging from
              stiff glasses to very flexible rubbers and viscous melts.  Both the requency of
              oscillation and the measurement temperature can be varied, which enables the
              construction of master curves using time-temperature superposition.  This
              instrument can also perform stress relaxation experiments permitting the
              determination of relaxation times.  A special option will be purchased to
              measure the dichroic and birefringent properties simultaniously with the
              rheological properties.  Birefringence measures segmental orientation, while
              dichroism measures orientation of microdomains, such as spherulites, in the
              specimen.  Hence we will be able to directly correlate segmental orientation
              with relaxation times, WLF shift constants, or activation energies.

This
              instrument will significantly improve the current research programs of four
              investigators in two different departments (Chemistry and Chemical Engineering)
              and will also be used to initiate research in a new area.  Faculty in Chemical
              Engineering are interested in the effect of fillers on polymer morphology. 
              Room temperature relaxation times have been correlated with crystallite
              orientation after stretching at elevated temperatures in reticulate doped
              composites.  This instrument will accurately determine relaxation times and
              also allow the measurement of relaxation times at different temperatures. 
              Studies are also underway on a unique coating method that improves
              polymer-filler adhesion in composites.  This instrument will help identify the
              optimal coating for a given polymer.  Faculty in Chemical Engineering are
              conducting studies of fundamental processes associated with producing both
              melt-spun and melt-blown fibers.  With this instrument, they will be able to
              more fully characterize the fibers to better understand the relationship
              between processing and properties.  The optical attachment will be used to
              correlate rheological properties with segmental orientation of polymer chains. 
              Faculty in Chemistry are presently investigating mechanisms of ionic conduction
              in polymer/salt electrolytes.  The most extensive studies have involved
              poly(ethylene oxide)/lithium systems.  The DMTA will be used to measure changes
              in mechanical and relaxation behavior and these changes will be correlated with
              changes in salt speciation determined by various spectroscopies.  Other faculty
              currently synthesize novel intrinsically electrically conducting polymer films.
               Physical properties are important to end use but samples are either only
              available as thin films  (<200 u) or the use of interest is as thin films and
              evaluation in that form would be desirable.  Finally, it is planned to initiate
              studies to measure rheological properties using the DMTA while simultaneously
              measuring the orientation behavior of polymer crystallites using synchrotron
              radiation.
%%%
***   

