Title       : New Materials and Methods for Tunable Mid-Infrared Laser Fabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a9802396

Award Number: 9802396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. McCann pmccann@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9802396  McCann    This project covers the growth, characterization, and
              processing  of IV-VI semiconductor layers grown by both liquid phase epitaxy 
              (LPE) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on silicon substrates to  provide the
              materials science basis for improvements in mid-IR  lasers. Owing to a large
              band gap dependence on temperature,  lasers made from IV-VI semiconductors have
              tuning ranges of  several hundred wavenumbers in the mid-infrared region, 3
              microns  to over 20 microns, where most molecules have strong absorption 
              bands. This tunability, an advantage over mid IR lasers based on  quantum
              cascade technology, and the expected improvement in cw  operating temperatures
              using lift-off fabrication methods make  IV-VI semiconductors attractive
              materials for enhanced mid-IR  laser performance. This research seeks
              fundamental understanding  of strain relaxation in highly thermal expansion
              mismatched  epitaxial layers, work that can lead to the integration of 
              compound semiconductor devices on silicon substrates. It is also  expected to
              lead to the development of a new materials technology  that can dramatically
              improve maximum operating temperatures of  mid-IR lasers. The project is
              co-supported by the DMR Electronic  Materials Program and the EPSCoR program. 
              %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of 
              materials science having high potential technological relevance.  The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at  a fundamental level to
              new aspects of electronic/photonic  devices. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the  research is expected to contribute to improving
              the performance  and stability of advanced devices by providing a fundamental 
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved  materials, and
              materials combinations. A direct benefit of this  research is that it will
              enable the development of user friendly  mid-IR laser spectrometers,
              instruments that can be used in a  variety of applications includ ing air
              pollution monitoring,  real-time process control, and medical diagnostics. An
              important  feature of the program is the integration of research and  education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and  technologically
              significant area.  ***
