Title       : GOALI: Magnetic Thin-Films for Data Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a9802278

Award Number: 9802278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Kurtz kurtz@phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Kurtz
9802278
This is a GOALIE proposal involving a collaboration between a
              physicist at Louisiana State University and collaborators at Hewlett-Packard
              Laboratories and Seagate Technology. The research relates to magnetic data
              storage devices that currently incorporate thin film giant magnetoresistive
              (GMR) sensors, constructed from magnetic and non-magnetic materials. Particular
              combinations of materials give rise to enhanced sensitivity to magnetic bits
              which are detected by changes in resistance. Students will be sent to HP and
              Seagate Laboratories to grow films, characterize their magnetic and transport
              properties, and develop transferable methods to compare films grown at
              different institutions. At LSU, the growth characteristics of the films will be
              evaluated with scanning tunneling microscopy, while magnetic characteristics
              will be evaluated using the magneto-optical Kerr effect. The electronic band
              structures will be characterized at the LSU Synchrotron Center for Advanced
              Microstructures and Devices (CAMD), using an array of synchrotron based
              techniques such as angle- and spin-resolved photoemission, valence-band
              dichroism, and Fermi surface mapping using a display analyzer. The materials
              studied include 3d transition metals and alloy films on single-crystal
              substrates such as Cu(001), or on oxides grown in situ. Theoretical studies
              suggest that improved sensitivity may be achieved by using half-metallic
              materials, such as Fe3O4 and CrO2, in spin-tunneling devices; such materials
              will be investigated as well. The project will provide excellent training for
              undergraduate and graduate students in fundamental and technical areas of
              condensed matter physics.
%%%
This is a GOALIE proposal involving a
              collaboration between a physicist at Louisiana State University and
              collaborators at Hewlett-Packard Laboratories and Seagate Technology. Magnetic
              sensors in computer disk drives are now being fabricated by combining
              atomically-thin magnetic and non-magnetic films into layered structures with
              improved sensitivity, allowing bit sizes to shrink and capacity to increase.
              The fundamental properties of the thin films differ significantly from bulk
              materials, however. This project focuses on experimental characterization of
              the new electronic structures and their relationship to the improved magnetic
              performance. LSU students will grow films in industrial and university
              facilities and characterize the magnetic and electrical characteristics of
              these devices.  Research conducted at LSU involves atomic-scale
              characterization of the film growth properties using scanning-tunneling
              microscopy and magnetic characterization by observations of the degree to which
              polarized light is rotated on reflection. At the LSU Center for Advanced
              Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) synchrotron, students will evaluate the new
              electronic structures that arise by monitoring the energies and angles of
              electrons emitted from the surfaces under intense soft x-ray irradiation. These
              data will be compared with theoretical models of the electronic structure,
              providing the feedback that is required in the process of developing new
              magnetic materials. The project will provide excellent training for
              undergraduate and graduate students in fundamental and technical areas of
              condensed matter physics.

