Title       : Adaptive Estimation in Wavelet Image Compression: Thresholding and Quantization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9802314

Award Number: 9802314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bin Yu binyu@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the exploding demand in Internet applications and  multimedia
              communications, image compression has become one  of the most important areas
              in signal processing and  communication. Well compressed images are close to
              the  original images, but take much less space to store or are  faster to
              transmit. Indeed, the network computing trend is  moving towards high quality
              images for Web surfing and real-  time video for video conferencing, and
              compression is  necessary for their real-time transmission and reasonably 
              small memory storage. Much engineering wisdom and heuristics  have accumulated
              on image compression in recent years, and  adaptivity (to the local
              characteristics of an image) is  found to be the key to efficient image
              compression. This  research follows an approach underlying many, if not all, 
              important developments in statistics. That is, it aims at  identifying problems
              from an applied field --(wavelet) image  compression, developing their
              solutions in a statistical  framework, and seeking answers and insights in this
               framework relevant to the original image compression  problems. On one hand,
              this research uses and extends modern  statistical estimation theory; on the
              other hand, it  summarizes or formalizes engineering heuristics. Therefore  it
              builds a bridge between image compression and statistical  estimation
              literatures.  The investigators are studying adaptive thresholding methods  for
              wavelet image coding from the point of view of denoising  and compression. They
              are also studying estimation and  adaptive quantization methods based on
              quantized data for  general digital signal compression including wavelet-based 
              image compression. The statistical research establishes a  framework for
              adaptive wavelet thresholding for images, and  provides solutions to the
              general statistical problem of  estimation based on quantized data, which are
              available in  large quantities in the modern communications age. A level  of
              effort statement.  At the recommended level of support, the PI  will make every
               attempt to meet the original scope and level of effort of  the project.
