Title       : Relativistic Fluids and the Coupling of Gravity to Other Forces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9802370

Award Number: 9802370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel A. Smoller smoller@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposer will continue his investigations in two areas:
i) shock-waves in
              Einstein's Theory of General Relativity with
applications to cosmology  and 
              ii) the coupling of Einstein's equations 
for the gravitational field to other
              (fundamental) force fields; 
for example to electromagnetism and nuclear
              forces.
In part i) he will investigate his alternative model to the standard
              
"Big-Bang" cosmology.  In this theory, the observable universe began 
with a
              shock wave explosion into a stationary (time-independent) space.  This
              
explosion created the expanding universe that astronomers observe today.
              
The leading edge of this expansion is modeled by an outward propagating
              
shock-wave.  Since shock-waves are irreversible solutions of the 
equations,
              information about the past is lost as the shock-wave advances. 
In this model
              one should therefore not expect a unique time reversal of 
the solution all
              the way back to an initial Big-Bang, whereby the entire 
universe was
              compressed into a tiny region.  In part ii) the proposer 
will study how
              solutions of the equations of Quantum Mechanics change 
when gravity is taken
              into account.  Up to now, gravity has been 
ignored in elementary particle
              theory, because gravity is much weaker 
than nuclear forces and
              electromagnetism.  Preliminary calculations of 
the proposer show that in
              spite of the weakness of the gravitational force, 
the addition of gravity
              into the equations has a "smoothing"effect on 
solutions, and greatly modifies
              some aspects of elementary particle theory.

The proposer will do research in
              two areas.  First, he will investigate an
alternative scenario to the standard
              "Big-Bang" cosmology.  In his model 
the observable universe began with a
              shock-wave explosion rather
than from an incredibly dense small region the
              size of a grapefruit. 
Consistent with some recent astronomical observations
              of huge energy 
bursts in the very outer regions of the cosmos, this theory
              implies that 
there may be other distant universes which also arise from
              shock-wave 
explosions.  Secondly, the proposer will study the effect that
              gravity has 
on other forces (electromagnetism and nuclear forces).  Since the
              
gravitational force is extremely weak in comparison to these other 
forces, 
              physicists have ignored gravity in studying elementary particles. 
However,
              the proposer has found that the inclusion of gravity does 
actually play a
              role in elementary particle theory.  Furthermore, he 
will investigate the
              possibility that quantum-theoretic effects play a 
role in the study of black
              holes.

