Title       : Inference For High Dimensional Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9802885

Award Number: 9802885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Murphy murphy@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802885
Susan A Murphy

This research concerns estimation in high dimensional
              models.  In the first part the use of high dimensional models   for incomplete
              data is addressed. Suppose the pattern of incompleteness is related to an high
              dimensional vector of observations.  Then the dimensionality of the vector
              precludes straightforward maximum likelihood estimation.  The research
              addresses two modifications of maximum likelihood.  In the first modification,
              the dimension of the vector is reduced by a balancing score and in the second
              modification, a weighted likelihood is used.  The second part of this research
              focuses on  maximum likelihood estimation for the transformation model, a high
              dimensional generalization of the linear regression model.  This model
              stipulates that an unknown transformation of the response follows a linear
              regression.  In special cases, such as the proportional hazards model, the
              estimators found by maximum likelihood are well understood.  Yet in general,
              estimators of parameters in this model, although extremely popular, are rather
              difficult to analyze.  This research investigates the use of  new techniques,
              such as empirical processes and  empirical likelihood in order to understand
              the estimators.

Models in which there are many unknowns or unknown functions
              (called parameters here) appear throughout the sciences.  Often these models
              are formulated to address inadequacies of the classical linear regression
              model.  For example, social scientists use high dimensional models in event
              history analysis of the causes of variability in the timing of life events such
              as premarital births, initiation of drug abuse, timing of retirement and
              duration of poverty spells.  High dimensional models attempt to allow the data
              to speak for itself and to minimize the addition of spurious information caused
              by imposing a low-dimensional model on the data.  This research advances the
              understanding of these high dimensional models. Often high dimensional models
              are applied without any theoretical understanding of when they may or may not
              produce quality estimators.  In particular, this research investigates the bias
              and variability of of estimators found by the use of a common estimation
              method, maximum likelihood estimation.  This is important as understanding the
              causes of variability in the timing of life events is crucial to designing
              appropriate social policies and intervention/prevention programs.

