Title       : Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a9802373

Award Number: 9802373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ceperley ceperley@.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1339,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802373  Ceperley  The long range goal of this research is to develop 
              practical, efficient theoretical methods to accurately  predict the properties
              of many-electron systems.  Theoretical methods and computational algorithms are
              being  generated that can be applied to important idealized  systems, such as
              the homogeneous electron gas, as well as to  realistic problems in atoms,
              molecules, and condensed  matter.    The approach taken is a combination of
              quantum Monte Carlo  (QMC) simulations and density functional theory (DFT). 
              QMC  can provide exact results for some many-body problems and  the range of
              problems for which this method can be applied  is being extended.  DFT is the
              only method feasible for  large-scale simulations of real systems.    Research
              objectives include the development of QMC methods  with emphasis on the
              improvement of the nodal surfaces for  fermion wavefunctions which is the
              limiting factor in the  accuracy of the algorithms.  A method has been
              developed to  dynamically optimize the nodal surface and will be applied  to
              many-electron systems.  Work will also continue to  calculate forces with QMC
              methods.  First applications will  be for forces between protons in an electron
              gas.  Applications of QMC methods to physical problems will  include nanoscale
              quantum devices and lower dimensional  systems; electron-hole plasmas where
              finite-temperature  techniques will be used to srudy the formation of excitons,
               bi-excitons, and the superconducting state; and hydrogen  impurities in
              metals, which is a test of DFT and an  important problem in materials science. 
              New work on the  phases of hydrogen at high pressure will focus on prediction 
              of infrared activity using the Berry's phase formulation.  Also to be developed
              will be general theoretical methods for  studying dielectric polarization in
              correlated systems.  The  first test of the new ideas are being implemented in
              lattice  models and methods will be developed for real systems.  Many-  body
              calculations will be used to  test approximate DFT  functionals and to derive
              new forms.    Long term challenges are to develop algorithms to solve the 
              famous "sign problem" which is a limiting factor in  application of Monte Carlo
              methods to fermions and dynamics;  to develop robust "order-N' linear scaling
              methods that go  beyond approximate DFT methods; and to apply these methods  to
              outstanding materials problems.  %%%  The long range goal of this research is
              to develop  practical, efficient theoretical methods to accurately  predict the
              properties of many-electron systems.  Theoretical methods and computational
              algorithms are being  generated that can be applied to important idealized 
              systems, such as the homogeneous electron gas, as well as to  realistic
              problems in atoms, molecules, and condensed  matter.  Long term challenges are
              to develop algorithms to  solve the famous "sign problem" which is a limiting
              factor  in application of Monte Carlo methods to fermions and  dynamics; to
              develop robust "order-N' linear scaling methods  that go beyond approximate DFT
              methods; and to apply these  methods to outstanding materials problems.  ***
