Title       : Multidimensional Problems in Granular Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9802520

Award Number: 9802520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16588              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Bruce Pitman pitman@math.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9802520  Pitman      This interdisciplinary proposal addresses scientific
              issues regarding the dynamics of granular materials coupled with interstitial
              fluid.  The investigation is composed of three parts:  modeling, analysis, and
              numerical computation.  Models of particle-fluid motion must determine which
              physical mechanisms are dominant and which may be neglected without detrimental
              effect.  In particular, traditional models of these flows treat the particle
              phase as a fluid-like material with a viscosity that depends on the particle
              volume fraction.    A significant component of this research program is to
              study the effects of modeling the particle phase as a frictional material. 
              Analysis will be primarily directed toward a study of the stability of
              distinguished solutions to the model equations.  Numerical simulations will
              provide an understanding of nonlinearity in the equations, especially the
              effect of the particle phase model.  These complementary methods of
              investigation will be guided by recent experiments that highlight the need for
              a new approach to the question of particle-fluid interaction.    The combined
              flow of particles and fluid has many industrial applications, such as particle
              coating and drying, particle flow in pressurized vessels and cat-crackers,
              transport by lubrication, and heat transfer.  New xerographic and metallurgic
              technology necessitate very fine powders.  In these latter applications,
              however, as particle size decreases, transport and handling become more
              difficult, and the effects of interstitial gas become more important.  Without
              better characterization of particle-fluid flows, products that exploit new
              technologies may not come on-line as quickly, nor with sufficient reliability. 
              In this regard, it is useful to note a study by the Rand Corporation showing
              that, because of an inability to accurately predict powder behavior,
              solids-producing manufacturing plants performed on average at 63% of design
              capacity, compared to 84% for liquids-producing plants .  This project will
              study new mathematical models for the behavior of very fine powders.  The
              results of this project will be compared with concurrent experimental work by
              industrial researchers.
