Title       : Development of a Cryogenic Femtosecond Aptureless Near-Field Scanning Optical
               Microscope for Nanostructure Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9802784

Award Number: 9802784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy Levy jlevy@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802784  Levy  This award provides partial support to develop a variable- 
              temperature "apertureless" near -field scanning optical  microscope (ANSOM) for
              studying local electronic and lattice  dynamics in nanostructured
              optoelectronic materials.  The  instrument will have unique and unprecedented
              capabilities,  combining near-atomic spatial resolution, femtosecond  temporal
              resolution, a wide operating temperature range  (1.6K-400K), and operation in
              magnetic fields up to 10  Tesla.  The instrument is specifically suited for the
              study  of material properties which couple to refractive index  changes.  The
              contrast mechanism for ANSOM comes from  measuring small phase shifts in
              scattered light from an  atomic or magnetic force microscope tip.  By
              modulating the  tip-sample separation, it is possible to measure local  sample
              polarizabilities (electric or magnetic) at length  scales significantly smaller
              than those attainable by either  conventional optical or fiber-based near-field
              scanning  optical microscopes (NSOMs).  The instrument design will  also allow
              it to be used as a confocal scanning optical  microscope, which can focus or
              collect light with high  efficiency and diffraction-limited spatial resolution.
                 There are presently several low-temperature NSOMs operating  in laboratories
              around the world.  Sub-wavelength spatial  resolution for these instruments is
              obtained by scanning a  tapered optical fiber close to the sample to form an
              image.  However, both practical and fundamental constraints prevent  the
              optical resolution from approaching that of atomic-force  microscopy (AFM) or
              scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).  The unique power of this instrument will
              come from the  ability to combine traditional strengths of optical methods 
              (e.g., time resolution or energy selectivity) with the  spatial resolution of
              atomic force microscopy.  It is  possible using ANSOM to achieve spatial
              resolution below 10  A.  The combination of spatial and temporal resolution
              will  open many new research  avenues related to dynamical  processes in
              nanometer-scale condensed matter systems.    The immediate scientific
              applications are threefold: (1) the  study of exciton dephasing in
              semiconductor quantum dots,  (2) spectroscopic and time-resolved studies of
              neutral  excitations in single conjugated polymer chains, and (3)  lattice
              dynamics and domain wall motion in ferroelectrics  and quantum paraelectrics. 
              Longer-range goals include the  study of magnetization dynamics in ultrathin
              magnetic films,  applications in biology (e.g., DNA sequencing), and  optically
              detected magnetic resonance.  The construction of  this instrument will benefit
              from the design principles of  earlier pioneers in the area of low-temperature
              scanning  probe microscopy.  Principles that ensure sufficient  vibration
              isolation, coarse approach mechanisms, etc., have  been incorporated into the
              proposed design.  Many of the  critical design parameters have been assessed
              from the  construction of a room-temperature prototype, which is  currently
              being used to study domain dynamics in  ferroelectric thin films.    The
              construction of this instrument will provide valuable  experience for students
              at both the graduate and  undergraduate level.  The project will be overseen by
              the  principal investigator, who will direct a postdoctoral  researcher, a
              graduate student, and several undergraduate  students.  The graduate student
              will work closely with  undergraduates on various subtasks related to the
              larger  goal of  building the proposed instrument,  such as writing  software
              drivers for instruments such as lock-in amplifiers  and temperature
              controllers.  The overall goals of the  project will be discussed during group
              meetings so that  undergraduates (and graduate students) can see how their 
              project fits in with the larger goal.  Support for both the  graduate and
              undergraduate students comes from an NSF  CAREER award DMR-9701725.  %%%  ***
