Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: The Interpretation of Indefinites as a
               Window on the Interpretive Procedure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9802869

Award Number: 9802869
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75888              (Estimated)
Investigator: Orin J. Percus opercus@linguist.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5920,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802869  Percus    The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour  months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twenty-four-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Orin J. Percus to work with Dr.  Gennaro
              Chierchia at the Universita degli Studi di Milano in  Italy.    Dr. Percus'
              research is concerned with the general problem  in linguistics of how language
              encodes information, and how  a sentence's structure contributes information. 
              An  important result of modern linguistics is that the cognitive  systems
              underlying our use of language employ a number of  different kinds of discrete
              representations.  One kind of  representation indicates how words join together
              to form  larger units; another encodes what we think of as meaning.  Many
              assume that there is a procedure that maps  representation encoding structure
              to representation encoding  meaning.  The goal of Dr. Percus' research is to
              improve our  understanding of this procedure.      His host, Dr. Chierchia, is
              competent in both syntax and  semantics.  He is a leading formal semanticist,
              who is at  the forefront of the issues of what makes language learnable  and
              how linguistic variation is constrained.  ***
