Title       : Dissertation Enhancement: Noncommutative Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9802696

Award Number: 9802696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Dadarlat mdd@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802696  Dadarlat      This award supports a twelve month NSF Dissertation 
              Enhancement Award for Dr. Marius Dadarlat at the University  of Tokyo, Tokyo,
              Japan.  Dr. Dadarlat's student, Mr.  Nathaniel P. Brown, will work with Dr.
              Yasuyuki Kawahigashi,  Professor in the Department of Mathematics, on a
              research  project entitled, "Noncummutative  Dynamical Systems."    A dynamical
              system is a mathematical model through which one  attempts to understand the
              behavior of physical phenomena.  The study of classical, or commutative,
              dynamical systems is  closely related to many aspects of modern physics
              including  both chaos and quantum theories.  The proposed research will 
              attempt to apply classical dynamical systems theory to the  noncommutative
              setting and will investigate a series of  geometric and algebraic questions
              concerning crossed product  C*-algebras.  The first component of the research
              will  examine when certain classes of crossed product C*-algebras  are embedded
              into AF algebras, allowing deduction concerning  the specific geometric and
              algebraic properties of the  crossed product C*-algebra.  The second component
              of the  research will build on some of the known classification  results for
              crossed product C*-algebras; specifically, it  will attempt to determine when
              certain crossed products are  essentially the same.  Finally, the research will
              attempt to  develop an innovative notion of topological entropy for  these
              noncommutative systems.  Entropy has played an  important role in the study of
              commutative systems, but  entropy in the noncommutative setting is relatively
              new and  not yet well understood.  The research is designed to study  this
              facet of mathematics with the goal of achieving  concrete calculations for
              future examination.  ***
