Title       : Floer Homology and Closed Orbits of Hamiltonian Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9802460

Award Number: 9802460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54228              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Tian tian@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS 9802460  Principal Investigators:  Gang Tian and Gang
              Liu    The purpose of this project is to continue the investigation of Liu and 
               Tian on the applications of their construction of relative virtual moduli  
              cycles in Floer homology and the dynamics of Hamiltonian systems on  
              symplectic manifolds.  By using this construction, the principal  
              investigators were able to extend Floer homology from the semi-positive   case
              to all closed symplectic manifolds and consequently to solve the  
              non-degenerate Arnold conjecture completely.  By using certain refinements   of
              this construction, they established a general relationship between  
              non-vanishing of certain GW-invariants and the existence of closed orbits   of
              Hamiltonian systems.  As one of the applications of this, they solved a  
              stabilized version of Weinstein conjecture.  Base on these results, the  
              principal investigators propose further investigations on the Arnold  
              conjecture for degenerate case and some other unsettled cases of the  
              Weinstein conjecture.    Hamiltonian equations arise from classical mechanics,
              celestial mechanics   and many other physical systems as fundamental equations
              governing the   motions in such systems.  The dynamics of Hamiltonian systems
              describes the   evolution of the "classical" world.  One of the important steps
              to   understand the dynamics of Hamiltonian systems is to understand their  
              simplest dynamic behavior, the periodical orbits.  The basic questions   here,
              known as the Arnold conjecture and the Weinstein conjecture, are   about the
              existence and the number of closed orbits of Hamiltonian systems.    Both of
              these conjectures have been considered as main guiding problems in   the
              subject of symplectic topology.  The methods developed by the   investigators
              of this project to solve the non-degenerate Arnold conjecture   and stabilized
              Weinstein conjecture have opened the door for investigating   the Arnold
              conjecture for the degenerate case and the Weinstein conjectur e   for general
              symplectic manifolds.
