Title       : Estimation and Computation for Multivariate Classification 
and Mixture
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9802522

Award Number: 9802522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rabindra N. Bhattacharya bhattach@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Flury  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9802522
Bernhard Flury

This research focuses on methods of classification in
              multivariate statistics, studying theoretical, practical, and computational
              aspects.  The investigator explores finite mixture models with an "improper"
              component, i.e., a component in which each data point has the same density
              value.  This leads to a flexible class of estimators that depend on the setting
              of a tuning parameter.  For the extreme values of the tuning parameter, the
              resulting methods of estimation correspond to fully parametric maximum
              likelihood, and to nonparametric likelihood (empirical distribution function),
              respectively.  The estimators are useful for contaminated data, and their
              performance is compared to traditional robust estimators.  The main
              computational tool is an application of the EM algorithm.  In another problem
              related to finite mixture analysis the investigator studies the question of
              dimensionality: if interest focuses on a subset of variables measured, should
              one use only that particular subsetfor the purpose of estimating the parameters
              of the mixture, or should one use the remaining variables ("covariates") as
              well?  In addition, this research develops the asymptotic distribution theory
              for maximum likelihood estimators in multivariate models that are usually
              regarded as untractable by conventional methods (common canonical variates,
              partial common principal components, the discrimination subspace model, and
              others), and investigates iterative computational methods needed for estimating
              their parameters.

Methods of classification play an increasingly important
              role in areas such as remote sensing, pattern and speech recognition, and
              taxonomy.  The investigator studies methods of estimation and computation in
              multivariate situations, i.e., when many variables are measured on the same
              objects. In particular, the finite mixture model used in this research allows
              us to improve statistical methodology in situations where the data is distorted
              by errors and outliers.  Efficient computational methods developed in this
              research allow us to exploit this powerful methodology, and to make it
              applicable to problems in many areas, including biotechnoloy and environmental
              sciences.  Further research topics involve models of allometric growth in
              biology, improved estimation in unsupervised methods of classification, the
              development of efficient computational algorithms for recentlycreated
              multivariate methods of data analysis, and the analysis of periodic phenomena
              in biology.

