Title       : Cubature Formulae and Orthogonal Polynomials in Several Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9802265

Award Number: 9802265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Florian Potra                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan Xu yuan@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: The project continues an ongoing program, the aim of which is to
              
establish a workable theory for orthogonal polynomials (OP) in several
              
variables and use the knowledge to construct cubature formulae (CF), synonym
              
for higher dimensional numerical integration formulae. A general framework
              
has been developed by the P.I. in the first phase of this program, including
              
an extensive theory of OP in several variables based on a new vector-matrix
              
notation and a systematic study of the relation between CF and the common
              
zeros of (quasi-)OP. The main focus of this project is on OP and CF on
              the
unit sphere, on the unit ball and on the standard simplex of the Euclidean
              
space. The starting point is a recent observation made by the P.I. that
              
orthogonal structures on these domains are closely related, which has led to
              
new understanding about OP on these classical domains and to a powerful new
              
method for constructing CF. Special attention will be given to the structure
              
of OP and CF that are invariant under certain groups, such as octahedral
              group
or symmetric group of the simplex, which has a close relation to the
              recent 
development of h-harmonics associated to the reflection groups.
              

Cubature formulae and orthogonal polynomials in several variables
              have
fruitful connections with many branches of applied mathematics such as
              
numerical integration, approximation, coding theory, data fitting,
              numerical
solution of differential equation, finite element methods to name a
              few. CF 
itself is essential for practical evaluation of high dimensional
              integrals, 
which is one of the basic questions in numerical analysis and is
              often taken 
as a test problem in high speed computing. The present project
              seeks new 
understanding of the nature of CF and OP in several variables. Its
              aim is to 
determine the precise relationship between orthogonal structures on
              the sphere,
the ball, and the simplex, especially analytic relations which
              will lead to new 
progress on convergence of the orthogonal expansion, and to
              develop practical
method that will yield new effective numerical integration
              formulae on these 
domains, especially on the unit sphere. 



