Title       : RUI: Geometric Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9802388

Award Number: 9802388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Gardner gardner@baker.math.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9178,9229,9251,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geometric tomography uses data concerning sections by planes and projections on
              planes of geometric objects to obtain information about these objects. The
              latter include general compact sets, but often they are convex bodies,
              polytopes, star-shaped bodies, or finite sets. One advantage of this setting is
              that it becomes more probable that inverse problems have a unique solution. 
              Generally, the a priori knowledge that the unknown object is of uniform density
              can be exploited to retrieve more information than would otherwise be possible.
              This can lead to algorithms that are more effective when few measurements are
              available, and less sensitive to measurement errors or noise. Within
              mathematics, geometric tomography has links to functional analysis, convex
              geometry, Minkowski geometry, and combinatorics. The project will focus on
              several topics in this area and continue the development of geometric
              tomography begun in two previous NSF proposals. New directions include
              reconstruction of objects from measurements of volumes of projections onto
              planes or concurrent sections by planes, stability questions related to
              sections, and the systematic development of discrete tomography (involving
              inverse problems concerning finite sets). Examples of proposed techniques are
              the use of recently discovered Fourier transform formulas and of special bodies
              defined by $p$th means of metric quantities. Also included is a program
              designed to stimulate undergraduate research.    CAT scanners are machines that
              save lives daily. They take X-rays in a number of different directions, and
              synthesize the information to create an image of a two-dimensional section of
              part of the body. The mathematics behind this process is called computerized
              tomography. It is very successful, but not perfect; the reconstructed image is
              only approximate, and to get a better picture with the same procedure one has
              to take more X-rays, causing greater expense and likelihood of side effects. In
              geometric tomography, only homogeneous objects ar e allowed-the density of the
              object is the same everywhere inside it. An example from medicine would be a
              bone or a kidney. One can use this information to find better reconstruction
              procedures. The scope of geometric tomography is actually much wider. Any
              measurement involving sections of a homogeneous object by lines or planes or
              its shadows on lines or planes can be considered. Because of this, it has many
              links to other areas, both in mathematics (there is a large overlap with convex
              geometry, the geometry of shapes without holes or dents) and outside. For
              example, a new technique in electron microscopy allows measurement of the
              number of atoms in a crystal lying on certain lines. The material scientist
              wants to reconstruct the crystal from this information. The object in this
              case-the crystal-is mathematically represented by a finite set of points.  This
              project continues the development of several aspects of the mathematics of
              geometric tomography.
