Title       : Acquisition of an Imaging Filter for an Analytical Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9802839

Award Number: 9802839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehmet Sarikaya sarikaya@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ondrej L. Krivanek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9802839
Sarikaya
This award provides partial support to acquire a post-column
              imaging filter, to be interfaced to an ultra-high-resolution 200 keV analytical
              transmission electron microscope.  The resultant high-resolution,
              energy-filtering transmission electron microscope (EFTEM) will be employed in a
              wide range of multidisciplinary research and materials science projects at the
              University of Washington.

The instrument will be used to: (i) map the
              distribution of most elements in thin samples and probe the sample's chemistry
              with a spatial resolution of 0.5-2 nm in about one minute for a 512 x 512 pixel
              map; (ii) digitally record energy-filtered high resolution EM images and
              diffraction patterns with precision that will revolutionize our ability to
              analyze materials quantitatively; and (iii) acquire data by electron energy
              loss spectroscopy and associated techniques, such as energy loss near-edge and
              extended edge fine structure analyses (ELNES and EXELFS), with unprecedented
              sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio.  Owing to the high-quality objective
              lens of the microscope, the obtainable spatial resolution in elemental maps
              will be about 0.5 nm, i.e. significantly better than the resolution that can be
              achieved in most energy-filtering systems.  The wide range of capabilities made
              possible by the instrument will revolutionize the way structures  can be
              analyzed in many areas of materials science, condensed matter physics,
              chemistry and biology at the University of Washington and in the whole Pacific
              Nrorthwestern geographical region.  The instrument will be employed extensively
              in courses on materials science characterization at UW, and it will also serve
              to deepen the extensive collaborations we have with local and national
              companies and various government and university laboratories.

Among the
              materials to be investigated are: (i) Biomimetic and biological materials:
              interfaces and problems related to templating for inorganic growth; (ii)
              Microelectronic devices: interfaces, diffusion, oxide compositions, dielectric
              properties, and dopant distrubutions; (iii) Ferroelectrics and dielectrics:
              local structures/properties, and compositional variations; (iv) Ceramic
              composites and glasses: structure and composition profiles, spinodal
              decomposition in glass matrices.

The nano-scale composition and chemistry in
              materials research are the keys to understanding and controlling the
              macroscopic properties of materials.  All the materials to be studied with the
              instrument are of very high scientific and industrial importance.  The
              instrument will allow the materials to be imaged at atomic resolution, their
              composition to be studied at nm-level resolution, and their bonding and
              electronic properties to be investigated.  Our research will also focus on
              advancing the capabilities of electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) towards
              reliable single atom detection.  In particular, detection limits will be
              studied aiming to extend the attainable minimum detectable mass fraction into
              the parts per million range.  The improved technique will be applied in areas
              such as dopant detection in semiconductors and ionic concentrations in
              biological materials.   Our previously developed techniques in the ELNES and
              EXELFS areas will be made much more powerful by the excellent probe-forming
              capabilities of the 002B, and we will apply them to a braod range of advanced
              materials.  We also plan to develop spectrum imaging with the new instrument
              and optimize it so that it can produce reliable elemental maps of elements
              present in concentrations of less than 1 part per thousand.
%%%
***

