Title       : Adsorption Sites and Nucleation in Materials Deposition on Silicon and
               Hydrogen-Terminated Silicon Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9424296

Award Number: 9424296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Flynn flynn@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian E. Bent  (Principal Investigator former)
              Yves J. Chabal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gwyn P. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1762,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9424296 Bent  The goal of this research is to obtain an atomic and molecular
              level understanding of film nucleation on silicon substrates through a
              combination of  infrared(IR) vibrational spectroscopy and scanning tunneling
              microscopy(STM).  By combining IR with STM, a number of important issues in
              materials deposition and etching on silicon surfaces -- issues which are
              fundamental to understanding current microelectronics processes and to
              developing future technologies will be addressed definitively.  Initially the
              focus will be on exploring the limits of the approach with emphasis on the
              GaAs/Si system as well as emphasis on the oxidation of silicon. The GaAs/Si
              system will test the limitations of the experimental approach since this is a
              system where the IR intensities are expected to be particularly weak.  Silicon
              oxidation will also be studied both because of its technological importance and
              because it represents a system where high quality and interesting IR results at
              low frequencies using CoSi2-implanted silicon samples can be obtained.  The
              systems that will be investigated include: oxidation of Si(100) by water and by
              ethanol as a model system for the TEOS (tetraethoxysilane) MOCVD process. %%%
              The characterization techniques used in this research provide site specific
              "fingerprints" of  bonding at surfaces, and the fingerprint from each of these
              techniques places constraints on the interpretation of the other which permits
              more definitive conclusions than would be possible from either of the
              techniques alone.  Because of the significance of these materials for
              electronic and photonic applications, it is important to study the details of
              elementary chemical and physical processes, and to understand fundamental
              features of structure/property relationships.  An important feature of the
              program is the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area of materials research. ***
