Title       : Industry-University Cooperative Research: Molding of Thermosets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9424553

Award Number: 9424553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude Cohen cc@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cornelius A. Hieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Cohen - 9424553    This is a Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
              with Industry (GOALI) award to enable the PIs, working with industrial
              partners, to extend the knowledge and science base available for the molding of
              thermosets.  They will perform detailed comparisons between numerical
              predictions based on computer simulations and molding experiments, including
              pressure-versus-time traces at various locations in the cavity as obtained with
              flush-mounted pressure transducers.  They will focus on thermosetting materials
              of industrial interest which are frequently highly filled.  In addition,
              recently developed fast-reacting thermosets commercially available for the
              plastic packaging of microelectronics devices will also be investigated.  A
              large fraction of the work will be devoted to the kinetic, rheological, and
              thermal characterization of the materials in order to determine the critical
              parameters that govern the moldability of a thermosetting compound.  The
              numerical-simulation work will elucidate the physics of the process and will
              allow for the optimization of process conditions.    The project involves
              Motorola, The Ford Motor Company, and Advanced CAE Technology.  Motorola
              technical staff will perform instrumented spiral-flow experiments in a
              manufacturing transfer-molding machine using specialty epoxies developed for
              encapsulation.  Ford's engineers will perform controlled injection molding of
              bumpers and instrument panels using a variety of thermosets such as polyesters,
              phenolics and ureas.  The results will be compared with numerical simulations. 
              Advanced CAE Technology will collaborate with Cornell on several aspects of the
              characterization of the materials.
