Title       : CRB: Biodiversity in Experimental Prairie Restorations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9424546

Award Number: 9424546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Howe hfhowe@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Howe  I propose to discover whether seed-eating birds and rodents and
              foliage-eating mammals influence plant diversity and community composition as
              agricultural land is converted to native tallgrass vegetation.  Birds and
              mammals select seeds by size, and most herbivorous mammals select seeds by
              size, and most herbivorous mammals prefer to eat foliage of some plant species
              over others.  However it is not known whether preferences evident in the lab
              actually alter composition and diversity of tallgrass prairie communities,
              either in conserved remnants or in synthetic assemblages created by
              restoration.  Understanding such basic processes as seedbank depletion and
              intensive mammalian herbivore will aid in land reclamation, prairie
              restoration, and conservation of hundreds of native species which now occupy
              peripheral oldfield or woodland habitats, or increasingly isolated prairie
              remnants now (( 1% of pre-European extent on rich soils suitable for intensive
              agriculture.    An exclosure experiment in southwestern Wisconsin will
              determine whether consumer choices by vertebrates regulate vegetative
              composition during establishment of replicated restorations of prairie grass
              and forbs.  I will seed 45 representative species of fallow agricultural land
              that has been prepared for two years.  Different levels of vertebrate access
              (no access, bird access, rodent access, total access including deer) should
              produce different species composition in replicated plots that initially
              receive the same number an composition of seeds.  Cricetid and microtine
              rodents should depress large-seeded species (( 3.0  mg/seed), sparrows should
              depress species with seeds of intermediate size (0.3-2.0 mg/seed), while
              populations of plants with seeds to small to be of interest to vertebrates ((
              0.2 mg/seed) should be most diverse and abundant when granviores are present. 
              With all vertebrates absent, large-seeded species should be disproportionately
              abundant.  Rodent and deer access after emergence should favor grasses because 
              of selective herbivore on forbs.  It is remarkable that foraging preferences
              considered axiomatic in foraging ecology of seed selection and herbivore are
              generally untested in tallgrass prairie communities, and therefore cannot be
              applied to conserving or restoring a rich flora.  Recent experience has shown
              that when restoration is done as a science, it is very revealing.  This study
              will augment scientific understanding needed by federal, state, and local
              governments, private interests, and environmental groups that show an
              increasing commitment to "restoration from scratch" of species assemblages that
              are vanishingly rare on rich agricultural soils.
