Title       : Studies of Geometric Algorithms and Their Applicatins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9424398

Award Number: 9424398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Pollack pollack@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janos Pach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micha Sharir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The relatively new field of computational geometry has  developed  at an
              accelerating rate in the past few years. The   problems that  it  encompasses
              cover a wide range of applications, such as   motion  planning and  computer
              graphics, and their solution often involves  the use   of sophisticated 
              techniques drawn from many branches of  mathematics and   theoretical computer 
              science. Prior work includes  extensive contributions to many   basic and
              applied  problems in the  area, including motion planning, hidden   surface
              removal and  related visibility problems, combinatorial and algebraic  
              analysis  of  arrangements of curves and algebraic surfaces, randomized   
              algorithms for linear  programming and other optimization  problems, etc.   
              The   purpose of this  research is to  continue the work in these fields  and 
              to extend it into new core areas in  computational geometry.  A  major portion
              of the research is   devoted to the  study of  arrangements of curves and
              surfaces.      Specifically, the following  problems are being studied:    1.
              Combinatorial and   algorithmic problems related  to  substructures (lower
              envelopes, single cells, zones,   etc.) in  arrangements  of surfaces in higher
              dimensions.    2. Related algorithms in   real algebraic  geometry for
              computing  cells and road maps in semi-algebraic   sets.    3.  Combinatorial
              and algorithmic problems involving planar    arrangements of  segments or
              curves (also known as ``geometric  graphs''.    A   theme that is  manifest in
              this work is the rich cross-fertilization between   basic research  in
              computational geometry  and the various application areas,   where problems in 
              one area  motivate the study of new basic problems whose   solution in turn 
              finds  applications in many other areas.    Another theme is the   strong
              connection  between the combinatorial  analysis of substructures in  
              arrangements and the  design of  corresponding efficient algorithms for  
              constructing and utilizing  these structures.  Often the efficiency of such an
              algorithm    crucially depends  on the size of the structure to be computed, 
              and most of the   algorithm design  has to be devoted to the  combinatorial
              analysis of the   complexity of that  structure. These  considerations are
              reflected in the work   being done.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
