Title       : An Investigation into the Socio-Legal and Cultural Bases of Democracy in South
               Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9424287

Award Number: 9424287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316798             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9424287  Gibson  This project seeks to trace the progress of democratization and
              political change in the new South Africa.  It focuses on the systematic
              assessment of the causes and consequences for the legal and constitutional
              institutions of South Africa of intolerance in the political culture.  To do so
              it assesses political tolerance and intolerance as demonstrated in the beliefs
              of both masses and elites.  Survey research methods will allow the
              investigators to accomplish four related goals:  1) analyze the distribution of
              intolerance, considering its level, its breadth, and pluralism of distribution;
               2) assess the etiology of intolerance, testing a number of hypotheses that
              have emerged from studies in Western literature; 2) examine the consequences of
              intolerance especially for interpersonal political interaction, and political
              participation; 4) test the pliability of intolerance by determining the extent
              to which citizens can be "talked out of" their intolerance or into giving
              "sober second thought" to repression of their political enemies.  The surveys
              will be conducted under contract with a reputable South African firm under the
              supervision of an onsite South African collaborator.  This research on South
              Africa should increase our knowledge about how democratic legal culture emerges
              out of the background of dictatorial government.  %%%  This project seeks to
              trace the progress of democratization and political change in the new South
              Africa.  It focuses on the systematic assessment of the causes and consequences
              for the legal and constitutional institutions of South Africa of intolerance in
              the political culture.  To do so it assesses political tolerance and
              intolerance as demonstrated in the beliefs of both masses and elites.  The
              investigators will 1) analyze the distribution of intolerance;  2) assess the
              origins and foundations of intolerance; 2) examine the consequences of
              intolerance especially for interpersonal political interaction, and political
              participation; 4) test the plia bility of intolerance by determining the extent
              to which citizens can be "talked out of" their intolerance or into giving
              "sober second thought" to repression of their political enemies.  This research
              on South Africa should increase our knowledge about how democratic legal
              culture emerges out of the background of dictatorial government.  ***
