Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Mathematical Models in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9424592

Award Number: 9424592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Waltman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Waltman       The investigator develops and analyzes a class of biological 
              models generally described as chemostat-like models.  While  ordinary
              differential equations techniques have been effective for  the basic models,
              effects such as diffusion and transport require  system of reaction diffusion
              equations.  The basic techniques are  those of monotone dynamical systems on
              infinite dimensional  spaces.  The effect of delays (for example the cell
              cycle) can also  be described in such a context.  General techniques for
              competitive  systems on products of ordered Banach spaces, developed in 
              previous work, seem to be applicable.  Plasmids are often used in  the
              manufacture of products by genetically altered organisms.  Because the plasmid
              can be lost in reproduction and because the  plasmid-free organism is often a
              better competitor, coding for  antibiotic resistance is often included on the
              plasmid and an  antibiotic used in the feed bottle.  The differential equation 
              models describing chemostats with inhibitors and plasmids are no  longer
              monotone.  The project undertakes the mathematical analysis  of such models.   
                 The chemostat is a basic piece of laboratory apparatus that  models a
              bio-reactor.  The mathematical description of such models  takes the form of
              systems of ordinary differential equations.  If  the basic assumption of well
              mixing is removed from the model  (there is evidence that it is not satisfied
              in general) more  complicated equations result.  The project undertakes the
              analysis  of such model equations using the modern techniques of dynamical 
              systems.  The general view is to use the mathematics to point the  way to
              biological (or chemical engineering) experiments with the  hope of building
              better bio-reactors.
