Title       : SGER: A New Approach to the Study of Meiotic Chiasma Interference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9424330

Award Number: 9424330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Haber haber@hydra.rose.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9424330  Haber  This proposal presents a new approach to understanding the
              mechanisms of meiotic crossover interference and the connection between gene
              conversions and crossing-over. Interference, the inhibition of crossing-over in
              chromosomal regions adjacent to another crossover, has been known since early
              in this century, but the mechanism by which one crossover during meiosis can
              exert an inhibiting effect on an adjacent crossover - over distances of
              hundreds of kilobase pairs - is not yet understood. One of the difficulties in
              studying interference is that the location of double-strand breaks that
              initiate meiotic recombination in any given meiosis is not known, so that it is
              difficult to determine how one recombination event influences another. The
              investigator has expressed the site-specific HO endonuclease gene under the
              control of a meiotic-specific SPO13 promoter in order to create defined
              double-strand breaks in well-defined intervals, so that the relationship
              between gene conversion, crossing-over and interference can be studied.
              Preliminary studies have confirmed that the expression of SPO13::HO leads to
              meiotic gene conversions after premeiotic DNA replication. Moreover the
              investigator has shown that complete meiotic recombination can be carried out
              in rad50 spol3 diploids in which all normal meiotic double-strand breaks are
              absent; hence, examining crossing-over in the absence of any other initiating
              lesions is possible.  This should make it possible to confirm - by indirect
              immunofluorescence using antibodies directed against recombination proteins -
              that elements of the synaptonemal complex, implicated in the establishment of
              interference, will assemble at the site of a double-strand break.  Several
              aspects of this project are "high risk." First, it must first be established
              more precisely if SP013::HO-induced double-strand breaks are produced at the
              same time as normal meiotic breaks. Second, it must be established if apparent
              crossing-over associated with gene conversion in a  rad50 spol3 background is
              in fact the consequence of reciprocal exchange. Finally, the detection of a
              single region of synaptonemal complex by cytological means may prove to be more
              difficult than to see many such regions in a normal meiosis.  %%% 
              Interference, the inhibition of crossing-over in chromosomal regions adjacent
              to another cross-over, has been known since early in this century, but the
              mechanism by which one crossover during meiosis can exert an inhibiting effect
              on an adjacent crossover - over distances of hundreds of kilobase pairs - is
              not yet understood.  The investigation has designed an elegant series of
              experiments to further our understanding of this fundamental process.  ***
