Title       : GOALI: Nonlinear Identification and Control Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9424094

Award Number: 9424094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale E. Seborg seborg@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Seborg GOALI    Model-based process control strategies utilizing
              nonlinear dynamic models can provide improvements over conventional PID and
              control strategies based on linear dynamic models.  A factor for successful
              application of nonlinear control systems is the availability of a reasonably
              accurate, dynamic model.  For some industrial control applications, physical
              models can be developed from first principles such as unsteady-state mass and
              energy balances.  However, it may not be feasible to use a physical model as
              part of the on-line control calculations due to model complexity, unknown model
              parameters, or the lack of key measurements.  In many applications, accurate
              physical models are not available for a variety of reasons, which include
              process complexity, lack of process understanding, limited measurements, and
              the time and effort required to develop them.  For these situations, an
              attractive alternative is to develop an empirical nonlinear model which is
              consistent with available a priori physical information using nonlinear
              identification techniques.    In this joint academic-industrial research
              project, process control researchers at the University of California at Santa
              Barbara and at DuPont will address a number of issues in nonlinear
              identification which limit the effectiveness of existing methods and their
              widespread application.  These issues include: (1) selection of the input
              sequence to ensure appropriate process excitation; (2) incorporation of
              available a priori process knowledge; (3) selection of key design parameters
              such as sampling period, amount of data to be acquired, model orders and model
              time delay; (4) characterization of model uncertainty; and (5) on-line model
              updating and adaptation.  The identification methods resulting from the
              research will be evaluated in a number of simulation and experimental studies,
              including industrial applications.  A case study will provide a comparison of
              alternative identification techniques based, in part, on whether  they can be
              used to develop effective model-based control systems.
