Title       : RUI: Semantics and Design of Object-Oriented Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9424123

Award Number: 9424123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim B. Bruce kim@cs.williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This award is for research on the design and semantics of  statically-typed
              object-oriented programming languages.  The project has several  goals.  (1) It
              builds on and extends the design of the polymorphic,  statically-typed
              object-oriented  programming language, PolyTOIL, to provide  more power  and
              expressibility while retaining  type-safety. (2) It investigates  the design of
              an object-oriented language whose primary  relation between types  is matching
              rather than subtyping.  This will likely req  uire the development  of a
              partial type-inference system to allow the programmer to avoid  the 
              proliferation of bounded type parameters. (3) It seeks to create better 
              mathematical  (denotational) models for foundational calculi for
              object-oriented  languages. (4) It  investigates the development of
              verification  techniques for  object-oriented programming  languages. (5) It
              applies current knowledge of the  semantics of object-oriented languages to 
              the understanding  of concurrent  object-oriented languages.    These problems
              are being attacked using formal  specifications of type-checking rules and 
              operational semantics.  Subject-reduction-style theorems are being used to
              prove the safety  of type  systems. Interpreters are being written in order to
              provide a better  understanding  of the strengths and weaknesses of the systems
              and in order to  invetigate scaling up of theoretical designs to full-strength
              programming  languages.  The project seeks to  validate verification techniques
              by proving  the consistency of an operational and axiomatic  semantics.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
