Title       : GOALI/IUCRP: Uniform Grain Size Polysilicon for Thin Film Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9424399

Award Number: 9424399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331481             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Collins collins@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9424399  Collins   The goal is to define low temperature processes to form 
              uniform grain silicon films for use in fabricating thin film transistors to be
              benchmarked in static Random Access Memory System (RAMS), in collaboration with
              industrial partners.  At present, transistors in amorphous silicon achieve low
              leakage, while in polysilicon, they achieve carrier high mobility.  But one
              material is not able to provide both desirable properties at the same time
              unless crystalline silicon is used.  The research approach is to use anodic
              aluminum oxide as a seed bed, where the seeds are uniformly spaced so that the
              subsequent polysilicon grains are forced to have an extremely narrow 
              distribution of grain sizes thereby providing a tighter distribution of
              threshold voltages, mobilites and leakage currents in the thin film
              transistors.  The first step is to use aluminum substrates that are anodized to
              form alumina and then move on to Al metalized Si wafers as substrates for final
              Si wafers processing through device fabrication .  Since the processed wafer
              must never exceed 350 degrees celcius during the polysilicon formation on
              alumina due to the temperature limits of the underlying devices, non-thermal
              electron irradiation will be incorporated to cause weakly-bound species to
              desorb or re-order more efficiently, thereby allowing new microstructural
              pathways for uniform grain silicon.  First, a silicon seed layer that has a
              single strong preferred orientation  will be grown on the anodized Al, with as
              grown grain size as large as possible.  Second, energetic particle
              bombardment-assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition will be used for the thick
              Si-on-Si film growth to achieve uniform size grains.  Finally, grain boundary
              passivation is achieved via either low temperature plasma-based anneals or
              plasma immersion ion implantation.  The electrical performance of transistors
              built with these silicon wafers will be measured with a target to exceed on/off
              current ratios above 10 to the power of 10 and mobilitie s exceeding 500 square
              cm./V-sec.      Silicon remains the workhorse semiconductor material in the
              manufacture of computers, telecommunication equipment and myriad's of
              electronics devices.  Successful completion of this research project has the
              potential to drive down the cost of silicon wafers for many electronic
              applications and improve the efficiency of many electronic devices.  Further,
              industrial partners are collaborating closely  by hosting university faculty
              and one student for three months and sending their own researcher to the
              university for one year.  Cross fertilization of ideas between academia and
              industry impacts the Nation's ability to select relevant areas for research and
              then transform the results into the commercial sector to maintain global
              competitiveness.
