Title       : Hydrodynamic Convection of a Passive Scalar in a Two-Dimensional Couette Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9424355

Award Number: 9424355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Lun Wu xlwu@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9424355  Wu    In  this  research we investigate statistical properties of a
               passive  scalar  coupled to a two-dimensional (2D) fluctuating velocity 
              field.  The  experimental object is a free-standing soap film which is  driven 
              by  a  2D Couette cell.  The 2D Couette cell, which has recently  been 
              developed  in  our laboratory, allows precise control of  hydrodynamic  flow 
              and  characterization of various flow instabilities.  Our  early  experiments 
              have  shown  that  a driven  soap  film  exhibits  strong  spatiotemporal 
              fluctuations in its thickness.  A  simple  calculation  suggests  that  these
              fluctuations can be treated as a passive  scalar  and  that the
              viscous-"diffusion" subrange is extensive due to a sharp  cutoff  at  small 
              length scales.  We intend to measure  the  spectral  density of the
              fluctuations as a function of wavenumber using a  real-  space imaging
              technique.  In addition, the spatiotemporal fluctuations  of  the  velocity 
              field will be measured using a novel  fiber-optical  velocimeter.   We wish to
              establish correlations between the  spectral  densities  of  the velocity field
              and the passive thickness  field  in  flows with different degrees of
              stochastic components.  %%%  Two-dimensional  (2D)  hydrodynamics and 
              instabilities  have  largely  remained domains for theoretical and
              computational analysis.  However,  the subject has great importance for
              meteorology, oceanography, and  a  variety of laboratory experiments.  This
              research is geared toward  an  understanding  of  a  passive scalar, such  as 
              dyes  or  temperature,  convected  by  an  imposed fluctuating velocity 
              distribution  in  two  dimensions.   Our previous experiments have shown that a
              free-standing  soap  film  behaves  like  a 2D fluid, and the  fluctuations  in
               film  thickness  are  influenced  by  the  spatiotemporal  behavior  of  the 
              velocity  distribution.  A simple theoretical analysis indicates  that  if  the
               fluctuations in the thickness are much less than the  average  thickn ess, 
              then the fluctuations can be treated as a  passive  scalar  quantity.    We 
              will  use  a  video  imaging  technique  to   extract  statistical  properties
              of the film thickness in space  and  time  and  correlate  them  with  the 
              imposed 2D  velocity  distribution.   This  research   will  enrich  our 
              general  knowledge  about   hydrodynamic  fluctuations in two dimensions and
              help to refine theoretical models.  ***
