Title       : CRB: Local Mechanisms that Generate Landscape-level Patterns: Relative Habitat
               Suitability of Fragmented Coastal Sage Scrub Habitat for the Rufous-crowned
               Sparrow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9424559

Award Number: 9424559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas T. Bolger douglas.bolger@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the ecological effects of habitat fragmentation is essential to
              preserving  biodiversity.  The Rufous-crowned Sparrow is relatively common in
              large habitat patches, but uncommon  in smaller patches in the human modified
              landscape of southern California.  The hypothesis to be  tested in this
              conservation and restoration biology research is that rarity of the
              Rufous-crowned  Sparrow in small fragments in attributable to one or more
              demographic, behavioral, community, or  ecosystem-level changes which occur as
              a consequence of habitat fragmentation.  This hypothesis will  be addressed
              through comparative studies in matched plots of coastal sage scrub in
              relatively small  patches and in patches embedded in a larger undeveloped area.
               Relevant demographic parameters will be  measured in each patch.  Resource
              abundance and depletion rates will be measured.  This study is an  attempt to
              interpret landscape-scale distribution of a single species within the context
              of an entire  suite of changing ecological conditions.  The research is being
              conducted on a species and at a  spatial scale that ar e immediately relevant
              to the practical conservation of biodiversity in a  rapidly changing
              landscapeIt has long been known that inbreeding, the mating of closely related
              individuals, is unhealthy to both individual offspring and the population as a
              whole.  Theoretical studies show this conclusively, as do domestic animal
              matings, where inbred cows or dogs or horses are much less  healthy, or much
              less fit, than outbred animals.  Further, inbreeding causes a population to
              lose  genetic variation, which means its ability to adapt genetically to a
              changing environment may be  impaired.  Today, conservation biologists are
              often responsible for managing small, threatened  populations of native
              species, which may be susceptible to inbreeding and resultant loss of genetic 
              variation.  Unfortunately, little is known about the relationship of genetic
              variation and fitness (  longevity, disease resistance, reproductive success)
              in the wild.  To analyze this problem Dr. Soule,  will study naturally
              occurring populations of an animal that is particularly well suited for this 
              research - pocket gophers - small, burrowing rodents that are common throughout
              California.  Earlier  studies of different gopher popula tions showed that some
              have unusually high levels of genetic  variation, while some have extremely low
              levels.  But do these genetic differences affect fitness?  The physiological
              vigor of animals will be measured in two ways - metabolic rate during normal 
              activity (burrowing) and by determining which animals assimilate and use food
              most efficiently.  Dr.  Soule will also determine which animals survive and
              reproduce best in nature.  He will then determine  if the animals which are the
              most fit are the ones which have the most genetic variation within their 
              population, or if animals from genetically variable populations are generally
              most fit that animals  from less variable populations.  Finally, he will assess
              which measurements of genetic variation are  most informative in these
              comparisons.  In the long run this type of study will help to determine how 
              best to measure genetic variation in threatened species and whether genetic
              variation is a significant  factor in survival or overall health.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
