Title       : Directed Improvisation: A Paradigm for Multi- Agent Human-Computer Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1997     
File        : a9424261

Award Number: 9424261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Fikes fikes@ksl.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The  proposed project will investigate directed improvisation,  a  new  
              paradigm   for  multi-agent  human-computer  collaboration.  Basically,  one 
              or  more  users  direct  one  or  more  computer  characters  with  abstract 
              instructions  and  constraints.   The  characters   improvise  courses  of 
              behavior  that  follow   the  directions,  express distinctive styles of  
              behavior,  and  meet  other   objectives.    The  resulting  "work,"  
              comprising   the  individual and interactive behaviors of the characters, 
              reflects  a collaboration among all of the human and computer participants. 
              Human  users  collaborate  with  one  another  to  determine  the  abstract 
              structure  and quality of their characters'  behaviors.  Computer  characters
              collaborate with users and with one  another  to  improvise  the  details of
              their individual  and  interactive  behaviors.    Objectives of the project
              are: (a) develop a  model  of  the   directed improvisation paradigm for
              multi-agent  human-  computer   collaboration;  (b) develop and  implement  a 
              domain-  independent   model  of  computer agents  capable  of  performing 
              directed    improvisation   in   single-agent   and   multi-agent 
              configurations;  (c)  develop and implement a  domain-independent  model  of 
              interfaces  for one or more human users to collaborate  with one another while 
              directing the improvisational behavior of  computer  agents;  (d)   instantiate
              the  implemented  models  of  agents and interfaces in an  experimental testbed
              application:  a  Computer-Animated     Improvisational   Theater    (CAIT);   
              (e)  demonstrate,  analyze,  and  evaluate the directed  improvisation 
              paradigm  in  the  CAIT testbed.    Directed improvisation  is  a  promising  
              new   paradigm  for  multi-    agent   human-computer  collaboration,  
              potentially  useful  in  a    diverse   set   of  applications.  The CAIT
              testbed also has intrinsic   significance  as  a pioneering example of
              enjoyable experience-  based learning  environments,  a new  kind of computer
              game, and a   new  artistic  "form" for interactive stories and entertainment.
