Title       : CRB: Projecting Diversity of Neotropical Migratory Birds Under Global Climate
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9424615

Award Number: 9424615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian A. Maurer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1305,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424615  Maurer  An understanding of how to conserve biological diversity must
              incorporate a knowledge of how geographic ranges of species change,
              particularly for those species that may be declining in abundance and are
              likely to become threatened with extinction. This research is designed to
              examine complex changes in the structure of geographic ranges of species of
              neotropical migrant warblers. A number of measures of geographic range
              structure have been discussed in the literature, but these have yet to be
              related directly to population level processes such as dispersal. Simulation
              models will be constructed that relate these measures of geographic range
              structure to population processes in order to provide a theoretical framework
              to understand mechanisms that determine patterns in geographic range structure
              within and among species. In order to establish empirical patterns of changes
              in abundance across  geographic ranges of neotropical migrant warblers, and
              their non-migratory relatives, maps of abundances of species will be
              constructed for 5 five-year time periods. Differences between logarithms of
              these maps between time periods will be used to construct maps of the spatial
              patterns of population change. Maps of abundance across geographic ranges of
              these species will be correlated with output from vegetation models that are
              linked to global climate change models. These correlation models will be used
              to obtain projections of the structure of geographic ranges of species under
              various climate change scenarios. Maps of diversity of warblers under current
              conditions and under a variety of global change scenarios will be constructed
              by overlaying abundance maps, and counting the number of species with
              abundances >0 in each map unit.    The analysis of geographic range structure
              and dynamics proposed herein will provide insight into the patterns and
              processes that determine the spatial distribution of abundances of species, and
              suggest possible mechanisms that are responsible for these patte rns. Such
              pattern changes under global change scenarios will provide further insight into
              the potential loss of species with narrow geographic ranges or small
              populations.
