Title       : New Polymer Electrolyte Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9424446

Award Number: 9424446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Zax dbzl@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel P. Giannelis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9424446  Zak    The objective of this collaborative project is to
              synthesize a  number of new polymer electrolyte nanocomposites, and to apply a 
              variety of analytical techniques so as to probe structure and dy-  namics in
              the nanocomposite phases for eventual applications in the  development of new
              batteries. Polymer systems are particularly  affected when confined, as the
              local dynamic modes which contribute  strongly to bulk mechanical properties
              are largely determined by  interactions between neighboring polymer chains. It
              should be  possible to engineer these systems so as to preferentially retain 
              the beneficial properties while eliminating the undesirable  properties, as
              polymer monolayers are expected to have  substantially different properties
              than the same polymer in bulk.  Thus, polymer nanocomposites provide a unique
              opportunity to study  both theoretically challenging and technologically
              important  problems. The major goals of this project are: (1) to characterize 
              fully the microscopic of cation complexation in intercalated  polymers, and to
              explore the extent to which the polymer and cation  dynamics are correlated;
              (2) to explore the specific parameters of  the polymer which appear to most
              influence cation dynamics; (3) to  understand which parameters of the
              cation/polymer/silicate  interaction are responsible for the improved
              conductivity observed  for polymer nanocomposites; (4) to provide a sensitive
              experimental  test of available theories of ionic conductance in similar
              systems;  and (5) to explore chemical modifications of nanocomposite 
              materials, based on a systematic understanding of microscopic  energetics,
              which optimize for high ionic conductance.   %%%  Batteries based on polymer
              electrolytes are the subject of active  R&D competition worldwide. A key
              unsolved problem is the design and  implementation of lightweight, chemically
              stable and  environmentally benign electrolyte/electrode combinations. 
              Particular interest has focused on lithium salts dissolve d in  flexible
              polymers like poly(ethylene oxide), as these polymer  electrolytes combine
              promisingly high ionic conductances with good  chemical stability, easy
              disposability, and are conveniently  interfaced to high energy density Li
              electrodes. One drawback to  available polymer electrolytes is the precipitous
              drop in  conductance (from 10-4 to 10-8 S/cm) observed as the polymer is 
              cooled below the melt phase-generally, somewhat above room  temperature. The
              objective of this collaborative project is to  synthesize a number of new
              polymer electrolyte nanocomposites, and  to apply a variety of analytical
              techniques so as to probe  structure and dynamics in these nanocomposite phases
              for eventual  applications in the development of new batteries.
