Title       : Phase Slip, Relaxation, and Field Effects in Charge-Density-Wave Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9424572

Award Number: 9424572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Thorne ret6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9424572  Thorne    Charge-density-wave (CDW) phase slip and CDW relaxation  as 
              well  as  a  recently  discovered CDW field-effect  modulation  of  CDW 
              conduction  will  be  explored. Transport  and  x-ray  scattering  experiments
              have indicated that phase slip is driven  by  strains  in  the CDW, that it
              occurs via homogeneous thermal nucleation of  dislocation  loops,  and that
              slips strongly  modify  the  strain  profile near current contacts. The spatial
              distribution of  phase  slip  and  strain  between and beyond current  contacts
               will  be  measured, and compared with models for CDW dislocation nucleation 
              and  motion. Spatially-resolved measurements of noise and Shapiro  steps  will
              determine the effect of phase slips on CDW  dynamics.  The coherence of the CDW
              response will be probed near the Peirels  transition,  where phase slips should
              become very  easy  and  the  effect   of  impurity  strains  on  slip  may 
              become  important.  Measurements  in  semiconducting  materials  such  as  TaS3
               will  investigate  the effect of quasiparticle density on  phase  slip,  which
               may  be  dramatic at low densities and  low  temperatures.  Detailed 
              spatially resolved measurements of time  dependent  CDW  relaxation   will  be 
              performed,  in  an  attempt   to   develop  quantitative   understanding   of 
              the   underlying   mechanisms.  Experiments  will be performed to investigate
              the  modulation  of  CDW  conductance using FET-like structure were the 
              semiconductor  is replaced by a CDW conductor.  %%%  Charge  density  wave 
              (CDW) conductors  are  among  the  richest  systems  in condense matter
              physics, and serve as a paradigm  for  study  of  many  fundamental issues
              occurring  in  a  variety  of  systems  such  as  superconductors, insulators,
              materials  growth  ...etc. CDWs can be represented as a sinusoidal modulation
              of the  electronic  charge density occurring in materials  with  specific 
              properties. The electrons in a CDW respond collectively and  with  some degree
              of coherence to ex ternal excitations such as electric  fields. This proposal
              investigates the phase slip process,  which  is  the  process  by which the CDW
              electrons are  converted  into  normal   electrons,  near  the  contacts,  in 
              order   to   carry  electricity  from the CDW sample into the remaining part 
              of  the  circuit.  A  number  of  electrical  transport  experiments   are 
              designed  to  explore  the  phase  slip  mechanism  and   related  relaxation 
              mechanisms  as well as a recently  discovered  field-  effect modulation of the
              CDW conduction.  ***
