Title       : Mechanisms of Indirect Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1995  
File        : a9424466

Award Number: 9424466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Greenfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                NSF proposal # IBN-9407162, Mechanisms of indirect sexual selection  in an
              ultrasonic pyralid moth; Co-PIs Michael D. Greenfield and  Robert D. Collins.  
               Non-technical summary    In many animals the basic processes of sexual
              selection include male  male competition and female choice.  It is generally
              believed that  female choice can involve preferences for mates who provide
              direct  benefits such as care of offspring and preferences for mates who 
              provide indirect benefits via the genes that they contribute toward  the
              offspring.  Recently, theoretical biologists have confirmed that  several
              different models of indirect sexual selection are plausible.  However,
              experimental evidence for, and distinctions between, these  models are meager. 
              This paucity largely exists because many of the  species in which sexual
              selection is studied are not amenable to the  controlled experiments needed to
              test assumptions underlying the  various models.  In the current project we
              will overcome these  previous difficulties by studying female choice in an
              unusual pyralid  moth, Achroia grisella, that can be observed and raised in the
               laboratory.  Female choice in A. grisella occurs via an indirect  mechanism  -
               selection based on male ultrasonic signals.  We will  employ a variety of
              breeding experiments to study the heritabilities  of male signaling
              characteristics and of female preferences for these  characteristics. The
              general viability of offspring of females who  mate with preferred males will
              also be noted.  Our findings will  provide assessments of the alternative
              hypotheses (1) that indirect  female choice is arbitrarily based on genetic
              attributes which are  unrelated to general viability and (2) that the genetic
              attributes  chosen are related to mate and offspring viability. Study of A. 
              grisella will also increase our fundamental understanding of  ultrasonic
              signaling and perception, and it may lead to improved  control strategies of
              this (and related) species, a pest of honeybee  colonies.
