Title       : Auroral Kilometric Radiation and Transverse Acceleration of Ions in Ionosphere
               Magnetosphere Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9424282

Award Number: 9424282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Bers bers@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abhay K. Ram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The aim of this proposal is to explain some of the observed  properties of
              the auroral kilometric radiation (AKR), and to  understand some of the
              processes leading to the transverse  acceleration of ionospheric ions (TAI)
              that eventually populate the  Earth's magnetosphere and result in a strong
              ionosphere-  magnetosphere coupling.  The analytical and computational 
              techniques that will be used to attain the goals of this proposal  include the
              space-time evolution of instabilities in plasmas, and  wave induced chaos in
              ion dynamics including the novel concept of  web stochasticity.  AKR has been a
              source of fascination and extensive study,  observationally and theoretically,
              for nearly twenty years.  The  data accumulated during this period has provided
              information about  the AKR source regions, the modes and polarizations of the
              waves,  and the particle distributions that exist in and around the source 
              regions.  It is generally agreed upon that, since the radiated  power in AKR is
              orders of magnitude above thermal emissions, the  source of AKR is plasma
              instabilities.  Theories based upon the  electroncyclotron maser instabilities
              (ECMI), generated by loss-  cone electron distributions, have been successful
              in explaining  some of the observed properties of AKR.  Thus, ECMI are
              generally  believed to be the source of AKR.  However, the traditional 
              analyses of ECMI have failed to provide a clear explanation of some  of the
              important features of AKR that are consistent with  observations.  The proposed
              work intends to understand and explain  the specific phenomena that have not
              yet been understood  theoretically.  A signature of the strong
              ionosphere-magnetosphere coupling is a  series of observations, reported over
              the past fifteen years, which  show that a significant population of the ions
              in the  magnetospheric plasma are of ionospheric origin.  In the  ionosphere,
              the ions are observed to be accelerated in a direction  transverse to the
              geomagnetic field.  The interaction between ions   and plasma waves, that seem
              to be present in regions where TAI  occurs, is believed to play an important
              role in the TAI.  The  proposed research is to use concepts of nonlinear
              dynamics and web  stochasticity to understand the acceleration of ions by
              lower-  hybrid wave packets; the observed tail heating of O+ and bulk  heating
              of H+; the ion distribution functions observed during TAI.
