Title       : Modified In-Situ Rutherford Design for Early SIMOX Contamination Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9424597

Award Number: 9424597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernhard Cordts   (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoff Ryding  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lisa P. Allen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ibis Tech Corp
	      32a Cherry Hill Dr
	      Danvers, MA  019232583    /   -

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9424597  Ryding       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will continue the design and implementation of an in-situ Rutherford
              spectroscopy system for monitoring surface contamination of Silicon on
              Insulator (SOI) Separation by Implantation of Oxygen SIMOX materials.  In Phase
              I a miniature Rutherford backscattering (RBS) system was designed fabricated
              and tested.  The RBS system utilized the implantation system's existing high
              current, high energy oxygen ion beam as the primary backscatter source, with
              theoretically predicted and obtained sensitivity enhancement. Signatures of
              specified contaminants were graphed as the final task of the Phase I
              feasibility demonstration.  Advantages of (SOI) SIMOX material include low
              power, low voltage integrated circuitry, radiation-hardened memories for space
              applications, and high (2 300  C) temperature/cryogenic applications.  The
              purity of the active silicon and buried oxide layers is of keen interest for
              the success of the technology.  Early analysis and detection of impurity
              content in the silicon layer is desired for cost reduction purposes as well as
              impurity source identification. The Phase II proposal incorporates more elegant
              design features for attachment to production implantation equipment.  Pulsed
              channel measurements of the backscattered signal are planned for absolute
              analysis of contamination concentrations.  Surface contamination analysis of
              specially fabricated 10A thin film metallic samples as well as manufactured
              SIMOX SOI is incorporated in the Phase II work plan.  Global commercialization
              of this product is an anticipated result of successful Phase II research.      
              Ion implantation, in general, as well as the silicon electronic industry should
              benefit from the development of an in-situ, miniature RBS system for
              contamination detection. Used in an ion implant process as a quality control
              feedback tool, it can be packaged and sold for existing and new implanters. 
              ***
