Title       : Dynamics and Mechanism in Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9123207

Award Number: 9123207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William V. Doering doering@midas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An investigation of the competition between energy                             
              randomization and chemical reactivity in a series of carefully                 
              chosen reactions will be conducted with the goal of testing the                
              RRKM theory of kinetic reactivity. The addition of carbon                      
              labelled singlet methylene to selected dienes and a fluorinated                
              aryl vinyl system will be evaluated. Perturbation of the Cope                  
              rearrangement by phenyl groups will also be investigated. In                   
              addition, the concept of solvent friction and the resultant                    
              effect on chemical reactivity of steroidal heptaenes will be                   
              investigated under a variety of conditions. Finally, the effect                
              of configuration and substitution on the stability of                          
              pentadienyl radicals will be determined, and the two-step                      
              dimerization of polyenes will be explored.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor W. Doering at Harvard University.                 
              The studies are designed to provide critical information for a                 
              number of reactions which proceed upon exposure to heat. The                   
              objective of the investigation will be to determine how                        
              molecules decide to direct the energy they absorb: do they                     
              distribute the energy evenly throughout the molecule or do they                
              direct the energy to weak parts of the molecule which                          
              subsequently undergo specific chemical reactions? Another                      
              aspect of the investigation will be to determine the critical                  
              effect that solvent viscosity has on the reactions of chemical                 
              species that are comprised of a series of doubly bonded carbon                 
              atoms.
