Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Electronic and Magnetic Properties of
               Quasicrystalline and Amorphous Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9123488

Award Number: 9123488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sitaram S. Jaswal sjaswal@aloha.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Sellmyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1761,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports Professors S.S. Jaswal and D. J.                           
              Sellmyer of the University of Nebraska to collaborate                          
              in condensed matter physics with Professor Jrgen                              
              Hafner of the Technical University of Vienna.  Their                           
              two research groups share an interest in metallic                              
              glasses and propose to work together in a study of                             
              amorphous and quasicrystalline transition-metal alloys.                        
              The collaboration will bring together the theoretical                          
              expertise of the Austrian group in atomic structure of                         
              liquid and amorphous metals with the experimental and                          
              theoretical expertise of the U.S. group in the                                 
              electronic structure and magnetic properties. In                               
              addition, several other research groups in Europe and                          
              the U.S. will be brought into the collaboration for                            
              particular necessary talents.  At least one young U.S.                         
              scientist, probably on the postdoctoral level, will be                         
              involved in the collaboration.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project addresses mainstream issues in the field                          
              of magnetic materials, and focuses on some particular                          
              active, important and rewarding topics.  The                                   
              combination of theoretical and experimental work should                        
              contribute to a better understanding of the short-range                        
              order and electronic properties of 3d-5d transition                            
              metal glasses.  The quasicrystals are much more                                
              difficult to study theoretically because of their non-                         
              periodic long-range order.  Still, this effort to                              
              extend the theory on amorphous systems to the                                  
              properties of quasicrystals made up of simple metals                           
              has a good chance of providing valuable new insights.
