Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hans Rademacher Commemorative Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9123821

Award Number: 9123821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Bressoud   (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The focus of this project will be a conference on the impact              
              of the work of Professor Hans Rademacher on recent mathematical                
              research.  The major topics of this conference will include                    
              modular functions, additive number theory, and Dedekind sums and               
              analytic number theory.  Rademacher's successful extension of the              
              circle method to obtain exact, convergent series representations               
              for the Fourier coefficients of modular forms of nonpositive                   
              weights (including the important example p(n)) has provided the                
              crucial step linking the results of the number-theoretically                   
              oriented school to the developments initiated by researchers                   
              using the perspectives of Riemann surface theory and function                  
              theory and to the contemporary Eichler cohomology theory.  His                 
              work on the more combinatorial aspects of additive number theory               
              is related to recent developments, including the Garsia-Milne                  
              bijection for the Rogers-Ramanujan identities, Baxter's solution               
              of the Hard Hexagon Model, and Hickerson's proof of the Mock                   
              Theta Conjectures.  Finally, his work on Dedekind sums is related              
              to recent work on class numbers of imaginary quadratic fields,                 
              values of zeta-functions of real quadratic fields and totally                  
              real cubic fields at integral arguments, random number                         
              generation, and others.                                                        
                   This project will support the Hans Rademacher Commemorative               
              Conference to be held from July 21-25, 1992 at Pennsylvania State              
              University.  The major topics of the conference are modular                    
              functions, additive number theory, and Dedekind sums and analytic              
              number theory.  The conference will include both invited talks                 
              and contributed paper sessions.
