Title       : The Belgrade Rat - An Intracellular Defect in the Transferrin Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9123241

Award Number: 9123241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura M. Garrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Garrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The Belgrade rat has a microcytic, hypochromic anemia inherited             
              as an autosomal recessive (gene symbol b), which is due to a                   
              transferrin cycle defect, resulting in defective intracellular iron            
              metabolism.  Iron-loaded transferrin enters b/b reticulocytes via              
              endocytosis, but is released from the cells still bound to iron.               
              The defect can be partially alleviated when ferric-salicylaldehyde             
              isonicotinoyl hydrazone delivers iron, bypassing the transferrin               
              cycle.  When succinylacetone inhibits iron incorporation into heme,            
              b/b reticulocytes lack the typical buildup of nonheme iron in                  
              mitochondria, and less iron than usual reaches a putative cytosolic            
              iron carrier.  These observations suggest that iron is unable to               
              exit normally from Belgrade endosomes.  This difficulty could be               
              caused by: (1) poor endosomal acidification; (2) transferrin                   
              receptors that fail to aid release of iron from transferrin; (3) a             
              mutant vesicular component that normally transports iron out of the            
              endosome; or (4) a functional or quantitative decrease in the                  
              putative cytosolic iron carrier.  Whichever is the case, studies of            
              the cells of this mutant rat would provide new insight into the                
              problem of how cells utilize transferrin iron.  This mutant also               
              has great value for testing in vivo the validity of recent concepts            
              in cellular iron metabolism and defining previously unknown or                 
              poorly understood steps.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The Belgrade rat has an inborn error of iron metabolism which is               
              due to a cellular dysfunction in utilization of iron from                      
              endocytosed transferrin.  Thus, it is a valuable model system for              
              studying various aspects of cellular endocytosis as it relates to              
              transferrin and iron metabolism, both at the cellular and whole-               
              organism levels.  Belgrade rats are not commercially available, and            
              in fact the world's supply of breeding stock of these rats is in               
              jeopardy.  This award is to support the maintenance of a breeding              
              colony of the mutant rat.
