Title       : Specificity, Case and Incorporation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9123463

Award Number: 9123463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murvet Enc menc@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  This project is a fine-grained investigation of the                       
              relationship between syntax and semantics in linguistic theory.                
              The investigator aims to explain the correlation of the semantic               
              phenomenon of specificity with case morphology and word order.                 
              Specificity is the semantic property of reference to a particular              
              individual, as in "a certain policeman" or "one particular                     
              student".  The beginning hypothesis is that specific and                       
              nonspecific noun phrases (NPs) do not have the same syntax, and                
              that both the determiner and the noun of a nonspecific NP are                  
              either incorporated into the verb or reanalyzed with the verb.                 
              As a corollary, only specific NPs occur in argument positions.                 
                                                                                             
              The research will be organized into three phases:  1) study of                 
              Turkish, a language which exhibits interesting surface                         
              correlations between the semantics and the morpho-syntax of NPs;               
              2) study of English, a language significantly different from                   
              Turkish in terms of surface case morphology and word order; and                
              3) a typological study to investigate the cross-linguistic                     
              behavior of specifics and nonspecifics.  In each phase, support                
              for the incorporation/reanalysis hypothesis will be sought from                
              morphological and syntactic evidence, including i) case                        
              morphology, ii) word order and iii) argument structure and                     
              argument projection strategies.  The rare phenomenon of                        
              nonspecific subjects of unergative and transitive verbs,                       
              observable in Turkish, will be investigated in relation to the                 
              incorporation of subject nouns, which once again is rare and                   
              observable in Turkish.
