Title       : Materials Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9123048

Award Number: 9123048
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9749877            (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony K. Cheetham cheetham@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at the University of                   
              California, Santa Barbara supports an interactive,                             
              interdisciplinary program of materials research with a                         
              strong emphasis on the synthesis and processing of novel materials.            
              Research is currently organized into three major thrust areas.                 
                                                                                             
              Research on high performance electrical and optical polymers seeks             
              to synthesize and process highly oriented conducting polymers                  
              having unprecedented combinations of properties, and to                        
              characterize and understand their behavior.  The thrust area on                
              synthesis and processing with solutions using templates focusses on            
              the chemistry and physics of a new approach for synthesizing                   
              materials with solutions, using either crystalline or molecular                
              templates.  The intellectual focus of research on advanced                     
              materials derived from self-assembling complex fluids is on the                
              synthesis, characterization and processing of materials derived                
              from a class of fluid systems in which spontaneous ordering due to             
              short-range, electrostatic or surface forces is a critical factor              
              in determining macroscopic properties.                                         
                                                                                             
              The MRL also operates and maintains major central facilities for               
              materials research, and provides seed funds for exploratory                    
              research and new initiatives.  It supports programs in education               
              and human resources in the materials field, and administers                    
              programs involving knowledge transfer and outreach to other                    
              institutions and sectors, including industry and national                      
              laboratories.  The MRL currently supports the activities of about              
              25 faculty members, 5 postdoctoral research associates, 22 graduate            
              students, and 1 technical staff member.  The MRL central facilities            
              also support a substantial amount of research that is funded                   
              primarily from other sources.  The MRL at the University of                    
              California, Santa Barbara is directed by Professor Anthony G.                  
              Evans.
