Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1992  
File        : a9123116

Award Number: 9123116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin A. Hill  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Doctoral Dissertation study uses interest group theory,                   
              especially the relationships between the state and functional                  
              groups in society, to explain how natural resource policies                    
              are made in the developing world.  Specifically, the research                  
              posits that the state, being at the pinnacle of a system of                    
              limited and structured, albeit meaningful, public                              
              invlovement, seeks that type of bargaining with interest                       
              groups within society which furthers its own power and                         
              endurance.  This conceptualization puts developing world                       
              conservation programs into a broader political context, and                    
              links an understanding of environmental policies to an                         
              understanding of the broader political power relationships                     
              within the polity.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The project test these and related propositions about African                  
              environmental policymaking, using Zimbabwe's elephant                          
              conservation regime as a case study.  Using survey research,                   
              interviews, and contextual data, this research empirically                     
              probes the nature of wildlife conservation policymaking in                     
              Zimbabwe, with a firm theoretical eye toward generalization                    
              about conservation policy regimes in the developing world,                     
              especially the role of group-state bargaining in                               
              policymaking.  The research will be conducted under the                        
              auspices of the University of Zimbabwe's Centre for Applied                    
              Social Sciences (CASS), which has been executing research on                   
              the human dimensions of wildlife conservation for over three                   
              years.
