Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Gender Talks: The Language of Women Doing
               "Men's" Work
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1993   
File        : a9123392

Award Number: 9123392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2100               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Rickford rickford@csli.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie McElhinny  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Ethnographic studies of women in traditionally all-male, working-              
              class jobs demonstrate that such women must present themselves as              
              masculine in order to be perceived as competent.  Such studies                 
              repeatedly refer to women who talk tough, talk rough, women, in                
              short, who talk like men.  This study examines the speech of                   
              policewomen and policemen in Pittsburgh, examining their                       
              management of verbal conflict, lexical encoding of affect, pitch               
              range and pitch dynamicity, and use of vernacular phonlogical                  
              variables to determine when and how women choose to talk in                    
              masculine ways.  Questions considered include:  Do policewomen                 
              employ the same verbal strategies for resolution of conflict as                
              do policemen?  When do policewomen and policemen manipulate                    
              inexpressiveness to legitimate their authority in the community,               
              and what are the linguistic markers of inexpressiveness?  Have                 
              women whose speech is perceived as masculine adopted more                      
              monotonic, less dynamic intonational contours?  The study also                 
              considers the widespread finding that men are more likely to use               
              vernacular phonological forms to project themselves as tough than              
              are women of the same class, by investigating the following                    
              Pittsburgh vernacular variables:  vocalization of /\/,                         
              neutralization of tense-lax vocalic contrasts before/\/,                       
              monophthongization of (al) and (aw), use of apical nasals for                  
              velar nasals in the morpheme -ing, and realization of voiceless                
              and voiced interdental fricatives as stops.  This study                        
              critically examines the common sociolinguistic assumption that                 
              although language varies across social contexts, social                        
              attributes like gender do not.  In particular it focusses on the               
              ways that linguistic projections of gender-typed characteristics               
              vary according to speaker's occupation.  Finally, the study                    
              suggests that rather than understanding the use of certain                     
              linguistic features as marking a social roles (e.g. understanding              
              vocalization of /\/ as a male marker), sociolinguistics should                 
              explore how linguistic features are associated with certain                    
              linguistic styles (e.g. tough, masculine) that that are                        
              normatively associated with certain social groups, situations and              
              occupations.  The project then becomes to understand how                       
              individual speakers manipulate the available speech styles to                  
              project the social identities they wish to create for themselves.
