Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cohomology and Actions of Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9123189

Award Number: 9123189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro Adem adem@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will incorporate and apply ideas and techniques              
              from representation theory and group actions to the cohomology of              
              groups. The main objectives are as follows:                                    
              1) Extend an ongoing project to calculate and interpret the mod-2              
              cohomology of certain key finite groups.  The hope is to find a                
              set of useful examples which will lead to further theoretical                  
              developments in the field, as has happened in the past.                        
              2) Analyze the cohomology and K-theory of certain discrete groups              
              such as arithmetic groups and mapping class groups, using                      
              methods from modular representation theory as well as a recent                 
               splitting result in K-theory.                                                 
              3) Apply methods from equivariant K-theory to certain G-complexes              
              associated to a finite group G.  This is motivated by a conjecture             
              in modular representation theory involving the isotopy groups of               
              the complex.                                                                   
                   Groups are the abstract mathematical embodiment of symmetry.              
              They are ubiquitous in mathematics and in many mathematical                    
              applications to the other sciences, being well nigh indispensable              
              in quantum mechanics.  As such, one cannot underestimate the                   
              importance of efforts to understand their properties even better               
              than we do now - there is no telling where such understanding will             
              pay off, but mathematical physics is a plausible assumption.  This             
              project is in a sense a bootstrap project, for cohomology is                   
              already a theory based on groups, the various cohomology groups.               
              The investigator has been very successful in applying the                      
              cohomology groups in studying the structure and properties of other            
              groups, particularly certain of the so-called finite sporadic                  
              groups which had defeated the efforts of others.  His project will             
              advance both by making difficult calculations and by evolving                  
              theory to bring order to the results of these calculations.
