Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Methods for Incomplete and Biased Data with
               New Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9123166

Award Number: 9123166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yehuda Vardi vardi@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The problem of recovering an input signal from a blurred                  
              output, in an input-output system with linear distortion, is                   
              ubiquitous in science and technology.  When the blurred output is              
              not corrupted by statistical noise, the problem is entirely                    
              deterministic and amounts to a mathematical inversion of a linear              
              system with positive parameters, subject to positivity con-                    
              straints on the solution.  By showing that all such linear                     
              inverse problems with positivity constraints can be interpreted                
              as statistical estimation problems, extremely simple algorithms                
              can be developed for finding the problems' maximum likelihood                  
              solutions.  Extensions to specific problems like noise degrada-                
              tion,  estimation of blurring parameters (parameters of the point              
              spread function) and regularization techniques will follow.  The               
              methodology will be applied to new problems including restoration              
              of images blurred by relative motion between the subject and the               
              camera lens.                                                                   
                   The blurring of a signal (sound, image, etc.) is common in                
              science and technology, for example the systematic distort                     
              observed signal becomes what mathematicians call linear inverse                
              problems with positivity constraints.  This research will develop              
              methods of solution which are broadly applicable to such                       
              problems.  The basis for this approach is to draw on statistical               
              principles and exploit the connection between such linear inverse              
              problems and statistical estimation problems for incomplete data               
              where methods already exist.
