Title       : A Strategic Model of Negotiation for Autonomous Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9123460

Award Number: 9123460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lou L. Rosenberg                        
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Wilkenfeld jwilkenf@gvpt.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarit Kraus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAI) has been concerned                 
              with the design of automated agents which can interact                         
              effectively in order to satisfy their goals.  This project will                
              contribute to both the theory and design of efficient autonomous               
              agents which are able to communicate and negotiate in such a way               
              as to enhance the possibility of reaching mutually beneficial                  
              agreements.  The  authors are developing a strategic model of                  
              negotiation that takes the passage of time during the negotiation              
              process itself into consideration.  This model is used in the                  
              creation of a prototype of an autonomous agent that participates               
              in situations where negotiations are required, and where time                  
              constraints exist.  A preliminary model has been constructed,                  
              based on the differentialimpact of time on the parties, the                    
              effects of two-partyand restricted N-party environments, an full               
              information. The researchers are extending the model to deal with              
              situations where the information available to the agents is                    
              incomplete, to more complicated N-party situations, and to agents              
              with limited rationality.  Parallel to these theoretical                       
              extensions, the design of the automated negotiator is being                    
              developed and a prototype created.  The strategic model is used                
              to identify efficient strategies for the automated negotiator,                 
              for various negotiationsituations.  A library of meta-strategies               
              in which the strategies will be presented using the                            
              finite-automata framework is being built.  The automated                       
              negotiator identifies the appropriate parameters of its                        
              situation, searches for the appropriate strategy, and negotiates               
              according to that strategy.                                                    
               //
