Title       : U.S.-Finland Workshop on Inverse Problems; Sodankyla, Finland; June 14 -20, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9123994

Award Number: 9123994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10250              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sylvester sylvest@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5935      FINLAND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for approximately                          
              twelve U.S. mathematicians to participate in a workshop                        
              on the topic of Inverse Problems to be held in                                 
              Sodankyla, Finland, from June 14 to 20, 1992.  The                             
              workshop is jointly organized principally by Professor                         
              John Sylvester of the University of Washington and                             
              Professor Lassie Paivarinta of the Mathematics                                 
              Department of the University of Helsinki.  Research in                         
              this area of applied mathematics is growing in Finland,                        
              and the government and private foundations in Finland                          
              are providing the major support for the meeting and                            
              publishing the proceedings.  Rapid advances in the field                       
              offer opportunities for research and applications that                         
              did not exist just a few years ago.  The workshop will                         
              focus on three areas of multidimensional inverse                               
              problems where the recent interchange of ideas has been                        
              particularly fruitful, and where increased international                       
              interaction should provide significant acceleration in                         
              progress.  These topics are inverse scattering,                                
              impedance tomography, and multidimensional inverse                             
              spectral problems.  Expected participants include some                         
              of the outstanding contributors in these fields.                               
                                                                                             
              The subject of inverse problems includes the                                   
              mathematical foundations of scientific problems in                             
              diverse areas of practical interest from seismology to                         
              radar.  New methods have been developed in the past five                       
              years that have stimulated rapid progress in                                   
              multidimensional inverse problems of many kinds.  The                          
              workshop will serve as a means for disseminating                               
              information and encouraging collaboration among                                
              researchers in different areas of this crossdisciplinary                       
              field.  It is specifically designed to enhance the                             
              training of postdoctoral and graduate students, as well                        
              as the more senior participants, from Finland, the                             
              Soviet Union, Europe and the U.S.  The location is a                           
              particularly convenient setting for Soviet researchers,                        
              who use different methods from their foreign                                   
              counterparts, to meet American  mathematicians and                             
              exchange ideas.
