Title       : Software for Collaboration in Ecological Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1993   
File        : a9123090

Award Number: 9123090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah A. Joseph                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125512             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Rasure   (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Koechner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this multidisciplinary project is to develop                  
              software that provides the mechanisms and methods that enable and              
              encourage scientists to exchange data, ideas, and results across               
              geographically distributed research sites.  The motivation is                  
              twofold:  the need for better methods of processing and                        
              visualizing data in environmental research; and the need for                   
              collaboration across and within disciplines.  The work, which                  
              will extend the Khoros 1.0 software, will provide a working                    
              environment that will motivate scientists from different                       
              locations to interact over a computer network.  When combined                  
              with the data base and management capabilities now in place at                 
              many research sites (e.g. Long Term Ecological Research sites)                 
              the proposed technology can lead to network-wide data analysis,                
              interpretation, and even manuscript preparation in ways not                    
              currently possible.  Standard audio communication will augment                 
              the computer interaction to provide an environment similar to a                
              workshop conference. Scientists in different geographical                      
              location will be able to use their workstations to cooperatively               
              examine, interpret, and change each others data, figure, text, or              
              visual program in real time as if sitting around a table in the                
              same room.  This technology will lead to a level of network                    
              interaction that is unprecedented in environmental science.  In                
              addition, the combined research teams in Biology and Computer                  
              Engineering will train scientists to use the collaboration                     
              software.  Feedback from the training process will identify new                
              ways to apply the technology and improvements in the existing                  
              applications.
