Title       : Latent Network Analysis of Central Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9123865

Award Number: 9123865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Schweickert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Cognitive processes take time.  It takes a human at least half a               
              second to subtract "1" from a number and key in the answer, and                
              subtracting "2" takes markedly longer.  The relationships among                
              reaction times taken by different tasks can tell us details about              
              the way the underlying processes are organized.  This research will            
              develop further a particular method for discovering process                    
              organization through reaction times based on the mathematical                  
              theory of scheduling, a theory concerned with how best to organize             
              the processes involved in carrying out a task using a PERT (Program            
              Evaluation and Review Technique) network.  As the theory of                    
              scheduling is ordinarily used, one knows the way in which the                  
              processes are arranged in a PERT network and how long each one                 
              takes, and one wants to determine how much time will be required to            
              carry out the entire task under various conditions.  The cognitive             
              psychologist faces the inverse problem, knowing how long it takes              
              to carry out the task under various conditions, and wanting to                 
              infer the structure of the network and to estimate the time                    
              required for each process.                                                     
                                                                                             
              At this point, we know how this works in dual tasks, tasks in which            
              two stimuli are presented, each requiring a separate response.  It             
              seems to be the case that more than one perceptual process may be              
              executed at the same time, as may more than one movement-related               
              process, but processes such as deciding and remembering must go on             
              one at a time.  Because the latter processes demand attention, they            
              appear to use a central processor which carries out only one of                
              them at a time.  Some of the experiments will investigate dual                 
              tasks, with an emphasis on learning about the order in which these             
              central processes are carried out.  Scheduling theory indicates                
              that some orders are more optimal than others, and the experiments             
              will investigate whether subjects spontaneously use the optimal                
              order, or can learn to do so with practice.  Using the optimal                 
              order would, of course, reduce reaction times.  Saving a few tenths            
              of a second or improving accuracy by a few percent would not make              
              much difference in everyday tasks, but might make a substantial                
              future improvement in tasks such as air traffic control, in which              
              it may be possible to optimize the type of information people                  
              receive and the order in which they receive it.                                
                                                                                             
              Other experiments will investigate the organization of mental                  
              processes when reading statements in the PASCAL computer language;             
              such statements need to be carefully read when debugging programs.             
              The most ambitious experiments will investigate the processing                 
              involved in recall from short-term memory.  When a list of items,              
              a phone number for example, is recalled immediately, a few items in            
              the middle are not so much recalled as reconstructed from the                  
              degraded fragments of the items that remain in memory.  By timing              
              subjects as the recall aloud, it is possible to study the processes            
              involved in such reconstruction.
