Title       : SGER: Evaluation of Sediment Trap Fluxes by Thorium Scavenging, a Three
               Dimensional Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1992   
File        : a9123888

Award Number: 9123888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony F. Michaels   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony H. Knap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1577,9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              This activity will conduct an unambiguous (or nearly so)                       
              calibration of free-drifting cylindrical sediment traps using the              
              in situ scavenging of 234-thorium as an independent predictor of               
              the sinking flux.  Thorium fluxes as measured by the sediment trap             
              will be compared with predicted thorium fluxes from the in situ                
              scavenging.  To avoid historical problems with the interpretation              
              of single thorium profiles, an expanded experiment will be                     
              performed in which both the thorium scavenging through time and the            
              variability in space will be followed.  The new profiling technique            
              also averages the entire water column vertically, thus ensuring                
              that any small-scale thorium minima in the profile will be                     
              quantitatively included.  This set of measurements will provide the            
              most unambiguous prediction to date of the thorium-bearing particle            
              flux that a sediment trap is predicted to collect.  If the sediment            
              trap measured thorium flux differs greatly from the predicted                  
              value, it will be able to be concluded that the trap does not                  
              quantitatively collect the particles that are responsible for                  
              thorium transport and thus may be unlikely to be accurate for other            
              particle classes as well.  If the values agree, it can be concluded            
              that the trap is accurate for the particles that transport thorium             
              and thus suggest that they may be accurate for other particle                  
              classes as well.  In either case, this experiment will demonstrate             
              a robust method for the calibration of sediment trap data in the               
              field that will be useful for other experiments on trap performance            
              (e.g. hydrodynamics).
