Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9123387

Award Number: 9123387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth I. Gross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Gross will continue his study of noncommutative harmonic                  
              analysis.  This will include an investigation of generalized                   
              hypergeometric functions on matrix spaces, domains of positivity,              
              and Hermitian symmetric spaces, concentrating on developing the                
              operator-valued theory, extending the context to include Siegel                
              domains of type II, deriving Mellin-Barnes representations, and                
              exploring applications to infinite-dimensional representation                  
              theory.                                                                        
                   The mathematical bedrock of Gross's research is the theory                
              of Lie groups.  Named in honor of the Norwegian mathematician                  
              Sophus Lie, these groups have been one of the major themes in                  
              twentieth century mathematics.  As the mathematical vehicle for                
              exploiting the symmetries inherent in a system, the                            
              representation theory of Lie groups has had a profound impact                  
              upon mathematics itself, particularly in analysis and number                   
              theory, and upon theoretical physics, especially quantum                       
              mechanics and elementary particle physics.DMS-9200774                          
              Gross                                                                          
                   Gross will investigate the natural Dirichlet form operator                
              over loop spaces associated to Brownian bridge measure.  The                   
              particular interest is in proving existence and uniqueness of                  
              ground states of the associated Schroedinger operators over                    
              homotopy classes.  This is a continuation of Gross's recent work               
              on logarithmic Sobolev inequalities on loop groups which has many              
              implications for the representation theory of Lie groups.                      
                   The theory of Lie groups, named in honor of the Norwegian                 
              mathematician Sophus Lie, has been one of the major themes in                  
              twentieth century mathematics.  As the mathematical vehicle for                
              exploiting the symmetries inherent in a system, the                            
              representation theory of Lie groups has had a profound impact                  
              upon mathematics itself and theoretical physics, especially                    
              quantum mechanics and elementary particle physics.
