Title       : Spectroscopy and Thermochemistry of Biradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9123487

Award Number: 9123487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9198,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An investigation of the heats of formation of a variety of                     
              biradicals will be conducted in the gas phase. The study will                  
              involve the use of laser photoionization mass spectroscopy and                 
              photoelectron spectroscopy to test the valence bond theory for                 
              biradical formation by making estimates of the singlet-triplet                 
              gap. The proposed investigation is based upon the assumption                   
              that the singlet-triplet energy gap can be obtained directly                   
              from the ionization potentials of the biradical and the parent                 
              radical intermediates. Species to be studied include benzynes,                 
              dehydrotoluenes, cycloalkynes, and a variety of other strained                 
              molecules. The reactive species will be generated in the gas                   
              phase by supersonic jet flash pyrolysis of appropriate                         
              precursors, and studied by vacuum-uv laser photoelectron and                   
              mass spectroscopy.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work                 
              of Professor Peter Chen at Harvard University. The                             
              investigation to be conducted will involve measurements of the                 
              chemical reactivity of molecules in the gas phase, and will                    
              provide information which will allow scientists to predict the                 
              direction of several important classes of chemical reactions.                  
              The chemical species to be investigated will be prepared by a                  
              technique called super-sonic jet flash pyrolysis, which results                
              in the generation of reactive species by exposure of                           
              appropriate precursors to very high temperatures in a short                    
              time frame. The species produced are subsequently characterized                
              by laser photoelectron spectroscopy and mass analysis. This                    
              work has profound implications for investigation of the                        
              reactivity of species which are produced in the atmosphere, and                
              thus contributes to our understanding of processes which effect                
              and alter the environment.
