Title       : Workshop on Creating an Infrastructure for Intelligent Systems in Molecular
               Biology, November 13-14, 1991, NLM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1991   
File        : a9123156

Award Number: 9123156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Hunter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jude W. Shavlik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIH-Natl Library Medicine
	      
	      Washington, DC  20014    /   -

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6856,
Abstract    :
              Research applying intelligent systems technology to problem in                 
              molecular biology is expanding rapidly.  Techniques such as                    
              artificial intelligence, neural networks, object-oriented                      
              databases, large-scale computer modeling, and robotics are being               
              successfully applied to problems in genetics, protein structure,               
              development, evolution, and many other aspects of biology.  The                
              rapid growth in this interdisciplinary research has created a                  
              need for infrastructure development and program planning.  The                 
              preposed meeting will bring together about two-dozen active                    
              researchers in the field with representatives of NLM and NSF to                
              discuss issues such as coordination of conferences and                         
              publication venues, distribution of research support,                          
              interdisciplinary training programs, and the sharing of data and               
              other resources. In addition to facilitating communication, the                
              goal of the meeting is to produce a report describing community                
              needs and a set of standing committees to help address those                   
              needs.  Intelligent systems technology is relevant to several key              
              problems in the HPCC Program.  Directly, advanced software                     
              technology and algorithms require intelligent systems technology;              
              and indirectly high performance computing systems will be                      
              developed based on novel intelligent software algorithms.  This                
              proposal addresses some of the key issues in the problem domain                
              of molecular biology, which have implications in many other                    
              problem domains of the HPCC Program.
