Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Heat Flow of Harmonic Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9123532

Award Number: 9123532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yunmei Chen yun@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The focus of this project is the mathematical analysis of                 
              solutions of partial differential equations defined on surfaces                
              or manifolds.  The work is intuitively geometric in that it seeks              
              to determine when smooth mappings between manifolds can be                     
              deformed into harmonic maps between the same manifolds.  The                   
              question can be rephrased in terms of parabolic partial                        
              differential equations where the deformation becomes the                       
              evolution of the solution in time.  Considerable work has been                 
              done on problems of this nature, especially in Euclidean space.                
              It is known that solutions need not evolve for all time, a                     
              phenomenon commonly referred to a finite-time blow up.  In the                 
              present context, the known conditions which preclude blow up are               
              related to the dimension and sectional curvatures of the target                
              manifold.  The best results are known for two dimensional                      
              manifolds.  In the present work, efforts will be made to                       
              establish global existence of the heat flow of harmonic maps with              
              boundary in higher dimensions and to understand the character of               
              singularities when they do occur.  A second objective is that of               
              understanding the boundary regularity of the heat flow for                     
              harmonic maps in higher dimensions.  Evidence suggests that the                
              evolving solutions to the heat equation cannot first encounter                 
              singularities at the boundary.  This may be difficult to show in               
              higher dimensions, but there is reason to believe that a complete              
              analysis is possible in two and three dimensional manifolds.                   
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
