Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution and Cultural Meaning of Courts in the Copan
               Acropolis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1992    
File        : a9123390

Award Number: 9123390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Loa P. Traxler  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Sharer, Ms Loa Traxler will                  
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation thesis.  She will                   
              participate in the excavation of the Acropolis of Copan and                    
              determine how architectural construction changed over time.                    
              Copan, located in Honduras, is one of the major Mayan sites and                
              it documents the rise and subsequent decline of Mayan society.  A              
              large mound or "Acropolis" marks the center of the site and                    
              consists of superimposed temples, palace buildings and other                   
              structures. Although other Mayan sites also contain such a                     
              sequence of buildings, Copan is unique because an erosional cut                
              along the eastern portion allows ready access to all major                     
              construction levels and presents a rare opportunity for extensive              
              exposure of superimposed architecture.  Dr. Sharer and his                     
              colleagues have developed a tunneling strategy which lets them                 
              follow buried walls and reconstruct building size and shape. Ms                
              Traxler will continue to collect and analyze such data.                        
                                                                                             
              In Middle America, archaeologists have tended to concentrate                   
              either on monumental structures which provide insight into elite               
              behavior or on smaller outlying sites associated with lower class              
              status.  The site of Copan is particularly important because of                
              the long term settlement pattern survey and excavations which                  
              have focussed on the latter.  As a result of this work,                        
              archaeologists now understand how population changed over time                 
              and how the utilization of the Copan Valley changed.  Within this              
              context, the data which Ms Traxler will collect is extremely                   
              important because it will permit her to examine how these two                  
              levels of society interacted.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research will provide new insight into the rise and decline               
              of Mayan civilization.  It will result in data of interest to a                
              large group of archaeologists and assist in the training of an                 
              extremely promising young scientist.
