Title       : Thermodynamics and Kinetic Theory of Structural Transformations in Metal and
               Ceramic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9123167

Award Number: 9123167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armen G. Khachaturyan khach@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical studies will be done on the thermodynamics and kinetics            
              of morphological and structural transformations in technologically             
              advanced materials, multiphase metal alloys with intermetallics and            
              in ceramic systems.  An understanding of underlying mechanisms of              
              atomic and structural transformations is crucial for processing and            
              materials design.  An evolution of the atomic structure as well as             
              mesoscale pattern formation along the transformation path will be              
              considered.  The emphasis will be on the decomposition and ordering            
              which results in a reduction of the point group symmetry.  The                 
              problem of transient metastable phases and their relation to the               
              mesoscale structure will be addressed.  We will concentrate on                 
              attacking problems concerning precipitation of non-cubic ordered               
              intermetallic phases from a cubic matrix, strain-induced                       
              coarsening, mesoscale pattern formation, problems involving virtual            
              metastable phases, and structure formation in ceramic systems.                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical studies utilizing analytical and computational                     
              techniques will be done to understand the structural                           
              transformations which occur in metals and ceramics.  A knowledge of            
              these transformations is important in the processing of these                  
              advanced materials in order to correlate materials properties to               
              the underlying crystal structure.
