Title       : The Impact of Oilseed Production and Processing on Biological Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9123965

Award Number: 9123965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Busch lawrence.busch@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              86        Sociology                               
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                 Although many people now agree with the premise that human activities       
              reduce the number of plant and animal species, few comprehensive               
              analyses have been undertaken to identify and analyze the human                
              processes that alter biological diversity.  Among the human activities         
              that have had the most significant impacts on plants and animals is            
              agriculture.  This project will begin an analysis of the ways that basic       
              production of oilseeds and processing of those products encourages             
              expansion of biological diversity through development of new hybrids           
              while simultaneously altering the mix of vegetation within regions.  The       
              project will begin with a pilot study of canola (rapeseed) production in       
              western Canada.  Sources to be examined include histories of the               
              industry; scientific and technical journals; laws and administrative           
              rulings; standards published by seed companies, elevators, processors;         
              and data on production, exports, prices, and other variables.                  
              Information also will be gathered through interviews with farmers,             
              processors, and others engaged in canola production and hybrid                 
              development.  This information will be assessed in order to identify the       
              role of various human factors, including market forces, in activities          
              that alter biological diversity.                                               
                 This pilot project will provide valuable new insights about a dynamic       
              industry that exemplifies the ways that human activity can create and          
              alter biological diversity.  Of even greater future significance, it           
              will enable the investigators to develop a consistent methodological           
              approach for use in studying other oilseed industries in other settings,       
              and it will provide them with an opportunity to identify information           
              sources for other industries.  Through expansion of this line of               
              inquiry, comparisons will be drawn across a range of agricultural              
              activities, thereby providing an enhanced base from which to generalize        
              about the processes through which humans interact with the natural             
              environment.
