Title       : Economic Issues in Medical Malpractice: Dispute Resolution and the Shift to
               No-Fault
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1992   
File        : a9123394

Award Number: 9123394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48558              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle J. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Medical malpractice represents the intersection of patient concerns            
              about the quality of medical care with the use of law to redress               
              a perceived grievance.  When patients are dissatisfied with the                
              quality of the medical care they receive, they can either register             
              a complaint at a hospital or file a lawsuit.  If they register a               
              complaint, the hospital's complaints office may respond by offering            
              a forum for an individual to air a grievance, providing                        
              compensation in the form of forgiveness of a patient's outstanding             
              bill, or by offering cash compensation.  If an offer of                        
              compensation is made, the patient has a choice between accepting               
              the offer or rejecting it, in which case (s)he may file a medical              
              malpractice lawsuit.  If no offer of compensation is made, the                 
              patient has a choice between filing a lawsuit or taking no further             
              action.  To date, very little research has been completed which                
              seeks to examine how complaints evolve into settlements, and into              
              medical malpractice lawsuits.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Dr. White will fill this gap in medical malpractice research by                
              collecting a rich set of data on complaints registered in a                    
              specific hospital and merging it with an existing data set                     
              concerning medical malpractice lawsuits from the same source.                  
              Utilizing the merged data set, models will be constructed to                   
              analyze what determines whether complaints evolve into lawsuits,               
              assess which side benefits most from resolving disputes early, and             
              estimate whether negligence matters in determining the hospital's              
              expected liability at the complaint stage of the dispute management            
              process.  This phase of the project should provide considerable                
              insight into the pre-litigation dispute resolution process in                  
              general and how the early stages of dispute processing influence               
              the evolution of complaints into settlements or into lawsuits.                 
              Using a simulation approach, the second phase of the project                   
              investigates the costs and benefits of shifting from the current               
              system of liability in medical malpractice to a hypothetical no-               
              fault system.  This phase of the project will investigate a series             
              of important policy questions, including an estimate of the effect             
              of a shift to no-fault on the level of total compensation paid and             
              the cost of administering the compensation system.
