Title       : SGER: Plant Connexin - Structure, Location, and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1992  
File        : a9123140

Award Number: 9123140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin Schindler schindll@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  It has long been known that plasmodesmata are involved in the             
              symplastic transport of solutes between adjacent plant cells.  The             
              overall aim of this project is to study the compositional,                     
              structural and functional organization of plasmodesmata in higher              
              plants.  Recent data have suggested that proteins present in                   
              plasmodesmata may resemble connexin proteins present in the gap                
              junctions of animal cells.  Gap junctions are involved in the                  
              symplastic movement of ions and perhaps small molecules between                
              animal cells.  The hypothesis being tested in this proposal is that            
              plant connexins reside in plasmodesmata and are involved in                    
              intercellular transport processes.                                             
                                                                                             
              The primary thrust of this project is to produce and purify a panel            
              of monospecific antibodies directed against protein motifs present             
              in a putative plant connexin that has already been obtained from               
              a cDNA expression library from Arabidopsis.  The antibodies will               
              be used in ultrastructural immunolocalizations, with the aim of                
              demonstrating their specific distribution in or around                         
              plasmodesmata. Later, the antibodies will be used in a fluorescent             
              dye transport assay, where their specific associations with                    
              plasmodesmatal components are expected to block intercellular                  
              movement of the fluorochrome.  Collectively, these studies will                
              contribute to our understanding about the structural organization              
              and functional roles connexin-like proteins in plasmodesmata.
