Title       : Collaborative Research on Varieties of Legal Consciousness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1995  
File        : a9123433

Award Number: 9123433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31027              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Ewick pewick@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              Studies of legal consciousness attempt to address questions about              
              the place and meaning of law in the lives of ordinary citizens.                
              Until recently, two competing theoretical perspectives have                    
              dominated the scholarship on legal consciousness.  One school of               
              thought treats consciousness as the ideas and attitudes of                     
              individuals; from this perspective the meaning that people give to             
              law and the role that it plays in their lives is representative of             
              the ways that individuals create or shape the world around them.               
              A second school of thought holds that legal consciousness is a by-             
              product of the social institutions and structures that define                  
              peoples lives.  From this perspective, legal consciousness is the              
              product rather than the source of the world people find themselves             
              living in.  In recent years, a growing body of empirical studies               
              reject both the individual and structural conceptualizations of                
              legal consciousness.  Instead, this school of thought views legal              
              consciousness as cultural practice that mediates between the                   
              individual and the social structure.  Consciousness evolves within             
              a framework of expectations about what is the normal and moral way             
              to act, what kinds of wrongs warrant action, and what kinds of                 
              remedies are acceptable and appropriate as well as probable and                
              effective.  With this view, legal consciousness varies and changes             
              with local situations, norms and customary ways of doing things.               
                                                                                             
              Silbey will advance this cultural perspective theoretically,                   
              introducing a typology of legal consciousness, and exploring                   
              whether and how people express their ideas about law in ways that              
              are consonant with one or more of these typifications.  Also, the              
              project introduces a unique data set.  She uses indepth, face to               
              face, interviews with 300 persons in four New Jersey counties.                 
              The questions enable her to collect rich stories of troubles and               
              minor disruptions, as well as formal experiences with legal agents.            
              By combining this methodology with probability sampling, she will              
              be able to trace greater variation in legal consciousness among                
              American citizens than has been achieved to date, including                    
              variations among African-American and Hispanic, as well as white               
              populations.  Finally, she introduces a unique, two stage plan of              
              analysis. Specifically, one phase  focuses on the analysis of                  
              discrete words while the second examines the thematic content of               
              the interview narratives.  Overall, the study will make substantial            
              contributions to the growing body of work on legal consciousness               
              by extending it demographically, methodologically, and                         
              theoretically.
