Title       : Examining Delinquency and Drug Use During Later Adolescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9123299

Award Number: 9123299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence P. Thornberry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Lizotte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin D. Krohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Rochester Youth Development Study is a longitudinal examination            
              of the causes and correlates of serious delinquency and drug use.              
              Phase I of the study, funded primarily by the Office of Juvenile               
              Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) with some supplemental              
              support from the National Science Foundation and the National                  
              Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), followed a sample of high risk                 
              youth from the seventh and eighth grades until their eleventh and              
              twelfth grades at six month intervals.  This grant provides partial            
              support for Phase II which will follow the youth to early                      
              adulthood.  The objectives of the study are to understand the                  
              social and psychological factors associated with different stages              
              of criminal careers, especially the termination of careers for many            
              offenders during early adulthood, and the continuation and                     
              escalation of criminal behavior for others.                                    
                                                                                             
              Since much of the data collection for Phase II will continue to be             
              funded by OJJDP, the NSF support will be used for data analysis and            
              dissemination of findings.  Two major theoretical models that are              
              being tested, interactional theory and network theory, will be                 
              analyzed.  Also, issues such as onset, specialization, desistance,             
              and the link between delinquency and drug use will be examined.                
              A number of publications are planned as a result of this work.                 
                                                                                             
              This project provides the most extensive delinquency data set                  
              assembled to date and already has contributed significantly to a               
              better understanding of the factors that contribute to, as well as             
              insulate against, serious involvement in crime and delinquency.                
              We have relatively little information about criminal involvement               
              at the transition from adolescence to adulthood and virtually no               
              information relating contemporary factors at these ages to earlier             
              attitudes and behaviors.  Doing so allows for a fuller description             
              of criminal careers and extends theoretical understanding of                   
              factors associated with continution of or desistance from deviance.            
              The results of this research promise to influence the study of                 
              delinquency for years to come.
