Title       : Integration of Petrology with Aqueous Geochemistry in a Recent Mixing Zone,
               Southeastern Barbados, West Indies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9123842

Award Number: 9123842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125058             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Humphrey jhumphre@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Late Pleistocene raised reef terraces on the island of                    
              Barbados provide an unparalleled setting to investigate early,                 
              near-surface diagenesis in carbonate rocks.  Dolomite has been                 
              encountered in core samples from within the modern mixing zone in              
              southeastern Barbados.  This dolomite may be Recent in age and                 
              related to the modern water chemistry.  We well further investigate            
              this dolomite occurrence with additional core-drilling, lithologic,            
              geochemical, and hydrogeochemical studies.  Four boreholes will be             
              drilled atop sea-cliffs along the windward southeastern coastline,             
              in an area where there is significant meteoric phreatic discharge              
              and a potentially thick mixing zone.  Southeastern Barbados                    
              provides the ideal site to test the mixing versus marine models and            
              to directly sample fresh, mixed, and normal marine pore waters in              
              contact with carbonate sediments and rocks actively undergoing                 
              diagenesis.  The mixing zone model has not received universal                  
              acceptance.  It is therefore important to document the occurrence              
              and geochemistry of the dolomite and pore fluids in question to                
              test the validity of the model.  This will be accomplished through             
              minerologic, petrographic, trace element, stable isotope, strontium            
              isotope, fluid inclusion, and absolute dating techniques.  In                  
              collaboration with R. K. Stoessell, pore waters from the boreholes             
              will be characterized by temperature, salinity, conductivity, pH,              
              Eh, alkalinity, dissolved oxygen, dissolved hydrogen sulfide, major            
              and minor elements and ions, saturation indices and stable isotopic            
              compositions.  Given the geologic/hydrologic setting of Barbados,              
              the fluid/rock interactions responsible for dolomitization must                
              necessarily be confined to either a normal seawater or mixed                   
              meteoric/marine model.  This integrated petrologic and                         
              hydrogeochemical approach represents a comprehensive effort to                 
              answer important questions regarding the enigmatic process of early            
              dolomitization, and will directly test the viability of each of                
              these possible models.
