Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program: Electron ScatteringInvestigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9123185

Award Number: 9123185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9960               (Estimated)
Investigator: T W. Donnelly donnelly@mitlns.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1235,
Abstract    :
              This award from the U.S.-Brazil Cooperative                                    
              Science Program supports collaborative research                                
              in nuclear physics to be conducted Drs. T.                                     
              William Donnelly and Ernest J. Moniz of the                                    
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Drs.                                 
              Mahir Hussein and Helio Diaz of the University                                 
              of Sao Paulo, Brazil.  The focus of the                                        
              research will be to carry out collaborative                                    
              theoretical research nuclear physics,                                          
              specifically calculations of the nuclear                                       
              response to high energy electron scattering.                                   
              The output of such calculations would greatly                                  
              further the experimental programs at several                                   
              high priority laboratories in the U.S. and                                     
              Brazil.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The project will provide calculations of the                                   
              nuclear response to high energy electron                                       
              scattering. Electromagnetic nuclear physics is                                 
              one of the top priority activities in nuclear                                  
              science and the investigators are amongst the                                  
              leaders worldwide in performing such                                           
              calculations.  The investigators will explore                                  
              the use of overlapping resonances and non-                                     
              resonant background terms in understanding                                     
              giant resonance electro-excitation.  They will                                 
              also probe the microscopic basis for the                                       
              resonance picture.  In addition, they will                                     
              investigate the role of two-body interactions                                  
              when imbedded in a nuclear medium, focussing on                                
              the repulsive core part of the nucleon-nucleon                                 
              interaction and how it introduces short range                                  
              correlations and modifies the electron                                         
              scattering response functions.  The                                            
              calculations will enhance the experimental                                     
              programs at CEBAF and Bates (high priority                                     
              laboratories in the U.S.) and for the                                          
              lower energy facilities under construction in                                  
              Brazil.
