Title       : Development of a more efficient insect transformation system
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1992  
File        : a9123858

Award Number: 9123858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross J. MacIntyre   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The long term objective of the proposed research is to develop                 
              physical and genetics systems for the delivery of cloned DNA to any            
              insect species with subsequent site specific integration into the              
              genome.  We will explore the ability of Drosophila melanogaster                
              embryos whose vitelline membranes have been permeabilized by a                 
              recently developed procedure to take up both DNA and nucleotide                
              precursors.  We will also utilize Drosophila embryos which are                 
              mutant for two predominant deoxyribonucleases to increase the                  
              persistence of the introduced DNA in both the somatic and germ                 
              cells.  The third aim of the research is to adapt the "Flip                    
              recombinase" system from yeast for use in insect hosts.  Initially             
              Drosophila and Musca domestica (housefly) embryos will be                      
              transformed with the recombination site sequence (FRT).  Then, the             
              recombinase gene will be introduced along with selectable marker               
              genes in plasmids containing a single FRT sequence.  Site specific             
              recombination of the marker genes will be monitored by genomic                 
              Southern and chromosomal in situ hybridization analysis.  Because              
              such a more efficient and site directed transformation system that             
              is developed for Drosophila as a model system should be applicable             
              to any other insect species, it will be possible to introduce genes            
              at will into insect pests and vectors of human disease.  This                  
              ability should allow biologists to devise new strategies for insect            
              control.***//
