Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in High-level Synthesis Algorithms, Tools and
               Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9123222

Award Number: 9123222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni De Micheli nanni@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4710,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports Dr. Giovanni De Micheli of                                 
              Stanford University to collaborate in computer                                 
              science research with Dr. Raul Camposano of the                                
              German National Research Center for Computer                                   
              Science (GMD) in Sankt Agustin, Germany.  They                                 
              are linking their research efforts in the                                      
              process of transforming high level, behavioral                                 
              descriptions of digital hardware into logic-                                   
              level specifications.  In particular, they plan                                
              to enhance the front-end of the "Olympus"                                      
              synthesis system, developed at Stanford, by                                    
              providing a VHDL input, as well as a synthesis                                 
              policy for VHDL.  This effort will benefit                                     
              tremendously from Dr. Camposano's experience                                   
              with VHDL models; he will take primary                                         
              responsibility for this part of the project.                                   
              Both of them will work on more efficient                                       
              algorithms for constraint-based synthesis of                                   
              concurrent hardware, such as the scheduling                                    
              problem for large scale circuits, where well                                   
              known techniques are inefficient.  They also                                   
              plan to work separately but cooperatively on                                   
              hardware designs, with the goal of synthesizing                                
              four to six real designs between the two sites.                                
                                                                                             
              This proposal joins the efforts of two well-                                   
              respected researchers in the design automation                                 
              community in a project that can have significant                               
              impact on progress in electronic system design.                                
              The enhancement to the Stanford Olympus                                        
              synthesis system will make it available to the                                 
              mainstream of electronic system designers.                                     
              Improving algorithms for constraint-based                                      
              synthesis will result in more efficient ways to                                
              design systems.
