Title       : Functionalized Polyolefins: Synthesis and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9123722

Award Number: 9123722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tze Chiang Chung chung@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research relates to a new class of polymers, functionalized               
              polyolefins, which have unique molecular (comb-like) structure.                
              The functional group is located at the end of the side chain with              
              several flexible methylene spacers.  This type of polymer could be             
              a very useful material, not only in the sense of having mobile                 
              primary functional groups to interact with other materials, but                
              also because many of the desirable physical properties of                      
              polyolefins-such as crystallinity, thermal stability, and                      
              processibility-are preserved.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The chemistry involved in preparing this type of functional                    
              polyolefin involves borane monomers and transition-metal catalysts,            
              such as Ziegler-Natta and olefin metathesis catalysts.  Borane                 
              monomers are generally stable to transition-metal catalysts and are            
              polymerizable to high-molecular-weight polymers.  In turn, the                 
              borane groups in these polymers are easily converted to other                  
              functional groups under mild conditions to polyalcohols.  This new             
              functionalization chemistry will include:  (1) a systematic study              
              of borane monomers which are polymerizable with transition metal               
              catalysts; (2) the extension of this functionalization chemistry to            
              polyolefins containing amino and halide groups; (3) a new synthetic            
              route to prepare telechelic polymers with functional groups at both            
              ends of the polymer chain; (4) the utilization of reactive                     
              polyolefins to prepare other new classes of materials, such as                 
              block and graft polyolefin copolymers; (5) the application of                  
              functionalized polyolefins to immobilize catalysts for chemical                
              processes; (6) the evaluation of functionalized polyolefins in                 
              polymer blends and alloys.  This study will be a colloboration with            
              Dr. Charles C. Han of the National Institute of Standards and                  
              Technology.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Overall, the goals are not only to extend this functionalization               
              chemistry, but also to study the potential of applying these                   
              research findings to the preparation of materials with novel                   
              properties.
