Title       : Uncertainty and the Viability of Limited War Options
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1992     
File        : a9123219

Award Number: 9123219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank C. Zagare 7166362150  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most strategic thinkers are of the opinion that the next world war,            
              should one occur, will not start with a "bolt from the blue,"                  
              rather, the gravest threat to international stability is usually               
              taken to be an escalation of some minor incident or conflict to a              
              major international crisis and, ultimately, to a global                        
              thermonuclear war.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The researchers will study the escalation process by using the                 
              contemporary methodology of games of incomplete information.  This             
              methodology allows a more realistic asessment of escalation than               
              more standard models that assume complete information.  In general,            
              in complete information games, war never breaks out and escalation             
              never occurs.  By contrast, the dynamic processes discovered under             
              incomplete information more closely match those observed in the                
              real world.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The proposed modeling effort differs in one very significant way               
              from other incomplete information models; the players in the games             
              under study are provided with two distinct ways (other than                    
              outright capitulation) to resist a challenge.  This, in turn,                  
              permits the introduction of an intermediate level of interstate                
              conflict into the analysis and a more realistic assessment of the              
              conditions associated with stable deterrence.  By delving into                 
              these conditions the investigator will gain insight into the                   
              precise set of circumstances in which sub-strategic deployments                
              make limited war possible and total war either more or less likely.            
                                                                                             
              For example, by assuming that the players are unsure of each                   
              other's intentions to wage nuclear war, but that each knows that               
              the other will (or will not) choose to fight at a sub-strategic                
              level, the consequences of adopting a "Flexible Response" posture              
              (or a policy of Massive Retaliation) can be assessed.  Similarly,              
              by further assuming incomplete information by each player about the            
              other's willingness to fight both at the sub-strategic and the                 
              strategic level, the implications of various mixgures of these two             
              policies can be addressed and the consequences of different "mixes"            
              of conventional and tactical weapons with strategic weapons can be             
              explored.
