Title       : Peptide Models of Biological Electron Transfer: Experiment and Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9123802

Award Number: 9123802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin D. Joran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports research on long-range electron transfer by                   
              Dr. Alvin D. Joran of the Chemistry Department, New York                       
              University, and collaborators Drs. Joseph Malinsky and Yuri                    
              Magarshak in biophysics at Mount Sinai Medical School.  The                    
              goal of the research is to determine whether and to what extent                
              hydrogen bonds in peptides mediate electron transfer.                          
              Synthetic model compounds in which electron donor and acceptor                 
              sites are directly linked to a known inflexible alpha-helical                  
              peptide backbone will be prepared.  The distance between the                   
              ruthenium complex donor and quinone acceptor will be                           
              systematically varied and the kinetics measured using                          
              time-resolved emission or transient absorption spectral                        
              techniques.  In the accompanying theoretical portion of the                    
              project, graph and propagator formalism will be applied to                     
              coupling electron transfer pathways including any number of                    
              resides and side groups.  The predictions will be tested                       
              against the experimental results and other available data on                   
              surface-labelled redox proteins.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Transfer of electrons over relatively long distances is an                     
              important process in biological systems as well as in molecular                
              wires or non-linear optical devices.  The contribution of                      
              hydrogen bonds to electron transfer is not well understood.                    
              Joran et al. have devised a rigid system in which to study the                 
              process and will use some novel calculational approaches to                    
              understand the effect.
