Title       : CRB: The Causes of Tropical Deforestation: Quantitative and Comparative Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9123569

Award Number: 9123569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas K. Rudel rudel@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              86        Sociology                               
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                The clearance of tropical forests has been cited as one of the major        
              factors contributing to the loss of biological diversity and to changes        
              in atmospheric chemistry that may ultimately lead to global warming.           
              While human activities have been identified as major causes of tropical        
              deforestation, relatively little attention has been focused on the             
              processes by which individuals and groups of people (whether functioning       
              together informally or in more formal organizational units) actually           
              make decisions that result in forest clearance.  This project will             
              develop and test a theory that identifies two forms of human action as         
              means through which people act to remove tropical forests.  One form of        
              action is through the development of "growth coalitions" that act in a         
              relatively coordinated manner to establish and operate an infrastructure       
              aimed at removing trees and establishing more "developed" forms of             
              activity.  The other form of action is a somewhat ad hoc process that          
              occurs when individuals with limited personal resources follow road-           
              construction crews into new areas and clear small parcels near the             
              roads.  This tests of this theory will be undertaken through analyses of       
              two extant databases that provide information about deforestation in a         
              number of different countries.  One database was gathered by the Food          
              and Agriculture Organization in 1980 and 1990 in order to provide              
              numerical estimates of amounts of deforestation.  The second database          
              consists of country-specific descriptions of deforestation based on            
              reports prepared by FAO and the International Union on the Conservation        
              of Nature and on other scientific studies.  Theoretically relevant             
              variables from these databases will be assembled into truth tables and         
              the tables will be simplified through the use of Boolean algebra.              
              Subsequent analyses should provide more direct insights into the causal        
              links among different variables, thereby improving our understandings of       
              the processes by which growth coalitions and individual actors clear           
              forests.                                                                       
                 This project will make contributions to our understandings of               
              tropical deforestation through a number of different means.  It will           
              develop and test new theoretical models about the processes of                 
              deforestation.  Assembly and analysis of empirical data will provide           
              valuable tests of these new models, and the data will become available         
              for use by investigators for other related studies.  The project also          
              will enable some relatively new analytic procedures to be assessed in          
              order to determine their efficacy and limitations for use in evaluating        
              both quantitative and qualitative information.
