Title       : Collaborative Research on the Intermediation Process and Political Decision
               Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1992  
File        : a9123519

Award Number: 9123519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Dalton rdalton@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Citizens in contemporary democracies learn about politics and make             
              political decisions based largely on the information provided by               
              political intermediaries, such as relatives and friends, the media,            
              and social groups.  This research investigation explores the                   
              intermediation process in the 1992 American presidential election.             
              The investigators utilize a mixed research design which combines               
              an intensive local study with a national study.  In both the local             
              and national studies, interviews will be conducted with a sample               
              of citizens and their personal discussants.  The content of the                
              newspapers they read also will be analyzed.  The local study,                  
              moreover, will include an examination of the activity of key                   
              secondary organizations in the community and how it impinges upon              
              citizens.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The current investigation is distinguished from prior                          
              investigations both in its examination of the full complement of               
              intermediaries and in its merging of citizen perceptions of the                
              intermediation process with information directly collected from the            
              intermediaries themselves.  In addition, this research is part of              
              a collaborative five-nation study of intermediation that enables               
              the investigators to place the American findings in a cross-                   
              national context, thereby identifying the regularities and                     
              anomalies of intermediation within advanced industrial societies.              
              The study lies at the nexus of several of the central research                 
              issues of contemporary political behavior and will generate a model            
              of the intermediation process that describes the citizen's                     
              relationship to the political world and how it affects the nature              
              of citizen electoral decision making.
