Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Computer Simulation of Fluids With Restricted
               Flow Geometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9123242

Award Number: 9123242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sohail Murad murad@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in               
              chemical engineering between Sohail Murad of the University of                 
              Illinois at Chicago and J.G. Powles of the University of Kent,                 
              United Kingdom.  They propose to conduct a comprehensive study                 
              of the molecular and macroscopic behavior of fluids with restricted            
              flow geometries, using computer simulation methods.  They will                 
              examine well-defined geometries, such as slits and pores, and more             
              irregular geometries, including random porous systems.  The                    
              investigators' collaboration during the last six years has resulted in         
              a novel technique that attaches a subset of molecules in the                   
              simulation to appropriate positions for obtaining any desired                  
              geometry. This technique will allow them to study the behavior of              
              fluids as the boundary changes from impermeable to a permeable                 
              wall.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The international aspects of this collaboration are significant.  Both         
              the U.S. and British investigators are expert in molecular dynamics            
              and theory.  The two groups will carry out independent molecular               
              dynamics studies and numerical simulations.  They will compare                 
              data and results.  Their joint effort will allow rapid progress and            
              advance our understanding of the molecular behavior of polar fluids            
              such as ammonia and hydrogen chloride.  Their research is of                   
              fundamental and practical interest to a wide variety of disciplines in         
              materials science, chemsitry and biology, where permeable and                  
              semipermeable membranes and porous flow are encountered.
