Title       : Transport and Equilibrium Properties of Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9123878

Award Number: 9123878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn T. Evans EVANSGL@CCMAIL.ORST.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor Glenn Evans is supported by a grant from the                         
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study                       
              structure and dynamics of simple model systems for                             
              liquid crystalline fluids.  For simplicity, the liquid                         
              crystalline forming molecules are envisioned as hard                           
              nonspherical bodies encircled with a spherical (square well)                   
              potential.  The proposed analysis of equilibrium phenomena                     
              are concerned with the derivation of phase diagrams for                        
              nematic and smectic phases, fluid mixtures and chiral                          
              nematics.  Elements of density functional theory, Onsager                      
              theory and scaled particle theory are combined to                              
              analyze the origin of these phases at high liquid densities.                   
              The dynamical properties to be addressed include: the self                     
              diffusion coefficient, the dielectric permittivity and the                     
              NMR spectral density for a single component nematic fluid.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Liquid crystals were discovered roughly one hundred years                      
              ago.  They are materials with flow properties of a liquid                      
              and the optical properties of a solid.  Since that time,                       
              these optical and fluid properties of LCs have been                            
              harnessed into display technology.  The molecular physics                      
              underpinning the development of LCs is nontrivial.  Liquid                     
              crystal displays are typically made from mixtures of chiral                    
              nematic phases with unusual optical and viscoelastic                           
              properties.  The richness of the technological applications of                 
              these phases is in turn directly linked to the diversity of                    
              their thermodynamic and transport properties which are the                     
              subject of Professor Evans studies.
