Title       : Novel Marine Archaebacteria: Potential Contribution to Midwater Biomass and
               Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1991  
File        : a9123889

Award Number: 9123889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed A. Fuhrman fuhrman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   This research investigation looks at newly discovered groups              
              of archaebacteria found recently by molecular genetic analysis of              
              marine bacterioplankton.  DNA sequences from these organisms                   
              were recovered from samples collected at one site in the                       
              oligotrophic open Pacific Ocean at depths of 100m and 500m.                    
              This group made up most (70%) of the clones obtained from 500m,                
              so there is a suggestion that they may be very important in the                
              biomass and metabolism of deeper waters.  Given the "unusual"                  
              nature of the niches ordinarily occupied by most archaebacteria                
              in other habitats (extreme thermophiles, strictly anaerobic                    
              methanogens, extreme halophiles, etc.), this occurrence of                     
              archaebacteria may suggest unexpected metabolic and                            
              biogeochemical processes in the ocean's vast interior.                         
                   Dr. Fuhrman will perform nucleic acid probe analysis on                   
              additional midwater and deep sea samples to see if this group of               
              bacteria is repeatably found in the interior ocean, and if so, to              
              estimate the relative abundance of these organisms compared to                 
              other types of microbes.  He will repeat the sequence analysis in              
              samples that test positive, to determine if the organisms are                  
              indistinguishable from those already found.  Additionally, he                  
              will attempt the very difficult culturing from fresh seawater                  
              samples to determine if these organisms can be enriched and                    
              possibly isolated from seawater for laboratory study.  Along with              
              a marine organic geochemist, he will analyse lipids for types                  
              unique to archaebacteria.                                                      
                   The conditions of enrichment plus information on the                      
              abundance of these organisms may indicate the significance of                  
              biogeochemical transformations mediated by these organisms.                    
              While the preliminary data indicate these organisms may be major               
              contributors to midwater processes, there is a risk of not                     
              finding them again.
