Title       : Surface UV Irradiance and PAR Variability over Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9725403

Award Number: 9725403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $521082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Ricchiazzi paul@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine H. Gautier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1318,1339,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725403  Ricchiazzi  The discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole in the early 
              1980's focused concern on whether enhanced ultraviolet (UV)  surface irradiance
              levels due to ozone depletion would have  a negative impact on the Southern
              Ocean ecosystem. While  subsequent photobiology research has shown negative
              effects  on photoplankton, zooplankton and fish larvae due to  increased UV
              radiation, it is difficult to extrapolate  localized studies to a broad spatial
              scale. Satellite-based  UV and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)
              mapping  techniques, developed through prior research support, offer  a way to
              extend the results of photobiology point-  measurement to large spatial scales.
              The mapping algorithm  uses specific satellite images of cloud and ozone 
              distribution to estimate UV and PAR irradiance levels of  large geographic
              areas. The goal of this research is to test  and improve performance of the UV
              and PAR mapping algorithm.  Since a significant fraction of the overall
              biological  productivity occurs in near-coastal waters, this project  will
              focus special attention on improving the performance of  the mapping technique
              near the coast. Simulations made with  Monte Carlo radiative transfer models
              suggest that these  coastal regions are subject to significant surface 
              irradiance enhancement. The field study will deploy a newly  modified surface
              radiometer with spectral sensors selected  to optimize the retrieval of cloud
              optical depth and surface  albedo.  The improved retrieval performance of this
              system  should significantly enhance the ability to test the  accuracy of the
              mapping algorithm. This project will also  investigate how the new AVHRR-3A
              satellite sensor can be  used to improve the algorithm. Initial analysis
              indicated  that information from this new sensor could be useful for  obtaining
              much more frequent and accurate surface albedo  maps, information that is a
              necessary ingredient for the  mapping algorithm. These new approaches to
              interpreting  satellite and surface mea surements will provide information 
              critical for an interpretation of the effects of ozone  reduction on the
              biological communities in Antarctica.
