Title       : Evolution of a Species Complex During Faunal Turnover: Morphometric Analyses of
               the Montastraea Annularis Reef Coral Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a9725273

Award Number: 9725273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann F. Budd ann-budd@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725273  Budd    More than 60% of the modern Caribbean reef coral fauna arose
              between 4-1.5 Ma during an episode of accelerated faunal turnover, documented
              as part of previous NSF funded research.  The proposed research shifts from a
              taxonomically broad characterization of this episode to an in-depth analysis of
              some of its most important participants, and focuses on morphologic evolution
              within a clade of Montastraea.  The selected clade has been ecologically
              dominant for the past 30 myr and consists of at least 10 species.  Among them
              are members of the modern Montastraea annularis species complex, which arose
              early during the turnover episode and have widely been used as a model organism
              in marine ecology and geology; e.g., to study coral beaching and paleoclimatic
              change.  The complex has long been thought to represent one species, whose
              colony morphology varied extensively in response to light at different reef
              depths.  However, Knowlton & co-workers have recently used reproductive and
              molecular data and field studies of colony morphology to propose that M.
              'annularis' is actually a complex of at least 3 species.  A pilot study with
              Knowlton has shown that, although the 3 species overlap in traditional
              morphologic characters, they are clearly distinct in morphometric analyses of
              non-traditional characters including: (1) the 3D relief of septa on calical
              surfaces and (2) the 2D structure of the corallite walls.  Moreover,
              evolutionary relationships inferred from 3D morphometric results correspond
              with those based on DNA.    These findings suggest that the evolutionary study
              of faunal turnover may be compromised by the inadequacy of traditional
              procedures to consistently recognize genetically distinct species.  The
              proposed research will therefore develop more refined morphometric methods for
              recognizing species in the fossil record and tracing their evolution through
              geologic time.  It involves:  (1) conducting a survey of morphologic characters
              using 3D morphometrics to determine which char acters best match the results of
              ongoing DNA work by Knowlton & co-workers;  (2) devising a procedure based on a
              subset of the characters above, which can be used to recognize species in
              fossil material and trace them through geologic time;  (3) examining the
              morphologic stability of these species at intervals of < 100 kyr through series
              of Late Pleistocene reef terraces at scattered geographic locations;  (4)
              Reconstructing the phylogeny of the clade using combined morphometrics &
              phylogenetic approaches.  In the first 2 sets of analyses, I will collaborate
              with Nancy Knowlton, and in the third, with John Pandolfi.  Except for field
              and shipping expenses, Knowlton & Pandolfi are funded separately by the
              Smithsonian Institution.  The material will consist of genetically
              characterized colonies (provided by Knowlton); newly collected, ecologically
              characterized Late Pleistocene colonies (collected with Pandolfi); and
              well-dated Oligocene to Early Pleistocene in museum collections, most of which
              I made as part of earlier NSF funded work.  The results will be used: (1) to
              document the timing and pattern of speciation and extinction events within the
              M. annularis complex, and relate them to patterns of overall faunal turnover,
              and (2) to examine trends of morphologic evolution at various levels within the
              clade and interpret their cause.  They will thus contribute valuable
              information for assessing the roles of external environmental factors and
              biological interactions in causing turnover.    The proposed research will
              provide an elegant model system, integrating molecular, reproductive,
              morphologic, and fossil data in an ecologically important but manageable size
              clade.  It will be the first such system in reef corals to incorporate fossil
              data and use them for inferring evolutionary processes.  In addition to
              paleontology, the proposed research will contribute in important ways to coral
              reef biology, systematics, and molecular evolution.  Interpretation of modern
              distributions will be aided by eval uation of the past ecological roles of
              these species, new morphological techniques for reliably separating closely
              related species will be developed, and the combination of fossil and molecular
              data will provide the first estimates in corals for rates of molecular
              evolution for relatively recently diverged taxa.    Funds are requested for
              image analysis equipment; salary for a grad student R.A. & the PI; field work
              collecting Late Pleistocene colonies; and the use of university SEM & confocal
              microscopes.
