Title       : SGER: The Mechanism of Complete Bacterial Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9725022

Award Number: 9725022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49823              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Schoolnik ML.GKS@FORSYTHE.STANFORD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Stocker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Schoolnik  9725022    Generalized bacterial virus transduction occurs when a
              virus particle incorporates a piece of host (donor) DNA in place of viral DNA. 
              When that virus infects a recipient bacterium, a recombinant bacterium can be
              formed, carrying genes from the donor bacterium in place of the recipient's
              homologous genes.  The fate of the recipient genes displaced by the incoming
              transduced DNA has been a puzzle for many years. The objective of this project
              is to determine the nature of the DNA molecule in which a displaced recipient
              gene persists within a complete  transductant clone and to discover how it was
              produced. The working hypothesis is that the persistence of the recipient
              wild-type gene results from incorporation of the whole injected fragment (with
              its ends held together by protein) by a single cross-over into the recipient
              chromosome, producing a chromosome with two copies (each including a crossover)
              of a segment corresponding to the injected fragment, separated by a break
              bridged by protein. Such a chromosome could not be replicated but it could give
              rise to a normal chromosome by slippage recombination of the two copies of the
              repeated segment; this would leave the abnormal chromosome intact, able to
              confer motility on its viable recombinant host and to be transmitted to a
              single descendant, and so production of a reverse trail.  The methods to test
              the hypothesis of an interrupted-chromosome intermediate in complete
              transduction will be genetic: (i) isolation by micromanipulator of motile
              bacteria (abortive transductants or of the postulated broken-chromosome class)
              in a cross of a donor with a Tnl0 insertion in one motility-essential gene to a
              recipient with a mutation in a closely linked motility gene; (ii) examination
              of the growth of reverse trails; (iii) search for minute colonies in
              transduction of biosynthesis genes inactivated by transposon insertion; (iv)
              analysis of transductant clones for genetic heterogeneity; (v) testing of the
              effect on the reverse-trail phen omenon of rec and related mutations, bacterial
              or phage, including one which reduces the ability of phage P22 to effect
              abortive transduction.  The significance of the research is that it may show
              that the process of complete transduction involves an intermediate of a
              previously unknown sort, with an interrupted chromosome, a finding of relevance
              to understanding of recombination generally.
