Title       : Topics in International Trade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9725019

Award Number: 9725019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kala M. Krishna kmk4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research consists of  three topics in international trade.  The first
              involves developing vertical models of production and trade.  These models
              where final products are created after going through a chain of production
              processes are of considerable interest.  Not only does trade in intermediate
              goods constitute a substantial proportion of all trade, but such vertical
              production creates complementarities across sectors which cause coordination
              failures and multiple equilibria to exist in a natural way.  It turns out that
              these models are useful for thinking about a variety of questions in trade and
              development, including the case for subsidization of what are called `leading
              sectors` and the determinants of the distribution of gains from trade.  This
              work is related to the literature in the 1950's on unbalanced growth and to the
              more recent literature on complementarities, as well as to the literature on
              models of vertical production in trade.  The second topic is concerned with
              trade liberalization, welfare, and market access.  This topic focuses on the
              relationship between trade liberalization, welfare, and the volume of trade. 
              The approach taken is to look at the linkages between markets and their
              implications for the effect of trade liberalization on welfare and trade
              volume.  The effects of linkages between markets in which the possibility of
              losses from liberalization due to second best effects is better understood. 
              For example, Lopez and Panagariya suggest the Concertina Rule, where the
              highest tariff is reduced first, would not apply to intermediate goods.  The
              approach, taken here casts light, among other things, on the issue of when
              trade liberalization along the lines of the Concertina Rule, raise welfare. 
              Second, a hitherto unsuspected link between welfare and trade volume is
              discovered which seems quite general.  This suggests that under certain
              conditions, trade liberalization which raises welfare must reduce trade volume.
               In these circumstances, pressure to liberalize trade in order to raise imports
              is likely to be resisted as such a policy would necessarily reduce welfare. 
              The third topic involves R&D and exchange rates:  This topic focuses on the
              effect of the exchange rate on R&D expenditures chosen in an open economy.  In
              his provocative book, Michael Porter speculates that economies with overvalued
              exchange rates are forced to compete by innovating rather than by using lower
              prices to compete in the market.  Despite the intriguing case studies offered
              in the book, the forces at work behind the scene are not well understood in the
              literature.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
