Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Ecophysiology of Larval-Stage Dispersal in
               Estuarine Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a9725942

Award Number: 9725942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23250              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Secor secor@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1308,5921,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725942  Secor    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor David Secor of the University of  Maryland and
              Professor Masaru Tanaka of Kyoto University in  Japan.  The researchers will be
              exploring ecophysiology of  larval-stage dispersal in estuarine fishes.  A
              critical  phase in estuarine fishes is the transition between larval  and
              juvenile stages.  For Japanese sea bass, transition-  phase fish move from
              brackish to freshwater habitats.  The  researchers will examine the timing of
              this habitat shift in  relation to:  (l) the physiological ability of larvae to
               adapt to changing salinity habitats; (2) the size and age of  larvae; and (3)
              environmental conditions.  The project will  couple methodologies in otolith
              microanalysis and  immunocytochemistry.  The otolith's chemical record will 
              serve as a chronometer on the timing of the habitat shift  relative to age and
              size.  Individual level analysis of  endocrine function will indicate whether a
              larva is  competent to change habitats.     This project brings together the
              efforts of two  laboratories that have complementary expertise, research 
              capabilities and equipment.  The collaboration will unite  the U.S.
              researcher's expertise in otolith microanalysis  with the Japanese expertise in
              immunocytochemistry.  Research results of otolith microanalysis will establish
              the  where's and when's of larval ingress or egress into juvenile  habitats. 
              Also the endocrine status and larval growth rate  will provide information on
              how the habitat shift is  successfully accomplished.  Through the exchange of
              ideas  and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic  knowledge
              and promote international understanding and  cooperation.  ***
