Title       : Investigation of Sulfur Chemistry in the Antarctica Troposphere (ISCAT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9725465

Award Number: 9725465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1010249            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred L. Eisele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1309,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9725465  Davis       The proposed work is a four-year study of the sulfur
              chemistry in the antarctic atmosphere, including two summer field seasons at
              South Pole station in 1998-99 and 2000-01.  It is a major project, involving
              ten principal and senior investigators at five institutions with seven
              additional contributing investigators.   The study has two broad-based goals:
              to substantially improve our current understanding of the oxidation chemistry
              of biogenic sulfur in the polar environment, and to improve the climatic
              interpretation of sulfur-based signals in antarctic ice core records. The
              decision to base the proposed study at South Pole came from the recognition
              that the atmospheric boundary layer in the interior would present a homogeneous
              and relatively simple environment from which to unravel the photochemically
              driven oxidation chemistry of dimethyl sulfide (DMS).   It is based on and has
              evolved from a number of other sulfur studies during the last decade, including
              an earlier study at a coastal antarctic site by this group of investigators.  
              Atmospheric sulfur chemistry is an important component in climate change issues
              because both naturally and anthropogenically emitted sulfur compounds form
              minute particles in the atmosphere (so-called aerosols) that reflect solar
              radiation, produce atmospheric haze and acid rain, and affect ozone depletion. 
              Sulfate particles in the atmosphere may also act as condensation nuclei for
              water vapor and enhance global cloudiness.  The primary natural sources of
              sulfur are volcanic emissions and DMS production by oceanic phytoplankton.   On
              the millenial time scale the variability and natural background level of
              atmospheric aerosols can be reconstructed from the preserved paleorecords of
              sulfur oxidation products in ice cores.  It is however necessary to understand
              how the physical and chemical environment of the oxidation process affects the
              relative concentrations of the oxidation products that become buried in the
              ice.   This study requires s imultaneous observations of a wide-ranging suite
              of sulfur species such as DMS and its oxidation products: sulfur dioxide,
              dimethyl sulfoxide, dimethyl sulfone, methane sulfonic acid, and sulfuric acid,
              as well as photochemically important compounds such as carbon monoxide, nitrous
              oxide, water vapor, and non-methane hydrocarbons.  Secondary objectives will be
              to examine interior antarctic air samples for other significant DMS oxidation
              products such as sulfurous acid and methane sulfinic acid, and to assess the
              local variation in hydroxyl and perhydroxyl radicals, a measure of the
              oxidizing power of the atmosphere.   This study will for the first time provide
              a quantitative picture of exactly which atmospheric sulfur compounds are
              advected into the antarctic interior, and a detailed picture of the sulfur
              chemistry that is active in the antarctic atmosphere.  ***  ??
