Title       : Modeling and Control of Nonlinear Micro-distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9725149

Award Number: 9725149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Wang pkcwang@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725149
Wang
Advanced applications of micromachined devices and systems call
              for precise control of their dynamic behavior with respect to both space and
              time.  The design and control of such systems require consideration of
              distributed-parameter models.  Since the physical size of such systems is of
              the order of 10-3 meter to 10-6 meter, it is necessary to take into account the
              minute nonlinear forces and moments in modeling.  The resulting mathematical
              models are in the form of nonlinear partial differential and/or integral
              equations.  The objective of this proposed study is to develop applicable
              theories for the modeling and control of such systems referred hereafter as
              nonlinear micro-distributed systems.  The initial effort will be focused on the
              modeling of specific micro-distributed systems derived from applications, in
              particular, systems with free boundaries; bifurcation phenomena and parameter
              estimation in micromachined elastic structures including deformable mirrors
              with nonlinear electrostatic or magnetostatic actuators, and elastic structures
              coupled with liquid films.   The subsequent efforts will be focused on the
              design, stabilization and control of micro-distributed systems.  They will
              include the optimal design of actuator patterns; the determination of
              attainable shapes in micromachined deformable mirrors using electrostatic
              actuation; the derivation of stabilizing feedback controls for vibration
              damping and precise alignment in micromachined elastic structures using
              electromagnetic, piezoelectric, or thermal actuation; and for laminar flow via
              boundary surface perturbations.  Emphasis will be placed on the development of
              applicable mathematical theory, efficient computational algorithms, and
              practical implementation for micro-distributed systems.  The proposed study
              represents a new research direction for distributed-parameter control system
              theory.  Preliminary studies in mathematical modeling already led to new
              nonlinear partial differential equations which are not only useful for control
              development, but they are also interesting from the mathematical standpoint. 
              The results have potential applications in micro-sensors, micro-imaging
              systems, and adaptive optical systems.  
***  
 
		 

