Title       : New Transition Metal Oxides Near Localized-Itinerant, Insulator-Metal
               Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a9725979

Award Number: 9725979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Cava rcava@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9725979  Cava    The discovery of high temperature superconductivity in
              complex  copper oxides led to the widespread realization that the 
              relationships between the chemistry, crystal structure, and  electronic and
              magnetic properties of transition metal oxides was  understood at only a
              cursory level. Due to the presence of strong  interactions between the d
              electrons, and the interactions  between the electrons, magnetic spins, and the
              underlying atomic  lattice, the usual band structure based picture (which, for 
              example, does not include the effects of electronelectron  correlations) often
              can not properly describe the observed  electronic and magnetic properties.
              This research program in  solid state chemistry has the goal of discovering new
              complex  oxides with exotic electronic and magnetic properties due to  their
              proximity to insulator-metal transitions. Two classes of  chemical compounds
              are considered in detail. The research program  consists of: (1) The discovery
              and characterization of new  ternary and quaternary ruthenium oxides,
              oxyhalides, and related  compounds. Taken as a whole, previous studies strongly
              suggest  that ruthenium and oxygen represent one of the pairs of atoms in  the
              periodic table for which unusual physical properties result  due to the
              characteristics of the metal-oxygen bond and the types  of crystal structures
              which occur when compounds with ternary  elements are formed. (2) The discovery
              of new copper oxide  superconductors and related materials with low-dimensional
              copper-  oxygen arrays. This program searches for new copper based oxides 
              synthesized at high oxygen pressures, in which the copper-oxygen  plane does
              not have the usual Cu02 checkerboard geometry. New  materials are sought in
              which the CuO geometry is electronically  "simpler" than the Cu02 plane. The
              characterization of these  materials will allow direct comparison to the
              predictions of  models for the behavior of quantum mechanical spin systems, an 
              area of intense theoretical activity, whic h many believe may hold  the key to
              the microscopic mechanism of high temperature  superconductivity .  %%%  Many
              of today's technological systems are based on the use of  sophisticated
              electronic materials. As those systems increase in  complexity, the types of
              materials they are based on also  increase in complexity. This project uses the
              methods of solid  state chemistry in the search for new materials at the
              borders of  our understanding of the fundamental relationships between the 
              chemistry, crystalline structure, and electronic and magnetic  properties of
              solids. Two promising classes of transition metal  oxides will be studied, with
              the hope that the insight gained  will ultimately help define the future
              directions of both  condensed matter science and electronics technology.  ***
