Title       : Physically Based Modeling of Spatially Variable Seismic Ground Motions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9725567

Award Number: 9725567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aspasia Zerva zervaa@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The spatial variation of seismic ground motions has an important effect on the
              response of lifelines, such as bridges and pipelines; it may induce significant
              additional loads in the structure than the ones obtained if the structure's
              supports are subjected to the same seismic motions. The spatial variation of
              seismic ground motions results from the apparent propagation of the waveforms
              on the ground surface and the differences in their shape at the various
              locations of the supporting structure.

In a previous study, the PI developed
              an alternative methodology for the investigation of spatially variable seismic
              ground motions recorded at dense instrument arrays. It models the seismic
              motions as superpositions of sinusoidal functions, described by their
              amplitude, frequency, wavenumber and phase. The application of the methodology
              to data recorded at the SMART-1 array in Lotung, Taiwan, revealed that the
              common, coherent component approximates to a very satisfactory degree the
              actual motions,
and that the spatial variability is caused by arrival time
              delays at the array stations associated with the upward traveling of the waves
              through the site topography, and by variabilities in both the amplitudes and
              phases of the motions around the common component characteristics.

The
              developed methodology considers simultaneously the amplitude and the phase
              variation in seismic motions. Its application to recorded data recognized
              correlation patterns between amplitude and phase variabilities around a
              coherent approximation of the motions; this observation may lead to significant
              developments in the description of spatial variability.  However, the
              methodology has been applied to one site only, and, for the generalization of
              its results, it is necessary that it be applied at different sites subjected to
              various earthquakes.

Therefore, the present study uses extensive additional
              sets of data recorded at rock and soil sites. Differentiation is made in terms
              of the earthquake magnitude: small and large events (e.g., main event
              and
aftershocks) at the same site are investigated. The effect of the water
              table at the sites ('wet' and 'dry' sites) is also taken into consideration.

