Title       : Lost Civilizations of the Tarim Basin - A Traveling Natural History Museum of
               Los Angeles County Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9725768

Award Number: 9725768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1652058            (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Olson jolson@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam T. Kessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Beggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dolkun Kamberi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725768  Olsen    The Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County will develop
              Lost Civilizations of the Tarim Basin. This will be a 6000 sq. ft. traveling
              exhibit that will introduce visitors to the extraordinary archaeological
              discoveries that have recently been made in the Taklamakan Desert in the
              Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of the People's Republic of China.  Due to
              the arid desert conditions the preservation of sites, artifacts, and human
              remains is exceptional and the artifacts represent some of the oldest extant
              items made of perishable materials (wood, paper, silk, and leather.)  What has
              intrigued scientists about these remains is the fact they are Indo-Europeans. 
              These remains have challenged the scholarly world by adding fuel to an already
              heated debate considering the origins and development of the Indo-European
              peoples who inhabited the Eurasian landmass for thousands of years.  Who were
              these people, where did they come from, and what was their role in the early
              development of East/West cultural contact?  Not only will visitors be able to
              see the artifacts and learn about the culture of this extinct group, but they
              will also learn how archaeologists and collaborating specialists work to
              unravel the mysteries posed by these remains.  The exhibit will be complemented
              by resources for formal education programs.  NHM will develop 1) an on-line
              presentation that will include "virtual" elements of the archaeology sites and
              materials, 2) teacher enhancement activities, 3) curriculum materials for older
              elementary and secondary students, and a menu of non-formal lectures, classes,
              and a symposium.  The museum will also produce a comprehensive, fully
              illustrated catalogue in both printed and digital formats.  The exhibit will
              have five venues.  It is expected to reach between 150,000 and 300,000 people
              at each venue.
