Title       : The Challenge of Developing Systems Thinkers: How Misconceptions About Complex
               Causality Contribute to Fundamental Problems in Scientific Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9725502

Award Number: 9725502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $837690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina A. Grotzer tina_grotzer@pz.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Perkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725502  Grotzer    Learning to understand and analyze the systems concepts
              present in many different scientific phenomena entails interpreting a variety
              of types of complex causal relationships. Yet students tend to hold
              preconceptions and misconceptions about causality that hinder learning and
              systematically generate misconceptions in science content. There are different
              levels of increasingly sophisticated forms of complex causality.  At each
              level, learners face new cognitive challenges where mismatches between
              students' causal models and scientific causal models arise and imperil
              scientific understandings. Despite the fundamental importance of complex causal
              models, few materials exist to help teachers support student learning about
              complex causal forms.    A taxonomy of increasingly complex causal models that
              represent different sets of science understandings will be generated. Students'
              understandings of the different  models and the inherent protoconcepts will be
              probed using computer and paper-based assessments, interviews, and
              observations. Mismatches between students' and scientific models will be
              investigated to identify and examine points of difficulty. Researchers and
              teachers will then work together to develop and assess intervention materials
              designed to help students beyond these points of difficulty. The resulting
              program, tentatively titled "The Understandings of Consequence Program," will
              be constructivist in nature. It will invite explicit student reflection upon
              causal models as situated in science content and how they map onto different
              scientific phenomenon. Methods will be developed for modeling and talking about
              specific concepts of difficulty. The program will be designed to be infused
              into existing science programs as well as provide direction for the development
              of future programs. In the third and final year of the project, the program
              will be tested with a set of teachers who were not involved in the research and
              development process. This will suggest what addition al supports may be needed
              for the broader dissemination of the program as well as provide a means of
              testing its effectiveness outside the development context. The effectiveness of
              the program will be evaluated through use of qualitative, conceptual methods as
              well as standardized assessments. The analysis will combine quantitative and
              qualitative methods. The program will then be offered for broad dissemination. 
                By focusing on a set of misunderstandings and preconceptions that
              systematically generate other misunderstandings, the resulting materials and
              methods should fundamentally impact science learning. It will contribute of
              halting a pattern of systematically generated misconceptions-enabling
              conceptual  changes that equip learners to grasp complex causal concepts and
              systematically contribute to deep understanding in science learning instead. 
              ***
