Title       : Sci-Squad
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9725381

Award Number: 9725381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1353388            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill Jersey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff Gentes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Valette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Brock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KCTS Television
	      401 Mercer Street
	      Seattle, WA  981094640    206/443-6717

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725381   Jersey      KCTS is producing Sci-Squad, a national weekly science
              education television series for children ages 8 to 10.  The thirteen half-hour
              programs in the series will show a team of kids, the Sci-Squad, who use inquire
              and collaboration to seek the solution to a science problem.   The team is led
              by Howzit, a young woman computer whiz.  Working cooperatively the team
              investigates each scientific subject through a combination of first-hand
              experimentation, Internet surfing, field research, and visits to real-world
              scientists.  Each of the characters models a different mode of science inquiry
              in search to a question the team receives at the beginning of each program.   
              Youth who view the programs will be encouraged to follow along with the
              Sci-Squad and will be challenged to observe, measure, think critically, analyze
              results, and devise further experiments.  Outreach materials to support science
              activities by viewers include an Explorer's Guide for youth, a Parents Guide,
              and a Guide for Teachers.  There also will be collaborations with science and
              youth serving organizations such as Boys & Girls Club of America, Family Math,
              GEMS, Science Linkages in the Community, the National Science Teachers
              Association, the National PTA, and, for the Hispanic population, ASPIRA and the
              National Council of La Raza.    Bill Jersey, President of Quest Productions,
              will be the Senior Producer, Director, and Co-Project Director.  The creator of
              the project and Co-Project Director is Pierre Valette, a producer and writer of
              documentaries for Quest Productions and previously an Associate Producer in
              Children's Programming at WGBH.  Elizabeth Brock will be the
              Executive-in-Charge of Production for KCTS.   The Senior Science Consultant is
              Ted Ansbacher who previously was Director of Exhibits at the New York Hall of
              Science and Director of Education/Senior Scientist at The Chicago Museum of
              Science.
