Title       : Hands-On Laboratory for Science Writers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9725267

Award Number: 9725267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Goldman rgoldman@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela C. Hinkle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Science Writing Fellowships Program provides hands-on  laboratory training
              for young and mid-career science  journalists (newspaper, magazine, radio,
              television and free-  lance). It begins with an intensive one-week laboratory 
              course that focuses on cell and molecular biology and  continues for up to
              eight weeks, during which time fellows  participate in on-going laboratory
              projects or in  postdoctoral-level courses offered at the Marine Biological 
              Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole, Massachusetts.  Fellows also  have the
              opportunity to participate in environmental and  ecological research studies
              either locally or at the Toolik  Lake Research Station in Alaska.  Fellows are
              selected on  the basis of demonstrated writing or broadcasting skills and  the
              size and importance of the public they address.  Their  participation in the
              program provides them with a better  understanding of the complex subject
              matter of contemporary  biological, technological, and environmental science,
              and  with a better insight into who scientists are, what their  motivations
              are, and how they work.  Fellows form long-  lasting and informative
              relationships with each other as  well as individual scientists.  Their ability
              to inform the  public of the place of science and technology in  contemporary
              life and its relation to critical social and  political decisions, i.e., to
              enhance the science literacy  of their, is also significantly improved.
