Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Experimental Study of Basin Stratigraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9725989

Award Number: 9725989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Paola cpaola@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725989  Paola    We propose a three-year program of experimental studies o the
              formation of physical stratigraphy, using a large new experimental basin with a
              subsiding floor at the St. Anthony Falls Laboratory (SAFL).  This facility
              allows study of scaled basin processes with complete control of base level,
              sediment supply and, especially, subsidence pattern and rate.  The basin is 13m
              by 6.5m and allows up to 1.3m of accommodation space for deposition.  The
              subsiding floor comprises 432 independently controllable subsidence cells
              arranged in a honeycomb pattern.  This design allows the creation of a nearly
              unlimited range of spatial and temporal subsidence patterns.  Sediment and
              water can be fed from anywhere along the basin margin and base level (i.e.
              water level) is independently controllable.    Our first experiments will be
              aimed at testing some of the first-order predictions of models that have been
              proposed for formation of physical stratigraphy at basin scales, such as:  (1)
              the relationship of shoreline migration and associated stratigraphy to the
              interplay between subsidence rate and eustatic sea level; (2) the control of
              subsidence rate and geometry, and sediment supply, on alluvial coarse-facies
              distribution (i.e. the origin of syntectonic gravel's); and (3) the influence
              of subsidence rate and sediment supply on the development of alluvial
              architecture.  Initial results suggest that the experiments can also provide
              insight on processes such as growth faulting that have not been widely
              incorporated into existing models.  These experiments will use relatively
              simple subsidence and sediment-feed geometries and will focus on demonstrating
              "unit" stratigraphic response to changes in one or at most two variables
              simultaneously.    The second set of experiments will focus on 3-D effects in
              both subsidence and sediment supply, including: 1) 3-D effects of base-level
              change; 2) propagating active folding in the proximal basin associated with
              blind thrusts and development of progressive un conformities; 3) sedimentation
              in an asymmetric half graben combining both transverse and axial drainage.   
              The principal products of the experiments will include: time records of the
              imposed variables (water and sediment supply, base level, and basement
              topography); measurements of bed-surface topography through time; video records
              of flow pattern, shoreline position and other surface features; 3-D block
              diagrams of the resulting deposits, presented both as directly digitized
              (photographic) and synthetic seismic images; and synthetic geophysical logs of
              selected profiles.  The synthetic seismics are a crucial link with field
              observations, since the only way that researchers can obtain views of the rock
              record comparable to those generated by the experimental basin is through the
              filter of seismic reflection profiling.  The synthetic seismics and well logs,
              when contrasted against the actual experimental stratigraphy, will also advance
              our understanding of what is and is not retained from the rock record when it
              is imaged via these widely used techniques.    The experimental results would
              represent the first test under fully controlled conditions of a wide variety of
              theoretical predictions of stratigraphic response that have been developed
              since Pitman's (1978) model of shoreline response to changing sea level.  They
              would also provide a template that could be compared with field observations
              and interpretations based on seismic and outcrop data.  Although laboratory
              scale models can never capture all of the complex processes that occur in real
              basins, they serve as a bridge between untested theoretical models and
              difficult-to-constrain natural examples.
