Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Study of Pattern Formation in Growing Ice
               Crystals and Influence of Microscopic Interfacial Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9725945

Award Number: 9725945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19058              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Wettlaufer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725945  Wettlaufer    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor John Wettlaufer of the University  of Washington and
              Professor Yoshinori Furukawa of Hokkaido  University in Japan.  The researchers
              will be undertaking  studies relating to pattern formation in growing ice 
              crystals and the influence of microscopic interfacial  structure.  This
              involves understanding the dynamics of  liquid water existing at the boundaries
              of ice crystals at  temperatures below the freezing point of pure water.  This 
              process, called premelting, has significant consequences in  the redistributing
              of brine in sea ice, the apparent  migrating of contaminants through glacier
              ice, and the rate  of frost heave and weathering in soils and rocks.  The 
              experimental and theoretical program will include studies of  ice crystal
              growth and unfrozen water transport between  crystals as functions of
              temperature and temperature  differences, as well as such studies between ice
              crystals  and various substrates.  An important objective will be the 
              development of useful models for ice growth and impurity  transport under
              natural conditions in order to assess how  grain interfaces may serve as
              chemical conduits.     This project brings together the efforts of two 
              laboratories that have complimentary expertise, research  capabilities and
              equipment. The research should provide new  insights into the theory of near
              equilibrium growth and  melting of ice.  The project is technically relevant
              because  surface phase transitions occur in a host of materials, many  of which
              are important to industrial processing.  It is also  environmentally relevant
              since the most abundant crystal  growth problems in the natural environment
              involve ice.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project  will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote  international understanding
              and cooperation.  ***
