Title       : Excavation of an Early Neolithic Village in the Eygptian Sahara
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9725162

Award Number: 9725162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Wendorf fwendorf@sun.cis.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While Egypt is best known for the civilization of the pharaohs, from an
              anthropological perspective it is also significant because of the developmental
              processes which proceeded this period. Thousands of years earlier hunting and
              gathering populations living in a fluctuating Saharan environment developed a
              subsistence strategy based on focused and extensive utilization of a wide range
              of local plant foods. This provided the basis for early settled (or
              semi-settled) village life and likely contributed to the domestication of
              sorghum, one of the world's major plant crops, and cattle. Perhaps the earliest
              known pottery is associated with such Saharan populations. A central goal of
              the research pursued by Dr. Wendorf and his international multidisciplinary
              team is to trace the early, Neolithic stages of this developmental process
              which established the groundwork for Egyptian civilization. With National
              Science Foundation support his team will conduct two seasons of fieldwork at an
              early Neolithic site in the Saharan Desert. Prior work has revealed the
              presence of an extremely early village, labeled E-91-9, which contains abundant
              carbonized plant remains, numerous houses and associated pits and the largest
              corpus of pottery yet found at such an early period of occupation. The work
              will focus on three issues: 1. The development of increasing reliance on cereal
              species that eventually became major domestic crops: 2. The changes in social
              organization that accompanied the adoption of a more sedentary village way of
              life; and 3. The origins of pottery production. To accomplish these goals, the
              team will excavate a number of storage pits which contain floral remains. They
              will also excavate house structures and the areas surrounding them. Preliminary
              data indicates that the settlement may be planned and that house structures are
              arranged in a row pattern.   This research is important because it will shed
              new light on the emergence of settled village societies and the processes
              involved in the domestication of plants and animals. It will fill an important
              gap in the prehistory of Egypt and provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
