Title       : Genetics of Organized Gliding Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9725527

Award Number: 9725527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armin D. Kaiser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kaiser  9725527  Myxococcus exhibits multicellular gliding movements that are
              highly coordinated. Coordination spans the range of few to many thousands of
              cells. While growing, a dozen cells may associate and move as a cohort. In
              fruiting body development, many thousands of cells move coordinately. The aim
              of this project is to work out the cellular and molecular basis for movement
              coordination. Despite the apparent complexity of their movements, myxobacterial
              cells have the structural, chemical and genetic simplicity of Gram-negative
              bacteria. Previous work on Myxococcus had distinguished two motility patterns
              called "adventurous" and "social". This project will seek to identify genes
              that control social motility and to learn their biochemical functions. For this
              purpose, mutants defective in social motility will be analyzed. Earlier work
              had identified pili, long thin hairs that projected from one pole of each cell,
              as necessary for social motility. This project will investigate the biogenesis
              of pili and the way that pili support social motility. The finding of mutants
              that assemble normal pili, yet fail to show social motility shows that pili are
              necessary but not sufficient for social motility. Steps in transducing a pilus
              "signal" might be found in this way. Many social motility genes are clustered
              in one long contiguous continuous stretch of Myxococcus DNA. More motility
              genes will be sought in the neighborhood of this block. The structure and
              function of the new genes will be analyzed. Regulation of expression of the
              pilin gene will be studied. Pilin is the protein monomer of the pilus fiber.
              The motors responsible for gliding movement have not yet been uncovered in any
              of the gliding bacteria. The search for new genes and mutants will be
              structured in a way that should allow mutations which inactivate the gliding
              engines to be detected.    Coordinated multicellular movements are particularly
              important in early developmental steps of multicellular organisms, but little
              is known about how  they are organized or regulated. Myxobacteria offer a
              realistic way to begin to investigate this general problem.
