Title       : GOALI: Geochronology of Ultra-Fine-Grained Clay, an Industry-University
               Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9725576

Award Number: 9725576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tullis C. Onstott tullis@geo.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hailiang Dong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9163,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725576  Onstott    This proposal requests funds for further refinement of
              methodologies for 40Ar/39Ar dating of fine-grained clay using the laser
              microprobe.  We have successfully developed a vacuum micro-encapsulation
              technique for 40Ar/39Ar dating of microgram amounts of clay.  This break
              through will enable 40Ar/39Ar dating of pore filling illite in sandstone and
              syndeformational illite in fault gouge when sample yields are too small for
              K/Ar.  Furthermore, we have shown that laser incremental heating can
              distinguish between authigenic illite/smectite and detrital muscovite in clay
              mixtures and can even detect trace quantities of detrital muscovite in a shale
              sample.  This result provides a partial solution to a vexatious problem for
              clay geochronologists.    As with every application of a new technology to an
              old problem, however, controversies have arisen regarding the interpretation of
              the 40Ar/39Ar spectra for illite/smectite.  When the 39Ar lost from clay during
              irradiation, but captured by the encapsulating tube, is added to the Ar
              retained in the clay, then the 40Ar/39Ar age (total gas age) agrees with the
              K/Ar age.  The 40Ar/39Ar age calculated from just the Ar retained in the clay
              (ignoring the Ar lost during irradiation) yields an age, referred to as
              "retention age" that is older than the K/Ar age.  In some cases, the "retention
              age" appears concordant with Rb/Sr and Sm/Nd ages; whereas the total gas age
              and K/Ar age is significantly younger.  If this phenomenon is generally valid,
              then the "retention age" is a more accurate estimate of the timing of clay
              crystallization than the K/Ar age.  This proposition critically impacts the
              underpinning of clay geochronology and hence is extremely debatable. 
              Fortunately, the hypothesis is easily tested, because a requisite corollary is
              that a portion of the K in the clay resides in sites that are non-retentive to
              Ar and that the amount of K in these sites equals the amount 39Ar lost from the
              clay during irradiation.  By performing 40Ar/39Ar  analyses on clay samples
              before and after they are subjected to cation exchange experiments, the amount
              of K in Ar non-retentive sites can be determined.    With respect to detrital
              contamination of clay, the 40Ar/39Ar step-heating results would be far more
              beneficial if they could be used to simultaneously estimate the ages of the
              authigenic illite/smectite and the detrital micaceous end members.  End member
              ages in clay samples are currently ascertained by plotting the K/Ar dates of
              separates of varying grain size versus their proportions of diagenetic and
              detrital components as determined by XRD, and then extrapolating to 100% of
              each component.  This approach referred to as Illite Age Analysis (IAA) is
              quite successful, but the accuracy's of the resulting ages are limited by the
              imprecision's of the XRD estimates.  The combination of 40Ar/39Ar, K/Ar and XRD
              analyses could potentially reduce these errors significantly.  Inferring the
              end member ages from the 40Ar/39Ar step-heating requires an independent measure
              of proportion of Ar contributed by each end member for each heating step. 
              Because Ar release in clays occurs by dehydroxylation, we propose determining
              the H2O/K of the end members by TGA and AEM/TEM, the proportion of Ar from each
              end member can be calculated for each heating step, and their ages extrapolated
              in a manner directly analogous to IAA, correcting for 39Ar recoil by modeling. 
                In summary, the scope of this two year proposal is to perform experiments
              that will fully elucidate; 1) the proportion of K in Ar non-retentive sites,
              thereby determining which age (retention vs. K/Ar) represents the clay
              crystallization age; 2) the Ar mixing ratio in 40Ar/39Ar incremental analyses
              for two component clay mixtures in order to deduce end member ages.    This
              will be accomplished by performing 40Ar/39Ar, quadrupole gas, high resolution
              TEM, and thermal stage XRD analyses on well-characterized samples of varying
              grain size.  These samples are authigenic illite/smectite, detrital musco vite,
              and mixtures thereof, each of known age, crystallinity and composition.  The
              research will be undertaken with the collaboration of Drs. Pevear and Vrolijk
              of Exxon Production Research Company following the guidelines of GOALI.  Drs.
              Pevear and Vrolijk are acknowledged experts in the field of clay mineralogy and
              clay geochronology.  The proposed duration of the research program is two
              years.
