Title       : Sequence Stratigraphic Signature of a Long Term Greenhouse to Ice-House
               Transition in Mississippian Ramp Carbonates of Appalachian and Eastern Illinois
               Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9725308

Award Number: 9725308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Read jread@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725308  Read    This proposal requests funds to study the large exposures and
              extensive cores of the Early Mississippian (Osage-Meramecian) carbonate ramp,
              Appalachian/eastern Illinois Basins, and compare them to Late Mississippian
              successions, to search for the long term (30 m.y.) stratigraphic response of
              this tropical carbonate ramp to eustatic and climatic changes associated with
              Late Paleozoic global greenhouse to icehouse transition.  We presently have a
              large data set on the later Mississippian (Chesterian) units from both the
              Appalachian and Illinois Basins, which appear to show evidence of deposition
              under relatively large sea level fluctuations during onset of Late Paleozoic
              glaciation of Gondwana; these will serve as a basis of comparison with the
              older units.  We propose to log and photo-mosaic the Early and Middle
              Mississippian ramp facies, which appear to have formed on and above a
              clinoformal ramp with skeletal ramp margin and downslope banks, a gullied slope
              and low-stand (?) sand bodies, that built out from an abandoned detaic-marine
              self.  Outcrops and cores will be logged bed-by-bed, to define vertical and
              lateral extent of component carbonate and siliciclastic facies, presence or
              absence of regional tidal flat facies, eolianites, types of bounding surfaces
              and paleosols developed, and any evidence of erosional incision.  We will
              construct detailed regional cross sections to define a high-resolution sequence
              stratigraphy for the early Mississippian ramp.  Additionally, we will extend
              our later Mississippian (Chesterian) high resolution, sequence stratigraphic
              outcrop study of the Appalachian Basin, throughout the subsurface Appalachian
              Basin using core, sample cuttings and wireline logs.  We will then use these
              data sets on the Early to Late Mississippian to evaluate the magnitude of
              Mississippian sea level fluctuations by computer simulation of our
              stratigraphic cross-sections.  Input parameters will be constrained where
              possible using the field data.  Finally, this data wil l be integrated with the
              ice-buildup history in Gondwana, to define the stratigraphic response of this
              tropical ramp to Late Paleozoic global climate change.
