Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Organic Carbon Burial, Anoxia, and
               Ecological-Evolutionary Events in the Appalachian Basin During the Middle and
               Late Devonian (Givetian-Famennian)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9725803

Award Number: 9725803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22115              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlton E. Brett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725803  Brett    The widespread but episodic deposition of organic carbon-rich
              facies (ORF) in marine basins during Earth history has been recognized as an
              important problem in the geological sciences.  Water column stratification and
              consequent anoxia has commonly been the favored hypothesis to account for
              ancient ORF deposition, but in recent years alternate hypotheses have emerged
              that highlight the importance of coupled biogeochemical and sedimentological
              processes (e.g., high productivity, stratigraphic condensation), and even
              suggest that water column anoxia may not have been as prevalent as once
              thought.  Yet oxygen deficiency, whether as a cause or consequence of organic
              carbon burial, has been postulated as a potential driving force for
              evolutionary change and extinction during the Phanerozoic.  For example, it was
              recently implicated as a possible cause of overturn events punctuating distinct
              Silurian and Devonian benthic faunas of the Appalachian basin.  These benthic
              faunas are termed ecological-evolutionary subunits, the pattern of
              punctuational change at the community level is called coordinated stasis has
              rapidly become a forefront of research in evolutionary paleoecology, very few
              studies have integrated analyses of faunal changes with independent assessments
              of coeval environmental change, and none have focused on the role of redox
              dynamics.  What are the spatial and temporal relationships between organic
              matter burial events and oxygen deficiency?  How does oxygen depletion relate
              to evolutionary change within a community, a basin, or an ecosystem?    This
              proposal outlines a plan to re-evaluate hypotheses for the origin of ORF
              deposits in the Middle to Late Devonian Appalachian basin (late Eifelian
              through early Famennian), and to use the data collected for this purpose to
              investigate the causes of faunal stasis and overturn.  A preliminary data set
              of geochemical analyses from core samples has been generated (Fig.3, Table 2)
              that illustrates why previous hypotheses for the o rigin of ORF in the
              Appalachian basin need to be updated.  This data set has provided a foundation
              for the development of working hypotheses relating OFR deposition and
              coordinated stasis, as well as a trial for selection of the best
              paleoenvironmental parameters to employ in the study.  The two year project
              will focus on two cores from west central New York that will be analyzed for
              sedimentologic and ichnologic trends and sampled for geochemical analyses. 
              Three types of geochemical data sensitive to redox dynamics will be collected
              (carbon isotopes; abundance of C, Fe, S, and P; and concentration of trace
              metals), and the results will be compared to a compilation of published and
              unpublished data on macrofaunal trends within and around the Appalachian basin.
               Tests for the statistical covariance of redox sensitive proxies and faunas
              will allow the fundamental hypothesis, that oxygen depletion controls faunal
              turnover, to be confirmed or refuted.  Alternate mechanisms, such as
              species-area effects related to relative sea level changes, will also be
              considered.    In recent years the importance of changes in ocean circulation
              and biogeochemistry to past global change have been increasingly recognized. 
              The results of this study will provide a major contribution to the
              understanding of organic carbon accumulation processes in the evolution of
              epicontinental foreland basins, and of the relationship between carbon cycling,
              redox history, and ecological-evolutionary events in the rock record.
