Title       : 1997 International Symposium: "The Ribosome-Its Nucleolar Synthesis and
               Structure" to be held in Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands, August 16-20, 1997.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1997      
File        : a9725106

Award Number: 9725106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig S. Pikaard pikaard@biodec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9725106  Pikaard  The National Science Foundation is providing funding for the
              travel of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the United States to
              attend an international symposium entitled "The Ribosome: Its Nucleolar
              Synthesis and Structure."  This meeting will be held in Noordwijkerhout, the
              Netherlands, August 16-20, 1997.  This conference will be the fourth
              incarnation of a meeting that has previously been held at Cold Spring Harbor
              (1988, 1991, 1994).  The study of ribosome biosynthesis encompasses the
              sub-disciplines of biochemistry, biophysics, genetics, cell biology,
              developmental biology and physiology.  Numerous prokaryotic and eukaryotic
              species are model systems including E. coli, yeast, Acanthamoeba, trypanosomes,
              plants, Drosophila, and mammals.  Ribosome synthesis meetings bring together
              research laboratories from around the world, all unified by a single topic. 
              The breadth of expertise of the scientists assembled for this meeting
              facilitates  interdisciplinary interactions and the development of new
              insights.  This meeting presents students with the larger context in which
              their research figures and often introduces them for the first time to
              sophisticated research in disciplines distinct from their own.  Ribosomes are
              composed of multiple rRNAs and approximately 80 proteins whose synthesis and
              assembly must be precisely coordinated.  In eukaryotes, all three nuclear RNA
              polymerases are required to express the requisite genes.  Cellular trafficking
              of rRNAs and ribosomal proteins is also a major logistical problem for the
              cell.  Control in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes occurs at multiple steps
              including transcription initiation, RNA processing, RNA turnover,
              post-transcriptional modification, transcription termination and protein
              turnover.  Assembly of the proteins and rRNAs into a functional ribosome is a
              problem that also attracts structural biologists to this field.  To encourage
              US students to seek out international experience in their education, the
              meeting will  provide a mechanism by which students interested in postdoctoral
              experience abroad can meet with laboratory directors (mostly in Europe) who
              anticipate openings in their laboratories.  In this way, the organizers hope to
              facilitate international research training and experience for American
              students, consistent with one of the many educational missions of  the National
              Science Foundation.  Ribosomes are responsible for protein synthesis in all
              organisms.  Scientists specializing in the study of these essential cellular
              "machines" will gather from all over the world in the Netherlands for the
              meeting entitled "The Ribosome: Its Nucleolar Synthesis and Structure."  The
              meeting provides scientists having a wide range of expertise the opportunity to
              share information and insights into this field.  Funding from the National
              Science Foundation will enable United States graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows to attend the meeting and will provide them with the opportunity to
              arrange international collaborations.  ***
