Title       : Application of Single Crystal Membrane (SCM) Technique for Investigation of
               Binary Diffusivities in Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9725256

Award Number: 9725256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Orhan Talu talu@talu.csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dhananjai B. Shah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Richard Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      2121 Euclid Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-3630

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9725256  O. Talu Shah/Cleveland State U.    The single crystal
              membrane (SCM) method, developed by the principal investigator, will be applied
              to investigate transport properties of binary systems.  In parallel,
              substantial effort will be devoted to molecular simulations to enhance the
              understanding of molecular scale phenomena.  All industrial applications
              ultimately require multicomponent equilibrium and diffusivity data.  It is
              therefore necessary to develop methods of predicting multicomponent equilibria
              and diffusivities from pure component data.  Experimental measurements and
              computer simulations are essential to develop reliable prediction models.  The
              binary systems chosen will be several mixtures of n-alkanes whose pure
              component adsorption equilibria and diffusion in silicalite have been
              well-characterized.  Binary diffusivities will be measured for three different
              modes: 1) co-diffusion, 2) counter-diffusion, and 3) a novel chromatographic
              mode which is only possible with a membrane configuration.  In a separate set
              of experiments, binary equilibria of chosen systems will be measured to enable
              accurate interpretation of diffusion data.  Molecular simulations will be
              performed to extend the available simulation techniques to a novel steady-state
              non-equilibrium method.  This approach will complement the experimental
              measurements more closely than has been previously possible and simultaneously
              lead to a more efficient method of deriving accurate statistics.    The
              findings will fill substantial voids in the present understanding of
              thermodynamics and transport in micropores by combining molecular simulations
              and novel experiments to resolve a number of fundamental controversies that
              have plagued progress in the study of zeolites.     ***
