Title       : Ecosim: A Proposal for Null Models Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9725930

Award Number: 9725930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Gotelli ngotelli@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   EcoSim is a set of stand-alone software modules for  Windows 95 personal
              computers that will satisfy the needs of  biologists for null models.  "Null
              models" are simulations  that deliberately exclude a mechanism of interest, and
               provide benchmark tests for patterns in nature.  Initial  funding from an NSF
              SGER grant resulted in the development  of a graphical user interface and the
              prototypes for two  modules of EcoSim.  This project will expand EcoSim and 
              develop nine software modules to answer broad questions in  community ecology. 
              Each module will contain a number of  simulations and statistical tests that
              are most appropriate  for addressing the question.  The modules will test
              patterns  of (1) species diversity, (2) niche overlap, (3) body size  ratios,
              (4) co-occurrence, (5) incidence functions, (6)  species-area relationships,
              (7) range overlap, (8) shared  species, and (9) cluster formation.  A tenth
              module will  allow the user to construct customized null model tests with  a
              minimum of programming.  This tenth user-module will  greatly expand the
              utility of EcoSim for problems in  population genetics, demography, and
              behavior.       EcoSim is written in Delphi, a high-level programming 
              environment for Object Pascal.  Data can be easily imported  and exported,
              provided full compatibility with other  graphics and statistics software. 
              Pull-down menus,  checkboxes, and a powerful data editor allow users to select 
              a variety of simulation options.  Output is fully documented  and can be
              exported to text files.  An extensive online Help  system, which includes a
              tutorial and sample data sets,  guides users through the steps of null model
              analysis.  The  expanded EcoSim will be demonstrated in seminars, 
              presentations, and workshops.  As with the current version  of the program, the
              expanded EcoSim will be distributed free  via the Internet.
