Title       : Isotopic Reconstruction of Home Range and Migration in Extinct Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9725854

Award Number: 9725854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Koch pkoch@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725854  Koch    Migration patterns, dispersal, and home range are important
              attributes of the biology of living animals that have proven difficult to
              reconstruct for extinct species.  Current methods, based on analogy to modern
              relatives, scaling relationships, or taphonomic interpretations of multiple
              individual sites are either controversial or they lack resolution.  Migration
              and home range have figured prominently in ongoing debates about susceptibility
              to extinction, differences in speciation rates, biogeographic patterns, and
              patterns of co-evolution between predator and prey.  Clearly, a method for
              determining the scale of animal movement is essential.    Strontium exhibits
              geologically-controlled spatial variation in the isotope composition, whereas
              oxygen isotopes differ among regions due to climatic differences.  Animals
              consume vegetation and drinking water and ingest the Sr and O isotope signature
              characteristic of their local environment.  Consequently analysis of isotopic
              variations within and among individuals may indicate the habitat and movement
              patterns of individual animals.    This study has three sections.  First, the
              susceptibility of tooth enamel apatite to diagenetic alteration will be
              examined through analysis marine fossils deposited in sediments derived from
              the continent.  This study will reveal if biogenic 87Sr/86Sr, phosphate (18O,
              and carbonate (18O values are preserved in bioapatite of progressively older
              fossils, and assess the rate and mechanism of alteration.  This will be the
              first test of the isotopic fidelity of Sr in enamel, and the first attempt to
              examine whether known phosphate (18O values can be retrieved from ancient
              enamel and bone bioapatite.  A second study will take advantage of the
              extremely low Sr isotope variability in peninsular Florida to examine home
              range size and migration in extinct Pleistocene proboscideans.  The study will
              reveal if late Pleistocene proboscideans had large or small home ranges, if
              they undertook seasonal migrations, and  if either of these attributes of range
              use changed between full glacial and late glacial ecosystems.  Finally, it has
              been proposed that Paleo-Indian hunters efficiently stalked and killed entire
              elephant family groups.  The empirical support for this conclusion, the age
              structure of multiple death sites, has been controversial.  Large Sr or O
              isotopic differences among samples in enamel deposited in the last few years of
              life would falsify the family group's hypothesis.  Overall, isotopic analysis
              has the potential to cast new light on old debates regarding animal movement,
              and it supplies a new method for detecting time or spatial averaging in a
              multi-individual sample.
