Title       : Living On Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9725042

Award Number: 9725042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Curwood scurwood@post.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : World Media Fdtn
	      55 Wheeler Street
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/868-8659

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725042   Curwood        ABSTRACT: Living On Earth is a weekly, impartial news
              journal devoted exclusively to coverage of ecology that is carried on 274 NPR
              stations in the United States.  It has had previous support from the Informal
              Science Education Program for initial series production and to help expand the
              series from a half hour formation to an hour-long show.  This grant will enable
              the World Media Foundation to deepen and strengthen the reporting of the
              science and technology of environmental change by employing a staff science
              reporter and a staff researcher with a Ph.D. in biology.  The science reporter
              will enable the project to respond more quickly to emerging issues, as well as
              providing more consistent and better prepared science coverage.  The research
              will help the producers better interpret new developments and studies, help
              identify new topics, and improve accuracy and balance.       The series also
              will add the topic of marine environments to their major areas of concern. 
              There currently is little media coverage of the rapid loss of healthy coral
              reefs, the collapse of commercial fisheries, and the changing ocean chemistry. 
              The project will continue to covers such major topics as biological diversity,
              climate change, environmental toxicology, and agricultural science.     Steve
              Curwood, the Executive producer and host of Living on Earth, will continue as
              the PI for the project.  The science producer/editor will be Dan Grossman.  He
              has a B.S. in physics and a Ph.D. in political science and has taught science
              journalism at Boston University.  The project advisory committee consists of
              Arjun Makhijani, Greg Watson, Theo Colborn, Catherine Vandermoer, William
              Moomaw, George Woodwell, Michael McElroy, Jane Lubechenco, Carl Safina, Sylvia
              Earle, and Jerry Schubel.  The series is produced by the World Media Foundation
              in cooperation with WBUR, National Public Radio, and Harvard University.
