Title       : The Study of Elusive Neutrals and Ion Structures by Neutralization-Reionization
               Mass Spectrometry Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9725003

Award Number: 9725003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chrys Wesdemiotis wesdemiotis@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1312,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the studies of  
              Professor Chrys Wesdemiotis on the synthesis of neutral, gas-phase  
              intermediates and their characterization by neutralization-reionization   mass
              spectroscopy.   Neutral intermediates, such as carbyne, silanone,   amino acid
              radicals and hypermetalated species, will be prepared from the   corresponding
              mass-selected cations or anions under conditions of   endothermic
              neutralization at low kinetic energy.    Ionization energies,   proton
              affinities and heats of formation of these neutral intermediates   will be
              extracted from the measured neutralization endothermicity.    The   different
              stabilities and reactivities of amino acids and peptides   neutralized by
              proton attachment will be exploited to distinguish proton   binding sites and
              their relative proton affinities in multi-functional   biomolecules.   Graduate
              and undergraduate students carrying out the   experiments will be exposed to
              the construction of the   neutralization-reionization mass spectrometer, its
              application to   different chemical systems, and the analysis of the resulting
              data.    With this New award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program 
               supports the research and educational activities of Professor Chrys  
              Wesdemiotis of the University of Akron.   Professor Wesdemiotis will   focus
              his research on the synthesis and characterization of neutral   intermediates
              that are currently thought to be short-lived intermediates   in a number of
              chemical transformations.  A number of intermediates will   be prepared in the
              gas phase and examined under low-energy neutralization   conditions in order to
              obtain long-sought thermodynamic parameters.   The   educational activities of
              Professor Wesdemiotis will include the training   of undergraduate and graduate
              students in the theory and applications of   neutralization-reionization mass
              spectroscopy.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
