Title       : Condensed Matter - Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1999   
File        : a9725037

Award Number: 9725037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip B. Allen philip.allen@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Allen  9725037  This is a renewal award to conduct theoretical research on 
              metallic, or nearly metallic, oxides and on glasses.    The normal modes of
              thermal vibration in glassy solids have  been characterized in computer studies
              of up to 4096 atoms.  These models yield realistic vibrations for amorphous 
              silicon.  Four new projects are planned: (1) Clarify the  concept of
              diffusivity of normal modes; (2) Find connections  between low energy
              "resonant"modes and low energy structural  rearrangements which couple strongly
              to the resonant modes;  (3) Develop a theory of the viscosity of the thermal 
              vibrations and apply this to the study of internal friction  in glasses; (4)
              Develop a new theory of hopping conduction  of heat when localized states are
              concentrated.    Although most important oxides are insulating, some are very 
              good metals and the most interesting ones are on the  borderline.  The
              transition from metallic to insulating has  usually two equally strong and very
              different driving  forces, Coulomb correlation and lattice distortion.  The 
              former causes great theoretical difficulty even in the  simplest fully
              interacting model, whereas the latter,  solvable in principle, has multiple
              manifestations depending  on the chemical species and crystal structure.  A
              study of  BaBiO3, where Coulomb effects are minimal, is currently  being
              completed.  To extract the common physics of many  oxides, a simplified model
              due to Rice and Sneddon is used,  where the only lattice degrees of freedom is
              the  displacement of oxygen atoms parallel to the metal-oxygen  bond.  This not
              only captures the breathing distortion that  drives the Bi(3+)/Bi(5+)
              disproportionation (and causes  insulating behavior), but also captures the
              principle Jahn-  Teller displacement which couples to the metal-insulator 
              behavior of Eg metals and T2g metals and many isoelectronic  materials.  %%% 
              This theoretical research will continue studies of metal  oxide materials and
              their unusual properties.  These  materials are intr iguing due to their widely
              varied  properties.  Some conduct electricity, like normal metals,  while
              others are insulating.  Some are on the borderline  between metallic properties
              and insulating properties.  The  research supported by this grant will
              investigate this  difficult, but technologically important class of materials. 
              ***
