Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Cosmogenic Nuclide Chronology of Bedrock Weathering
               Zones in Fennoscandia and Implications for the History of the Fennescandian Ice
               Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9725806

Award Number: 9725806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Brook brook@vancouver.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725806  Brook    The goal of the proposed work is to constrain models of the
              Fennoscandian ice sheet (FIS) during the last glacial maximum (LGM) and
              subsequent deglaciation by applying techniques of surface exposure chronology
              using cosmogenic nuclides.  A large body of field work in the high mountains of
              Norway documents high altitude glacial trimlines and areas of deeply weathered
              bedrock that have a regionally consistent configuration, suggesting that they
              may demark the vertical limit of the FIS.  However, profiles based on the
              spatial distribution of these features differ significantly from profiles of
              ice sheet elevation derived from various numerical and conceptual ice sheet
              reconstructions (for example, ICE-4G and CLIMAP).  Although it is clear that
              one of the two general approaches to reconstructing the FIS is flawed, it is
              difficult to say which one, primarily because the geomorphic features under
              debate have not been dated.  Our prior work in the mountains of western Norway
              demonstrate that such dating is, indeed, feasible.    The proposed work will
              produce the first numerical chronology for these features, thereby permitting
              us to assess the validity of various ice sheet reconstructions for the region,
              and, by inference, in North America (e.g. for the Laurentide ice sheet).  As
              the CLIMAP and ICE-4G reconstructions have been widely adopted as boundary
              conditions in simulations of LGM climate using atmospheric general circulation
              models, our studies will also bear on the efficacy of those modeling results
              and related assessments of climate sensitivity.  In addition, the proposed work
              will address a fundamental problem in glacial geology that of interpretation of
              weathering zones in formerly glaciated regions of the Northern Hemisphere.
