Title       : Exploratory Research and Biological Inventory of St. MatthewIsland, Bering Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9725154

Award Number: 9725154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin S. Winker ffksw@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This study proposes to study the biological diversity of St. Matthew Islands,
              a remote archipelago located in the center of the Bering Sea.  This archipelago
              is an isolated remnant of a formerly more extensive Beringian ecosystem.  They
              offer the chance to sample directly the remnants of a region that has had
              important effects on the fauna of two continents.  Beringia today represents an
              area of considerable interest to arctic science, and this archipelago is host
              to several endemic species and populations.  The PIs plan to collect tissue and
              specimens of plants, mammals, birds, and invertebrates for further systematic
              and ecological study.  These surveys will be the first comprehensive study of
              the biota, and the PIs will compare their findings with historical collections
              and will provide baseline data for studies of the effects of global change in
              the Arctic.  Travel to St. Matthew is extremely difficult and expensive because
              of the isolation and logistical requirements.  The PIs plan to take advantage
              of unique opportunity afforded by USFWS, which is providing space for the PIs
              aboard their research vessel R/V Tiglax on a cruise to nearby Hall Island. 
              Because the logistical demands are extreme and the window for opportunity is
              time-sensitive, the PIs have chosen to submit a proposal of limited scope under
              the guidelines of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) program.
