Title       : New Structural Modes of Organic Molecules Containing Silicon and Congeners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9725652

Award Number: 9725652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Lambert lambert@casbah.acns.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The foci of this research include five areas of silicon and related   organic
              chemistry.  First, new materials containing positive charge on   silicon,
              germanium, tin and phosphorus will be prepared.  Second, methods   will be
              employed to create a variety of stable carbocations, usually   stabilized by
              silicon, at room temperature. Third, dendritic polysilanes   will be prepared
              and tested for their conductive and nonlinear optical   properties, and in one
              case as a molecular wire.  Fourth, a new area of   sulfur chemistry will be
              developed in which sulfur substituents are   exploited to stabilize positive
              charge.  Fifth, the practical properties   of silicates will be used to
              synthesize a new class of materials that are   largely self assembling, have
              considerable stability, offer vacancies and   channels for inclusion of guests,
              and contain synthetically tunable   groups that can enhance these properties.  
              With this renewal award, the   Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              supporting the research   of Dr. Joseph B. Lambert of the Department of
              Chemistry at Northwestern   University.  Professor Lambert will focus his work
              on incorporating   silicon into normal analogues of carbon compounds or into
              novel   structures to create molecules with potentially important properties.  
               The properties may be of theoretical interest or they may offer new  
              practical applications.  The scope of the project is increased by   including
              germanium, tin sulfur and phosphorus in the synthetic plan                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
