Title       : Aqueous Solutions at High Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9725163

Award Number: 9725163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Wood rwood@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robert Wood is funded by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational  
              Chemistry Program to continue his experimental research in thermodynamic  
              measurements of aqueous solutions at high temperatures.  Wood will   measure
              the electrical conductance of aqueous solutions of a variety of   salts at
              temperatures from 300 to 425 C and pressures up to 28 MPa.     Systems to be
              studied include Sodium Sulfate, Calcium Chloride, Magnesium   Chloride,
              Hydrochloric Acid and Sodium Hydroxide.  The measurements will   yield accurate
              values of the association constants for the formation of   ion pairs. 
              Additional studies at higher temperatures and pressures will   be performed in
              collaboration with scientists at Oak Ridge National Labs.    The results of the
              measurements for Sodium Sulfate, Magnesium Chloride   and Calcium Chloride
              together with heat capacities and volumes measured   by V. Majer in France will
              be used to construct models for these salt   solutions near the critical point
              of water.  Model classical Hamiltonians   for the forces between the atomic
              sites in the molecules will also be   developed to make predictions, using
              molecular dynamics, in regions where   experiments are not possible.  High
              temperature aqueous solutions play an important role in a wide   variety     of
              industrial and natural processes.  Examples of these   processes are mineral
              transport, deposition and alteration, hydrocarbon   formation, migration and
              accumulation, electric power boiler corrosion,   and hydrothermal reservoir
              utilization.  There is also interest in using   supercritical water as a
              reaction medium for oxidative degradation of   hazardous waste, conversion of
              coal to gasoline, and as a reaction medium   for organic synthesis to replace
              conventional organic solvents.  Wood's   research will help to provide a basic
              understanding of ionic solutions at   high temperatures and pressures which is
              fundamentally important to the   efficient development of industrial uses of
              supercritical wate                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
