Title       : Mn Speciation and Mechanisms of Mn(II) Oxidation at Microbe-Water Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a9725845

Award Number: 9725845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley M. Tebo btebo@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725845
Tebo

The microbial oxidation of aqueous Mn(II) and subsequent
              precipitation of Mn(III) and (IV) oxides and hydroxides are important controls
              on the speciation of Mn in soils and aquifers, and the compositions of natural
              waters.  At present, the processes by which microbes adsorb and oxidize Mn are
              poorly understood and the compositions and structures of microbially
              precipitated oxide and hydroxide solids often are not known.  Microbes may
              control the aqueous reactivities for these Mn-oxide precipitates in aqueous
              solution by modification of surface areas and charge properties and may
              sequester deleterious contaminant metal ions within the Mn oxide precipitates. 
              Knowledge of these processes is necessary to the development of physically
              realistic geochemical models and could be used in the design of microbe-based
              remediation technologies.

The focus of this three-year multidisciplinary and
              multiinstitutional collaborative effort is to investigate the mechanisms of
              Mn(II) adsorption, oxidation and precipitation at microbe-water interfaces and
              the identities (i.e., structures and compositions) of Mn(III) and (IV)
              precipitates using XAFS spectroscopy and aqueous geochemical techniques. 
              Complementary surface characterization techniques and electron microscopy will
              be used to constrain design and interpretation of XAFS measurements. 
              Initially, the oxidation of Mn(II) by spores of the marine bacterium, Bacillus
              sp. SG-1, will be studied as functions of pH, Mn concentration, and major ion
              water composition.  SG-1, is an excellent model organism for the proposed
              studies because its mechanism of oxidation has been well characterized, it
              oxidizes Mn(II) over a range of environmentally significant conditions, and
              growth does not have to be sustained.  In the second and third years of this
              study, other microbes, including freshwater and marine strains recently
              isolated from the environment, will be investigated.  Specific hypotheses we
              wish to address are:
1) Microbe-and/or enzyme-bound Mn(III) species are
              intermediates in the oxidation of Mn(II) to Mn(IV);
2) Mn(II) cations are
              bound by microbes predominantly by inner-sphere complexation mechanisms under
              the experimental conditions;
3) Mn(IV) solid phases are the principal products
              of microbial Mn(II) oxidation under the experimental conditions.
4) Microbes
              influence the aqueous reactivities of Mn precipitates via modification of the
              surface areas, porosities, charge density and compositions of the Mn
              precipitates they produce.

The results will provide information on the
              factors that control the reactivities of bacteria surfaces and bacterially
              produced Mn oxides in aqueous solution.  Furthermore, since other metal ions
              are microbially oxidized by similar metabolic pathways as Mn(II), the results
              of this project will contribute to the knowledge base on microbially mediated
              metal redox reactions in natural ecosystems.  These studies on controlled model
              systems are a necessary starting point for understanding the complex suites of
              chemical reactions and transformations that occur at microbe-water interfaces
              in the environment.

