Title       : Investigation of Stratigraphic Manifestations of Younger Dryas Climate at
               Paleoindian Sites in North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a9725044

Award Number: 9725044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136912             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Vance Haynes jovers@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen K. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Approximately 11,000 years ago a wide range of North American large fauna went
              extinct over a short time period and scientists wish to understand the cause.
              Two main theories have been proposed: one invokes climate change and
              accompanying vegetation shifts. The other notes the presence of Paleoindian
              hunters and gatherers and sees hunting as the primary cause. In his prior work
              Dr. Vance Haynes has recognized the presence of a distinct dark organic strata
              which is present in many sites in the US West, Southwest and High Plains. It is
              extremely rare to find such a well defined horizon over this large an area and
              its presence implies a major climatic event. Artifacts associated with the
              Clovis culture are found under the horizon but never within or above it. Stone
              tools from the succeeding Folsom group occur only in or above the horizon. This
              fact leads Dr. Haynes to speculate that the organic layer is in fact
              synchronous across sites and was deposited in a very short time period. He
              associates the layer with the Younger Dryas cooling event, a period of major
              climatic change. He also notes that this coincides with a period of maximum
              faunal extinction. Unfortunately the organic soil horizon is not well dated and
              with NSF support Dr. Haynes will visit a series of sites which contain the
              horizon and are also important because of the archaeological and
              paleontological materials they contain. He will record the stratigraphic
              sequence  and collect suites of materials for radiocarbon dating. Specific
              organic compounds will be isolated for stable isotope analyses to determine
              relative amounts of C3 vs. C4 vegetation. In this way floral change can be both
              noted and dated.  This research is important because it will provide precise
              dates for past climate and environmental change in North America. This will
              refine the framework for understanding changes in both human behavior and
              faunal extinction.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
