Title       : Secondary School Curricular Reform and Postsecondary Education Success
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9725509

Award Number: 9725509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $483333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725509  Schneider    The purpose of the proposed project is to examine the
              relationship between students' academic experiences in high school and their
              success in postsecondary education. In 1990, the National Science Foundation
              created the Statewide Systemic Initiatives (SSI) program to create broad-based
              statewide coalitions to undertake extensive coordinated reforms of science,
              mathematics, and technology education. Evaluations of the first wave of these
              programs pointed out that many educational practitioners remain unconvinced
              that the type of standards-based reforms envisioned by educational and policy
              leaders are needed (Zucker, Shields, Adelman, and Powell, 1995). This project
              is designed to determine whether high school curricular programs that exemplify
              standards-based reforms lead to increased student achievement in science and
              mathematics and have enduring effects on student matriculation, persistence,
              and career development in postsecondary school. Currently, SSI relies on
              changes in student achievement as one of the major indicators of program
              success. However, we are interested in examining the wide-range effects of
              standards-based curricular reforms on postsecondary school experiences,
              particularly those of students traditionally underserved in high schools.  The
              logic underlying the SSI program is that student attainment of high standards
              of learning requires meaningful improvements in classroom teaching, the
              implementation of more challenging curricula and materials, and regular
              assessments of learning aligned with instruction. Furthermore, effective
              implementation of these initiatives requires better-trained teachers and
              administrators, support within and outside schools, and collaborative working
              relations among key constituencies. Launching these major reforms is a
              significant task, and there has been some concern among local and state
              educational leaders that such initiatives may not be worth the time and
              resources needed to implement them (Zucker et al., 1995). Therefore,  it is not
              surprising that the response to their implementation has been less than
              enthusiastic.  This project will provide information on the connection between
              high school and college success, and the different paths through which students
              arrive at college. In doing so, it also has implications for how to prepare a
              more educated and equitable work force for the 21 st century. Our results will
              highlight how schools and communities can encourage traditionally
              underrepresented students to pursue studies and careers in science,
              mathematics, engineering, and technology. Furthermore, our analysis will reveal
              the returns to course sequences, classroom learning environments, school
              organizational resources and family and community involvement in terms of
              postsecondary success. Finally, through an examination of students' educational
              experiences with NELS:88-94 compared with data from TIMSS and HS & B we can
              determine how contemporary young Americans fare in the new context of the
              global marketplace and international competitiveness.      ??
