Title       : Periodic Structures in the Study and Control of Surface Microtopography and
               Lattice Strain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9725082

Award Number: 9725082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317700             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Blakely blakely@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9725082  Blakely    This project utilizes periodic structures for fundamental 
              studies of the dynamics of semiconductor surfaces, the  production of stepfree
              substrates, and oxidation of high  aspect-ratio nanostructures. The evolution
              of mesoscale  structure will be studied in a context in which connection  to
              the underlying physical mechanisms and appropriate  theoretical approach to
              describing macroscopic structure  evolution are addressed. Focus  of the
              project is on fundamental understanding and  control of surface structural
              defects, the kinetics  of surface morphological changes, and the effect of 
              morphology on lattice strain in the near-surface  region. Initially most of the
              experiments will be  done with silicon, but extension to other materials,  Ge,
              C, GaAs and SiGe alloys will be considered. Major  experimental methods for the
              structural and kinetic  studies will be scanning tunneling and atomic force 
              microscopy, low energy electron diffraction and  microscopy and surface X-ray
              diffraction.  Conventional nanofabrication methods of  sample  preparation will
              be complemented by novel techniques  to create periodically patterned surfaces
              of very  small periods.  %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a 
              topical area of materials science having high  technological relevance. The
              research will contribute  basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental 
              level to important aspects of electronic/photonic  devices.  Experimental tools
              are now available to  allow atomic level observation of elementary surface 
              processes which when better understood will allow  advances in both fundamental
              science and technology.  The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the 
              research is expected to contribute to improving the  perform ance and stability
              of advanced devices and  circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and 
              a basis for designing and producing improved  materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important  feature of the program is the integration of
              researc h  and education through the training of students in a  fundamentally
              and technologically significant area.  ***
