Title       : Study of the Structure and Tectonics of the South Shetland Trench and Bransfield
               Backarc Using Ocean Bottom Seismographs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9725679

Award Number: 9725679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Wiens doug@kermadec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the  National Science
              Foundation, supports research to  investigate the seismicity and tectonics of
              the South  Shetland Arc and the Bransfield Strait.  This region  presents an
              intriguing and unique tectonic setting, with  slowing of subduction, cessation
              of island arc volcanism, as  well as the apparent onset of backarc rifting
              occurring  within the last four million years.  This project will carry  out a
              5-month deployment of 14 ocean bottom seismographs  (OBSs) to complement and
              extend a deployment of 6 broadband  land seismic stations that were
              successfully installed  during early 1997.  The OBSs include 2 instruments with
               broadband sensors, and all have flowmeters for measuring and  sampling
              hydrothermal fluids.  The OBSs will be used to  examine many of the
              characteristics of the Shetland-  Bransfield tectonic system, including:    ---
              The existence and depth of penetration of a Shetland  Slab:  The existence of a
              downgoing Shetland slab will be  determined from earthquake locations and from
              seismic  tomography.  The maximum depth of earthquake activity and  the depth
              of the slab velocity anomaly will constrain the  current configuration of the
              slab, and may help clarify the  relationship between the subducting slab and
              the cessation  of arc volcanism.    --  Shallow Shetland trench seismicity?: 
              No teleseismic  shallow thrust faulting seismicity has been observed along  the
              South Shetland Trench from available seismic  information.  Using the OBS data,
              the level of small  earthquake activity along the shallow thrust zone will be 
              determined and compared to other regions undergoing slow  subduction of young
              oceanic lithosphere, such as Cascadia,  which also generally shows very low
              levels of thrust zone  seismicity.    --  Mode of deformation along the
              Bransfield Rift:  The  Bransfield backarc has an active rift in the center, but
               there is considerable evidence for off-rift faulting.  There  is a
              long-standing controversy about whet her back-arc  extension occurs along
              discrete rift zones, or is more  diffuse geographically.  This project will
              accurately locate  small earthquakes to better determine whether Bransfield 
              extension is discrete or diffuse.    --  Identification of volcanism and
              hydrothermal activity:  Seismic records will be used to identify the locations
              of  active seafloor volcanism along the Bransfield rift.  Flowmeters attached
              to the OBSs will record and sample the  fluid flux out of the  sediments.    --
               Upper mantle structure of the Bransfield - evidence for  partial melting?: 
              Other backarc basins show very slow upper  mantle seismic velocities and high
              seismic attenuation,  characteristics due to the presence of partially molten 
              material.  This project will use seismic tomography to  resolve the upper
              mantle structure of the Bransfield  backarc, allowing comparison with other
              backarc regions and  placing constraints on the existence of partially molten 
              material and the importance of partial melting as a mantle  process in this
              region.    Collaborative awards: OPP 9725679 and OPP 9726180
