Title       : Antarctic Meteorological Research Center (AMRC): 1998-2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9725398

Award Number: 9725398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Stearns chucks@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The Antarctic Meteorological Research Center (AMRC), one of three  research
              centers in the Science and Engineering Technology Center  at McMurdo, is a
              resource for meteorological research and a test  bed for improving operational
              synoptic forecasting.  The Man-  Computer Interactive Data Access System
              (McIDAS), a versatile  computer-based system for organizing, manipulating, and 
              integrating antarctic environmental data forms the basis of AMRC.  It captures
              the flow of meteorological information from polar  orbiting satellites,
              automatic weather stations, operational  station synoptic observations, and
              research project data.  It  also receives environmental data products, such as
              weather  forecasts, from outside Antarctica, and acts as a repository for 
              existing archived data bases.    Phase I began in the 1992-93 summer season and
              consisted of the  installation and operation of work stations capable of 
              manipulating and displaying Advanced Very High Resolution  Radiometer (AVHRR)
              data based on the existing satellite imagery  acquisition system.  This was
              followed by the acquisition and  integration of a system that provided data
              collection, data  display and archiving, scientific applications, network 
              communications, and remote user access.    The McIDAS system, developed at the
              University of Wisconsin in  the mid-1970's, ingests meteorological data from
              various sources:  standard synoptic observations, radiosonde profiles,
              satellite-  based visible and infra-red imagery, atmospheric profiles  inverted
               from multi-spectral scanning sensors, and non-standard  data such as TOMS
              ozone data, SAR sea ice information, and the  AWS network observations.  The
              system automatically registers,  calibrates, and locates (by geographical
              coordinates) the  ingested information and allows a user at a work station to 
              manipulate the data base.  The manipulations include  sectorization, false
              color, enhancements, brightness stretching,  overlays, looping, differencing,
              and are quite definitely keyed  to syn optic meteorological research and
              weather forecasting.  The  antarctic system is based primarily on data streams
              provided by  polar orbiters (AVHRR/HRPT and DMSP), since the look angles from 
              geostationary satellites are so extremely low.  The full  utilization of McIDAS
              capabilities in producing meteorological  data products useful in both
              forecasting and research will  include a data transfer and communications
              capability to, for  example, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology(ABOM), the 
              University of Wisconsin Space Science and Engineering Center  (SSEC), the Fleet
              Numerical Oceanography Center (FNOC), Monterey,  and the European Center for
              Medium Range Weather Forecasts  (ECMRWF), Reading, U.K.    The current phase
              includes the expansion of the archived data  base, the design of the system to
              accept data from future polar-  orbiting satellites, and the continuation of
              product generation  and user support.    ***
