Title       : Signal Transduction Pathways of the Plant Oxidative Burst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9725934

Award Number: 9725934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Low   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Heinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9725934  Low, Philip S.    The oxidative burst constitutes an important early
              defense mechanism linked to disease resistance in plants.  The burst response
              is characterized by the rapid synthesis of highly reactive oxygen compounds
              (superoxide or hydrogen peroxide) within minutes after stimulation of the plant
              cell by pathogens or pathogen-generated elicitor molecules.  Because this
              oxygen burst is found throughout the plant kingdom, and since it may be a
              critical component of several plant defense mechanisms, its detailed
              characterization is of considerable importance and interest.  The overall goal
              of this project is to elucidate the signal transduction pathway that is
              activated when an elicitor binds to a cell surface or cytoplasmic receptor and
              which culminates when the oxidase enzyme complex is assembled and activated to
              produce the burst of reactive oxygen.  The specific aims are (a) to
              characterize a specific elicitor-activated protein kinase that initiates the
              response to oligogalacturonic acid, (b) to determine the timing of activation
              of possible intermediate components (G-proteins, Ca++, phospholipase C, other
              protein kinases) that relay the resulting signal to the oxidase to activate it,
              and (c) to clone the genes for both the kinase and several of the oxidase
              subunits.  Completion of these objectives will greatly enhance our
              understanding of the specific signal transduction processes that lead to the
              oxidative burst and will provide insights into general principles of signal
              transduction strategies in plant cells.  One practical extension of this work
              is that if the oxidative burst can be engineered to respond more rapidly or to
              a wider range of pathogens, reliance on toxic pesticides in agriculture could
              be reduced.
