Title       : Stratigraphic and Tectonic Analysis of Neogene Coal-Bearing Basins Along the
               Alaska Range Suture Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9725587

Award Number: 9725587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Ridgway   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725587  Ridgway    This proposal seeks funding for a three-year investigation
              of Neogene sedimentary basins located along the north-central flank of the
              Alaska Range.  These basins contain the record of basin development along an
              ancient suture zone, the uplift history of the highest mountain range in North
              America, extensive low-sulfur coal reserves, and potential petroleum
              reservoirs.  The east-west trending basins were filled by fluvial and
              lacustrine deposits and consist of the Miocene Usibelli Group (~ 600 m thick)
              and the Pliocene Nenana Gravel (~ 1000 m thick).  The general questions to be
              addressed include: (1) How do basins form within the interior of
              collisional/accretionary orogenic settings?  Can a conceptual model be
              developed for basin formation along former suture zones?  (2) What can the
              synorogenic deposits contained within these basins teach us about the Neogene
              uplift of the Alaska Range?  Does the detrital record contain information on
              how deformation and uplift changed along strike and through time for this
              orogenic belt?  What was the influence of paleoclimate on detrital composition
              during unroofing of the Alaska Range?  (3) Coal from the Usibelli Group is
              becoming an increasingly important energy source for Alaska and for export to
              Pacific Rim countries.  What were the depositional, tectonic, and climatic
              controls on coal deposition in these basins?  A regionally integrated
              stratigraphic, paleogeographic and tectonic framework for all the Neogene
              basins will be needed to answer these questions.  A database will be
              established by reconstructing the depositional systems for each basin;
              construction of a series of cross sections through the central Alaska Range;
              and compositional analysis of sandstone's and conglomerates.  Major
              contributions of the proposed research include documentation of the long term
              evolution of sedimentary basins along a suture zone; delineation of along
              strike variations in the uplift history of the Alaska Range; and analysis of
              the distribution of  potentially commercial coals for future exploration.
