Title       : Bringing the Universe Down to Earth: De-Mystifying the Forces that Shape the
               Solar System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9725551

Award Number: 9725551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1251082            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Reynolds reynolds@chabotspace.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ned Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose Olivarez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Hauben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chabot Space & Sci Center
	      10000 Skyline Blvd
	      Oakland, CA  94619    510/336-7300

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                       9725551         Reynolds    The Chabot Observatory and Science Center
              (COSC) in Oakland California will develop and present Bringing the Universe
              Down to Earth: Demystifying the Process that shapes the Solar System. This
              exhibition will utilize thirteen interactive works by Ned Kahn, a nationally
              recognized artist. The exhibition will consist of twenty-six exhibits: two per
              theme, one for Chabot, and one for the traveling component. The exhibition will
              be incorporated into the structure and network of COSC.  It will invite
              visitors to draw on their general knowledge of this world by focusing on
              familiar earthly phenomena, such as volcanoes, whirlwinds, wind storms,
              avalanches, and to consider them in a broader context.     Also, the project
              will take advantage of Chabot's well developed, online connection with schools
              and community groups in the area to create new opportunities for individualized
              inquiry. A direct product of this work will be a series of curricular outlines
              designed to help teachers make full use of the exhibition. This effort can be
              used to foster a strong collaboration between the informal and formal science
              education programs.    An important feature of this exhibition is that it will
              travel to nine sites around the country under the auspices of the Association
              of Science and Technology Centers (ASTC). It is projected that over one million
              people at the nine sites will see this traveling exhibition. Educational and
              marketing materials, as well as workshops materials prepared for the COSC
              exhibition will accompany the traveling exhibit.
