Title       : Secular Variations in Seawater Chemistry Over the Past 600 MY: A Study of Fluid
               Inclusions in Marine Evaporites Using Three Analytical Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9725740

Award Number: 9725740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim K. Lowenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725740  Lowenstein    The proposed study will apply three state-of-the-art
              techniques, Environmental SEM X-Ray EDS (ESEM X-Ray EDS), UV laser ablation
              microprobe-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LAMP-ICP-MS), and
              fluid inclusion extraction-ion chromatography (Extraction-IC) to chemically
              analyze fluid inclusions in Phanerozoic evaporites in an attempt to answer the
              important but unresolved question of whether global seawater has changed
              chemical composition over geologic time.  To date, the analysis of fluids
              trapped in large inclusions (102-103 microns) in halite crystals from ancient
              evaporites thought to be of marine origin has been the only direct method of
              obtaining clues to the major ion chemistry of ancient seawater (see Holser,
              1963; Das et al., 1990; Horita et al., 1991, 1996; among other).  However, the
              origin of the halite crystals carrying these large inclusions remains uncertain
              but they may be the result of recrystallization or other secondary grain growth
              processes (e.g. Das et al., 1990, p.323; Land et al., 1995).  The fluid
              extraction techniques used in these studies could not be applied to the small
              inclusions in halite chevron and cumulate crystals of undoubtedly primary
              origin.  Two new analytical techniques to be used in the proposed study
              overcome his drawback (ESEM X-Ray EDS and LAMP-ICP-MS); they allow direct
              chemical analysis of fluids in primary inclusions as small as 20 microns.  For
              comparison, bulk extraction methods (Extraction IC) will be used to analyze
              large fluid inclusions (>200 microns) on splits of the same samples analyzed
              with the Environmental SEM and by laser ablation-mass spectrometry.  The
              purposes of the bulk extraction analysis are to crosscheck whether large fluid
              inclusions required for the direct extraction procedure are representative of
              the primary seawater parent brines present in smaller fluid inclusions along
              crystal growth bands, and to obtain high precision data on brine chemistry,
              including minor elements (such as Br).    The  central objective of the
              proposed research is the recovery of a "global" seawater signal for each
              geologic period sampled.  In order to do this, small fluid inclusions in
              primary chevron and cumulate halite crystals from spatially separated but
              coeval marine evaporites will be analyzed.  We will use the water evaporation
              computer program of Harvie and Weare (1980) as a forward modeling tool to
              backtrack from the brine analyses to the parent "seawater" compositions.  We
              have chosen to analyze halites in evaporite deposits from four periods, the
              Devonian, the Permian, the Cretaceous, and the Miocene.  Globally, potash
              evaporites of Permian and Miocene age contain abundant MgSO4 salts, a mineral
              assemblage not predicted to form from the evaporation of modern seawater and
              one that has perplexed geologists for over a century.  Our results from these
              two groups of evaporites with such different primary mineralogies deposited in
              sedimentary basins on different continents during four different geologic
              periods should provide an important initial test of whether the major ion
              chemistry of seawater has changed over Phanerozoic time.
