Title       : ADVENTURES IN SCIENCE: An Interactive Exhibit Gallery Exploring Biological
               Diversity and the Changing Nature of Life on Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a9725177

Award Number: 9725177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David A. Ucko                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1376931            (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen M. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan C. Borkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Sheehan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary S. Korenic  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Rolf Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee Public Museum
	      800 West Wells Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  53233    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725177   Young     The Milwaukee Public Museum will develop Adventures in
              Science:  An Interactive Exhibit Gallery.  This will be a 7250 sq. ft.
              interactive exhibit with associated public programs and materials that link the
              exhibit with formal education.  The goal of Adventures in Science is to promote
              understanding of biological diversity, the forces that have change it over
              time, and how scientists study and affect change.  The exhibit will consist of
              three areas.  "Our Ever-Changing World" will feature "dual scene" habitat
              dioramas that will convey at-a-glance how environments change over time.  "The
              Natural History Museum" will be a reconstruction of a museum laboratory and
              collections area to protray behind-the-scenes scientific and curatorial
              activities that further the study of biological diversity, ecology and
              systematics.  An "Exploration Center: will bridge these two areas and will be
              designed to accommodate live presentations, group activities and additional
              multimedia stations for Internet and intranet access.  Using interactive
              devices, visitors will be encouraged to make hypothesis, examine evidence,
              compare specimens, construction histories of biological and geological changes,
              and develop conclusions about the science behind biodiversity and extinction
              issues.  Visitors should also come away with an increased understanding of the
              role of systematic collections in understanding biological diversity. 
              Information on MPM research programs will be highlighted in "The Natural
              History Museum" section and will be updated frequently.  Annual Teacher
              Training Institutes for pre-service and in-service teachers will present
              strategies for using the gallery's multimedia stations, lab areas, and Web site
              links.  Special attention will be given to reaching new audiences including
              those in the inner city and people with disabilities.
