Title       : Expanded Porphyrins and Calixpyrroles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9725399

Award Number: 9725399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan L. Sessler sessler@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor Jonathon L. Sessler, of the Department of Chemistry and   Biochemistry
              at the University of Texas at Austin, is supported by the   Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies of expanded   porphyrins and
              calixpyrroles.  Through the synthesis of expanded   porphyrin systems,
              including those designed to provide three-dimensional   coordination geometries
              to complement the planar to near-planar geometry   afforded by simpler
              porphyrin derivatives, Professor Sessler assesses the   geometric requirements
              of anion complexation, cation coordination, and   neutral substrate binding by
              these systems.  Related studies address the   basic molecular recognition
              properties of two new substrate binding   platforms, the calix(n(pyrroles and
              calix(n)pyridines.  The specific interaction between ions or molecules and
              receptors for them   represents a critical feature in countless biochemical
              processes.    Whereas the `molecular recognition` of positively charged species
                (cations) has received intense scrutiny, the recognition of negatively  
              charged molecules (anions) has developed more slowly.  With the support   of
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Jonathon   L.
              Sessler, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the   University of
              Texas at Austin, prepares large-ring cyclic compounds   designed to display
              specific interactions with various anions.  Given   their unique structural
              features, many of these compounds also act as   binding agents for cations and
              neutral molecules.  Through the synthesis   and study of these compounds,
              Professor Sessler gains critical   information regarding the relationship
              between structure and function in   the binding of ions and molecules.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
