Title       : A Simple Model for Land Surface Parameterization and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9725698

Award Number: 9725698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80694              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Friedl friedl@crs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725698
Friedl

This proposal addresses the need for improved methods to
              routinely monitor key variables within soil-vegetation-atmosphere-transfer
              (SVAT) parameterizations nested within climate and numerical weather
              forecasting models.  To this end, a two year research plan is described to
              refine and validate a simple model to parameterize land surface processes in
              SVAT models using remotely sensed data sources.  Key variables within this
              framework are surface temperature, vegetation type and amount, and surface
              moisture status.  The proposed methodology builds off previous research and
              model development related to relationships among surface energy balance,
              vegetation cover, and surface temperature using data from FIFE.  This work will
              continue to focus on analysis and modeling of these relationships in semi-arid
              regions.  The research will refine a modeling strategy that is based on
              principles of land surface energy balance and which includes treatment of
              soil-vegetation micrometeorology, but which at the same time is simple enough
              to be implemented operationally using satellite data in association with
              minimal in-situ ground measurements.  Specific tasks to be performed as part of
              this research are (1) the integration and validation of a soil heat and
              temperature model with a two-layer land surface energy balance model; and (2)
              development and testing of inversion modeling strategies to estimate land
              surface properties and energy balance components from satellite data.  The
              proposed research has the potential to provide a simple, operational, yet
              accurate method to initialize, updata and validate land surface
              parameterizations within hydrologic and atmospheric circulation models.  As
              such it is highly relevant to ongoing global change research programs including
              the GEWEX continental Scale International Project (GCIP) and the Earth
              Observing Systems (EOS).

