Title       : Collaborative Research: Magnetotelluric Transect of a Modern Continent-Continent
               Collisional Orogen: The SouthernAlps, New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9725883

Award Number: 9725883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Wannamaker pewanna@egi.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725883  Wannamaker    On the South Island of New Zealand, convergence of the
              Pacific and  Australian plates has given rise to a relatively narrow (~80 km 
              wide) and less complex zone of active mountain building than in  most other
              regions of the world.  The dominant structural elements  of the plate boundary
              are the Southern Alps where vertical movement  and accompanying rates of
              erosion are among the highest in the  world, and the Alpine Fault which has
              components of both strike-  slip and dip-slip movement.      The
              magnetotelluric work that willl be done under this project is  part of a four
              year cooperative study of the South Island plate  boundary involving U.S. and
              New Zealand scientists at USC, MIT,  Woods Hole, UC Berkeley, Purdue, San Diego
              State, Utah, Institute  for Geological and Nuclear Sciences (IGNS, NZ),
              Victoria University  (NZ), and Otago (NZ).  Support is being provided by both
              countries.   The centerpiece of the project is a pair of multifaceted 
              geophysical transects across the South Island including active  source
              seismology, offshore multichannel and OBS data acquisition,  passive
              seismology, petrophysics, magnetotellurics, gravity  measurements, and surface
              geology.  Experiments are aimed at  delineating the crustal and upper mantle
              structure beneath the  Southern Alps and adjacent regions.    MT data collected
              so far has led to a high-quality magnetotelluric  transect across the central
              South Island.  The MT response of the  interior of this orogen holds the
              exciting promise of understanding  the thermal regime and rheology of the South
              Island at depth.  The  complete resistivity structure will provide essential
              bounds on  crustal strain partitioning, metamorphism in the lower crust, 
              relative deformation of the crust versus the mantle, compensation  of the South
              Island uplift, and several other important processes.    However, there
              presently exists a crucial gap in the MT coverage  along the transect due to
              lack of land vehicle access across the  principal region of u plift through the
              Main Divide of the South  Island.  The data collected in this project will
              close this gap in  coverage with six-eight new MT soundings supported by
              helicopter  transport.  Personnel from the IGNS will participate in this effort
               and will provide manpower and logistical support.  ***
