Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Comparison of Regional Flood Frequency Responses to
               Climatic Variability in the Western United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9725336

Award Number: 9725336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa L. Ely ely@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725336  Ely       The connection between floods and decadal-to centennial-scale
              climatic variations in the past has tremendous implications  for probability
              assessments of the magnitude and frequency of future floods, especially in
              relation to scenarios of future regional or global climate change.  This study
              will use paleoflood data to compare the influence of decadal-to
              millennial-scale climatic  variability on the magnitude and frequency of large
              floods on rivers in three district hydroclimatic  regions of the western U.S:
              the Southwest, Northwest, and western Great Basin.  The paleoflood studies will
              provide physical evidence of individual flood events in the past, extending the
              record of severe floods on each river by 100s to 1000s of years through
              stratigraphic analysis of flood deposits.  Previous studies in the Southwest
              and preliminary field work conducted during the summer of 1997 on the John Day
              River in Oregon and the Truckee River in Nevada confirm the availability of
              excellent paleoflood records from rivers in all three regions.  Paleoflood
              chronologies on rivers in the southwestern U.S. indicate a connection between
              regional climatic conditions and centennial-scale variations in the frequency
              of large floods over the last 5000 years.  A principal aim of this project is
              to determine whether demonstrated regional differences in the timing and
              controls on floods at the short time scales of the modern records hold true for
              the regional responses of floods to longer-term climatic variations.  This
              broad, new perspective on flood hydroclimatology is achievable even with the
              relatively coarse resolution of radiocarbon dating methods.  With the
              collaboration of Kelly Redmond, Deputy Director and Regional Climatologist for
              the Western Regional Climate Center, modern discharge, meteorological and
              atmospheric-pressure data will be analyzed to serve as analogs for the
              paleofloods  in each region and thus aid in understanding the underlying
              physical bases for the patterns observed in each reg ional flood series.  The
              study will also take advantage of recent refinements in statistical computer
              programs for incorporating paleoflood information into single-site flood
              frequency analyses (developed by the Bureau of Reclamation), and methods for
              the quantification and reduction of paleoflood discharge-modeling uncertainties
              (House, 1996). Understanding links between climate and floods from the basis of
              real information on the magnitude and frequency of great, rare floods will
              improve the ability of water-supply managers to foresee the regional
              consequences of glodal-and regional-scale climatic phenomena, an increasingly
              important component of long-term planning in the face of uncertain future
              climate conditions.
