Title       : New England Regional Workshop on Climate Change Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9725852

Award Number: 9725852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Berrien Moore b.moore@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barrett N. Rock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Bartlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1314,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                As scientific research has improved understandings of the complex ways that
              climate and other facets of the global environment are changing, increased
              attention has focused on the impacts of those changes on people and ecosystems.
               In response to these changes, the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP)
              and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) have
              coordinated planning for a series of workshops that will focus on the impacts
              of global climate change on regional scales.  Seven workshops in this series
              are planned for the spring and summer of 1997; another dozen regional workshops
              are expected to be held in the following year along with a national workshop,
              which is scheduled for November 1997.  This award provides support to the
              University of New Hampshire for the conduct of a workshop that will focus on
              the regional impacts of global climate change in New England.  The workshop
              will be conducted on the UNH campus on 3-5 September 1997.  About two hundred
              people from Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,
              Vermont, and upstate New York are expected to attend the workshop.  The
              workshop will consist of a set of alternating formats, including plenary
              sessions, panel presentations, break-out discussions, and open-discussion
              sessions.  Topics on which attention will be focused include the impacts of
              global climate change on forests, species diversity, coastal wetlands, aquatic
              ecosystems, coastal resources, water resources, agriculture, human health,
              energy, and transportation.  A written report will be prepared and disseminated
              by the workshop organizers soon after the conclusion of the workshop.  This
              workshop will provide valuable new insights into the impacts of global change
              on a diverse set of sectors and activities in the New England states.  Because
              it is being conducted as part of a coordinated set of regional workshops, its
              outcomes will also be useful in a comparative framework as the U.S. assesses
              likely impacts of environmental change.  In addition to its scientific value,
              the New England workshop will engage local residents from many different fields
              into discussions that will facilitate public education and outreach about this
              important topic.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
