Title       : Heat and Chemical Exchange During the Early Stages of Backarc Rifting in a Polar
               Region: Hydrothermal Activity in Bransfield Strait, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9725972

Award Number: 9725972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Klinkhammer gklinkhammer@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin R. Fisk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1319,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)  This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of
              the  National Science Foundation, supports research to investigate 
              hydrothermal venting in Bransfield Strait, between the South  Shetland Islands
              and the Antarctic Peninsula.  Previous  exploratory work in the Strait
              identified several sites where hot  hydrothermal fluids emanate from the sea
              floor.  These  discoveries were made using an instrument package specially 
              designed to detect and map the thermal and chemical anomalies  that
              hydrothermal activity imparts on the overlying water column.  Hydrothermal
              sites in the Strait range in water depth from <200  to 1300 meters and occur on
              the volcanic outcrops that  periodically protrude through the sediment cover
              along the strike  of the rift zone.  These sites are alligned with the caldera
              at  Deception Island which has active hot springs.  These are the  first
              submarine hydrothermal sites discovered in Antarctica and  as such represent
              unique research opportunities.  This project  will return to the Strait to
              further map and sample these areas.    There are several compelling reasons to
              believe that further  exploration of vent systems in the Bransfield will yield
              exciting  new information: (1) Bransfield Strait is a back-arc rift system  and
              it is likely that the vent fluids and mineral deposits  associated with venting
              in this setting are unlike anything  sampled so far from submarine vents.  (2)
              Preliminary evidence  suggests that venting in the Bransfield occurs in two
              different  volcanic substrates: andesite and rhyolite.  This situation 
              provides a natural laboratory for investigating the effects of  substrate
              chemistry on vent fluid composition.  (3) Bransfield  Strait is isolated from
              the system of mid-ocean ridges and has a  relatively short history of rifting
              (approximately 4 my).  So,  while the region straddles the Atlantic and
              Pacific, vent biota  in the Strait may well have a distinct genealogy. 
              Biochemical  information on vent species in the Bransfield  will add to our 
              knowledge of the dispersal of life in the deep ocean.  In the  past such
              discoveries have led to the identification of new  species and the isolation of
              previously unknown biochemical  compounds. (4) The fire and ice environments of
              hydrothermal  sites in the Bransfield may prove to be the closest analog for 
              primordial environments on Earth and extraterrestrial bodies.    The Bransfield
              Strait is one of the most productive areas of the  world's oceans and lies
              close to the Antarctic continent, far  removed from the mid-ocean ridge system.
               The combination of  organic-rich sediment and heat produced by volcanism in
              this back-  arc setting creates a situation conducive to unusual fluids, 
              unique vent biota, and exotic hydrothermal deposits.    Collaborative awards:
              OPP 9725972 and OPP 9813450
