Title       : The Development of a New Generation Gravity Map of Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9725374

Award Number: 9725374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Bell robinb@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Small  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1338,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725374  Bell  The goal of this project is to develop a Web-based Antarctic 
              gravity database to globally facilitate scientific use of  gravity data in
              Antarctic studies.  This compilation will  provide an important new tool to the
              Antarctic Earth science  community from the geologist placing field
              observations in a  regional context to the seismologist studying continental 
              scale mantle structure.  The gravity database will  complement the parallel
              projects underway to develop new  continental bedrock (BEDMAP) and magnetic
              (ADMAP) maps of  Antarctica.  An international effort will parallel these 
              ongoing projects in contacting the Antarctic geophysical  community,
              identifying existing data sets, agreeing upon  protocols for the use of data
              contributed to the database  and finally assembling a new continental scale
              gravity map.  The project has three principal stages.  The first stage  will be
              to investigate the accuracy and resolution of  currently available high
              resolution satellite derived  gravity data and quantify spatial variations in
              both  accuracy and resolution.  The second stage of this project  will be to
              develop an interactive method of accessing  existing satellite, shipboard, land
              based, and airborne  gravity data via a Web based interface.  The
              Lamont-Doherty  Earth Observatory RIDGE Multi-beam bathymetry database will  be
              used as a template for this project.  The existing online  RIDGE database
              allows users to access the raw data, the  gridded data and raster images of the
              seafloor topography.  A similar structure will be produced for the existing 
              Antarctic gravity data.  The third stage of this project  will be to develop an
              international program to compile  existing gravity data south of 60 S.  This
              project will be  discussed with leaders of both the ADMAP and BEDMAP efforts 
              and the appropriate working groups of SCAR.  A preliminary  map of existing
              gravity data will be presented at the  Antarctic Earth Science meeting in
              Wellington in 1999.  A  gravity working group meeting  will be held  in
              conjunction  with the Wellington meeting to reach a consensus on the  protocols
              for placing data into the database.  By the  completion of the project,
              existing gravity data will be  identified and international protocols for
              placing this data  in the on-line database will have been defined.  The process
               of archiving the gravity data into the database will be an  ongoing project as
              additional data become available.
