Title       : Stochastic Analysis of Virus Transport in Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9725086

Award Number: 9725086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire Welty weltyc@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725086  Welty    The objective of the proposed work is to develop a
              three-dimensional stochastic model of virus transport in aquifers and to
              evaluate the usefulness of the model by  comparing it to available field
              observations.  The hypothesis to be tested is that the stochastic spectral
              approach provides an improved representation of field-scale virus transport
              compared to other currently available models.  The motivation for the proposed
              work arises from: (1) the public health need to predict virus transport in
              shallow drinking water aquifers due to evidence that many waterborne disease
              outbreaks can be attributed to contamination of water supply wells by
              nonindigenous viral pathogens emanating from land-disposed wasters, and (2) the
              lack of appropriate existing models to represent virus transport at large
              scales (tens to hundreds of meters)  in heterogeneous settings.  A stochastic
              approach is needed over a deterministic computation because defining a
              heterogeneous aquifer structure deterministically for large scales is difficult
              and impractical.    The model will be derived by using spectral perturbation
              analysis to evaluate the effect of coupling of local-scale virus transport
              phenomena with a three-dimensional, correlated-random-field model of aquifer
              permeability.  The result will be a set of mean differential equations
              representing the transport of free viruses and conservation of mass of attached
              viruses at the field scale.  It is expected that the mean equations will
              include mathematical expressions for field-scale advection, dispersion,
              detachment, filtration and adsorption coefficients that are dependent on
              aquifer statistical properties and local-scale virus transport parameters.  The
              theory will predict the interaction between local-scale processes and
              field-scale heterogeneities and the importance of this interaction on
              large-scale virus transport.  The resulting model could be simplified and
              applied also to the movement of abiotic colloids in groundwater.
