Title       : Wireless Channel Characterization with Implications on Coding and Throughput
               Optimization for Multiuser Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9725271

Award Number: 9725271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272223             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra Duel-Hallen sasha@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this project, flexible and robust models for mobile radio channels will be
              created and used in the analysis of joint detection and decoding algorithms and
              for throughput optimization of multiuser  wireless systems.  The research has
              three closely related thrusts.  In the first component, fundamental issues in
              estimation, equalization and modeling of multipath fading channels will be
              addressed.  Accurate models will be selected for rapidly time-varying mobile
              radio channels, and the impact of the nature of propagation on estimating
              channel coefficients will be investigated.  A performance comparison of robust
              channel estimation and adaptive equalization techniques will be carried out,
              taking into account issues arising due to error propagation.  Robust diversity
              combining techniques will be developed.    The other two directions will
              utilize channel modeling and estimation techniques developed in the first
              component of this project.  Reliable low complexity detection methods for
              multiuser systems with error  control coding will be the focus of the second
              component. Joint equalization, multiuser detection, and decoding will be
              addressed taking into account the effects of interleaving and error
              propagation.  In  the third component, the throughput of realistic wireless
              spread spectrum packet radio networks (PRNs) with multiuser detection will be
              evaluated.  In this work, accurate channel models, reliable joint detection and
              decoding methods, and antenna diversity techniques will be utilized to optimize
              the throughput.  Receiver complexity, the coding-spreading trade-off, and
              access schemes will be considered in this optimization.  The
