Title       : National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research (NLANR):Distributed
               Applications Support Team (DAST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2000   
File        : a9725292

Award Number: 9725292
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $764782             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Towns jtowns@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Catlett  (Principal Investigator former)
              George H. Brett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: NCR9725292  National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research
              (NLANR): Distributed Applications Support Team (DAST)    In 1995, NSF awarded a
              cooperative agreement for a National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research
              (NLANR) providing for engineering, technical support and coordination of the
              vBNS connections at the supercomputing centers. The purposes of this NLANR team
              activity were (i) to provide sufficient testing, utilization and measurement of
              the NSFvBNS to insure that its overall performance was at acceptable levels,
              (ii) to facilitate the experiments to be performed on the NSFvBNS, and (iii) to
              provide for the coordination of support activities among the centers. It also
              provided limited engineering and technical support for general use of the
              NSFvBNS and provided for the coordination of such activities and facilitated
              the development at the supercomputing centers of a skilled and distributed
              network engineering team with a thorough knowledge of the NSFvBNS and its
              performance capabilities and use for high performance applications.    The
              recently initiated expansion of the NSFvBNS to encourage its use as a "leading
              edge but stable" platform to enable the development and use of high performance
              applications by the broader academic research community requires that the
              original NLANR activities be significantly expanded to encompass support for
              new users, sites and applications as well as continued measurement and testing
              of an expanded network. The need for this expansion has defined the NLANR
              activity into separate awards for three functional areas: the NLANR:
              Distributed Applications Support Team (DAST), located at the University of
              Illinois at Urbana-Champaigne, aimed at assisting the end users of
              high-performance applications in maximizing the performance of their
              applications; the NLANR: National Center for Network Engineering (NCNE),
              located at Carnegie-Mellon University, aimed at assisting high performance
              connections campuses in optimizing their network engineeri ng and connectivity;
              and the NLANR: Measurement and Operational Analysis Team (MOAT), located at the
              University of California, San, Diego, aimed at measuring and optimizing
              performance and use of the NSFvBNS and interconnected networks. The three
              efforts will continue to be be closely coodinated with each other and with the
              NSFvBNS.     The agreement provides for the NLANR: Distributed Applications
              Support Team (DAST) which builds on the NLANR activity and brings to bear
              NCSA's experience in supporting users of both high performance networks
              (through NLANR, IWAY, BLANCA, etc.) and complex computing environments (through
              the NCSA user support structure that serves several thousand users).  DAST will
              place network and software engineers in direct contact with users, develop
              training materials and the host workshops to facilitate the transfer of 
              expertise in supporting applications to the High Performance Connections end
              users and user service organizations at their institutions.  DAST establishes a
              central help desk for High Performance Connection award site users with high
              performance applications to coordinate the routing and resolution of problems
              related to the vBNS and other networks associated with the High Performance
              Connections program.
