Title       : RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dynamic Response of Bedrock Fluvial Systems to
               Tectonic Forcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9725348

Award Number: 9725348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77296              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy J. Merritts d_Merritts@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      P O BOX 3003
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1044,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725348  Merritts    Erosional unloading is an important force in orogenic
              processes; the rates and patterns of erosion influence the heights of mountain
              belts, outcrop patterns of lithologic units, and, perhaps, the rates and styles
              of crustal deformation.  Analysis of the interactions of tectonic and surficial
              processes requires quantitative understanding of the dynamics of bedrock
              channel systems.  That is, in tectonically active fluvial landscapes bedrock
              channels control the rates and patterns of erosional unloading because they set
              the lower boundary condition for hillslope processes that accomplish land
              surface denudation.  Unfortunately, little is known quantitatively about many
              aspects of the process of river incision into bedrock, and this limits our
              ability to model the evolution of bedrock channel systems.  In particular,
              field data are needed to constrain:  ( rates of bedrock incision,    ( Patterns
              of transient response to tectonic forcing,    ( Channel response timescales,   
              ( Controls on bedrock channel width, and     ( Morphological consequences of
              transitions in channel processes (e.g., fluvial to debris flow).    In an
              effort to improve our capabilities to model interactions between tectonic and
              surface processes, we propose to examine bedrock channel systems at three field
              sites: coastal drainage's of the King Range of northern California,
              post-glacial gullies in the Finger Lakes region of New York, and Knife Creek in
              the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes in Alaska.  We chose these sites because
              climate and lithology are spatially invariant in each, uplift and climatic
              histories of each are relatively well-constrained, and each contains landforms
              indicative of incision (e.g., strath terraces) and tectonic disturbance (e.g.,
              oversteepened stream segments) that provide a means of assessing incision rates
              and patterns of transient response to tectonic forcing.  We will use data
              obtained from this comparative analysis to place quantitative constraints on an
              existing mathematical mod el of bedrock channel evolution through a series of
              forward and inverse modeling exercises (both 2-D profile and 3-D landscape
              evolution models).  The results will provide a more complete understanding of
              processes in bedrock channel systems and an improved mathematical framework for
              the analysis of landscape evolution and the interaction of tectonic, climatic
              and surficial processes.
