Title       : Optimization of Delay Constrained Wireless Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9725568

Award Number: 9725568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $880313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence B. Milstein milstein@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rene L. Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh R. Rao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Siegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Traditionally,  in order to address the many complex issues that arise in
              communication    networks, a ``layered" approach has been taken.  The different
              layers are typically assigned different  ``responsibilities," so that  the
              general network design problem can be decomposed into simpler, more  manageable
              problems.   However, the independent design  of the different layers - which 
              ignores the detailed nature of their mutual interactions, shared constraints,
              and cumulative impact on the network's overall performance - can lead to
              inefficiencies.    Future wireless communication networks will be required  to
              provide wide coverage and high capacity to mobile users generating bursty 
              multi-media information. This heterogeneous traffic will impose upon the
              network time-varying quality of service (QoS) constraints. Since many
              multi-media applications  have delay-sensitive information with varying
              reliability requirements, such as numerical data, voice, and video, the project
              will take end-to-end delay and data integrity as its dominant system
              constraints.    The goal of this project is, in the broadest sense, to take a
              more global view of end-to-end performance, to better understand the
              interactions among the layers, to develop techniques that improve system
              performance through joint optimization over the various layers and to do so in
              the context of a end-to-end delay constraint.  One key  theme of the proposal
              involves the optimization of system performance in the context of multiple
              users, particularly in a system which does not employ a cellular-type
              architecture. This requires the development of techniques that, on the one
              hand, address the deleterious effects of multiple-user interference at the
              physical layer, yet also incorporate end-to-end QoS objectives, especially
              delay, just as with the development of  routing and scheduling algorithms.
              Another major theme will be the determination of the optimal distribution and
              the real-time dynamics of error control  functions implemented across t he
              layers of the network, subject to specified end-user requirements. This
              requires investigation of inherent tradeoffs between error-rate and decoding
              delay of FEC employed at the physical layer, as well as the interactions among
              error control functions, including retransmission strategies, invoked at higher
              levels.
