Title       : ESH - COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Continental Ostracode Assemblages & Shell
               Geochemistry: Calibrating a Tool for Paleoclimatic and Paleohydrologic
               Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9725033

Award Number: 9725033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emi Ito eito@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725033  Ito    The study of high-resolution proxy climate records covering
              interannual through millennial time scales is growing importance in the field
              of global climate change.  Many of these proxy climate records include isotopic
              and trace-element geochemical data derived from fossil ostracode shells in
              continental deposits, such as lakes, springs, and wetlands.  Ostracodes
              (microscopic crustaceans) play a role similar to that of foraminifera in the
              marine world by providing vital information about the interactive nature of
              climate and the hydrologic cycle through their ecology, shell geochemistry, and
              biogeographical distribution.  In fact, ostracodes are the primary calcareous
              microfossils in continental records.    Despite the increasing amount of
              research presently underway involving oxygen isotopes and ostracode shell
              geochemistry in continental records, there is significant gap in the knowledge
              base.  There are no existing studies available that provide, through both field
              and laboratory calibration, the modern relationship between isotope
              fractionation and ostracode isotopic composition will remain at best a
              qualitative indicator of past conditions.  The high resolution continental
              climate records that rely on ostracode isotopic information have at present no
              quantified basis for interpretation.    We propose to conduct both field and
              laboratory calibration studies of ostracode species and shell chemistry.  This
              research focuses on modern distributions of ostracodes and their isotopic and
              trace-element signatures, with the purpose of developing them as proxy
              indicators for past Earth system processes.  The field-based study will
              calibrate ostracode species distributions and shell chemistry ((18O, (13C,
              Mg/Ca, Sr/Ca), against hydrochemistry (cation, anion, TIC, (18O, (D, (13C of
              DIC) and climate data.  This will include a study of intra-and inter-annual
              variation.  The laboratory-based study will verify the oxygen-isotope and trace
              element fractionation behavior of several common speci es of ostracodes as a
              function of hydrochemistry and temperature.    The results of this study will
              provide, for the first time, experimental verification through both field and
              laboratory calibration, of ostracode isotopic and trace-element composition as
              a quantifiable indicator for paleoclimate analysis .  Basic issues revolving
              around seasonality, hydrochemical variability, vital effects, and different
              hydrologic regimes will have been examined and assessed.  A fundamental gap in
              the paleoclimate knowledge base will thus be filled.
