Title       : Control of Denitrification in a Permanently Ice Covered Antarctic Lake:
               Potential for Regulation By Bioactive Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9725345

Award Number: 9725345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Wells   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP97-25345
P.I.  Mark L. Wells

Denitrification is the main loss
              term for fixed nitrogen from ecosystems, and thus its rate and regulation may
              directly affect primary production and carbon cycling over short and long time
              scales.  The proposed research investigates the role of bioactive metals in
              regulating denitrification by exploiting a natural experimental system that
              occurs in a permanently ice-covered lake in the Taylor Valley of East
              Antarctica.  Chemical distributions in the two lobes of Lake Bonney imply that
              denitrification occurs in one lobe but not the other.  Most of the obvious
              biological and chemical variables that usually influence denitrification, and
              might account for the difference between the two lobes, have been ruled out by
              previous study.  Denitrifiying bacteria are present in both lobes of the lake
              and isolates derived from the lake show temperature and salinity optima
              consistent with their persistence in this environment.  The proposed research
              represents a combination of culture experiments and field work to examine this
              paradox, and include:  (1) Experiments to determine the metal tolerances and
              requirements for growth and denitrification by the denitrifying isolates, (2)
              Measurement of metal concentrations and metal speciation in surface transects
              and depth profiles, and (3)  Experiments to determine how denitrifying bacteria
              respond to alterations in metal availability.  This approach allows examination
              of the relationship between microbial activity and metal distributions in Lake
              Bonney and has implications for elemental cycling in other aquatic systems. 
              Moreover, the insights will be useful for evaluating the proposed used of
              paleo-denitrification indicators for past climate reconstructions, as well as
              the potential significance of the global marine denitrification/nitrogen
              fixation ratio on atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.

