Title       : High Performance Simulation of Multiphysics Problems in Turbulence, Control, and
               Structural Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9725004

Award Number: 9725004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1975250            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos A. Felippa carlos@titan.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charbel Farhat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver A. McBryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kwang-Chun Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis M. Heimbigner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program will address the high-performance parallel simulation of
              multiphysics problems that couple dynamic models in fluid mechanics, heat
              transfer, structures and control.  This program requires the close
              collaboration of researchers in engineering, computer science and computational
              mathematics.    The activities in Engineering are driven by the simulation, on
              high performance parallel computers, of problems involving the dynamic
              interaction of physical  models from disciplines of importance in aerospace,
              civil and mechanical engineering.  Four specific applications of this class of
              problems will be considered: the mitigation of turbulent vorticity in
              high-temperature engines; the study of high turbulent flow in pipe bends, the
              use of active  and semi-active  control to safeguard composite structures in
              civil and aerospace engineering; and the implementation of topology/shape
              structural design and optimization for aeroelastic design.  These application
              are unified by their multidisciplinary nature which involves at least two
              mechanical fields, use of a common basis in modeling, visualization, problem
              decomposition, parallel simulation methodology, and software/hardware
              infrastructure.  The research in Computer Science will focus on the development
              of a problem Solving Environment (PSE) for the applications problems which is
              suitable for the parallel implementation of large-scale multiphysics 
              simulations.  The primary goal of the PSE is to provide transparent, portable
              and scalable access to all of the resources needed for execution of large
              parallel applications on heterogeneous and/or distributed systems, including
              interprocessor communication, access to disk, visualization, debugging and
              performance monitoring.  The following application s of the PSE will be
              investigated: network-based distributed object systems, distributed shared
              memory systems, parallel persistent I/O, and computational steering and
              debugging.  In addition we propose to integrate  quality of service protocols
              in high-speed networks with our distributed object  system to provide a true
              real-time distributed environment, and to investigate numerical algorithms for
              optimal memory access using the PSE to facilitate distributed performance
              analysis.  The application problems are interconnected in modeling,
              computational and software integration aspects, facilitating the common use of
              tools such as domain decomposers and response visualization.  This project will
              provide unique opportunities for the training of students and postdocs in an
              interdisciplinary setting.  Regular weekly meetings of the full research group
              will introduce all researchers to the breadth of issues involved and will allow
              students to locate suitable thesis topics.  Students will be encouraged to have
              advisors from two disciplinary areas represented by the research team, and each
              student will be paired with a postdoctoral student as a mentor.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
