Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Organic Carbon Burial, Anoxia, and
               Ecological-Evolutionary Events in the Appalachian Basin During the Middle to
               Late Devonian (Eifelian-Famennian)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9725441

Award Number: 9725441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley Sageman b-sageman@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Hollander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725441  Sageman    The widespread but episodic deposition of organic
              carbon-rich facies (ORF) in marine basins during Earth history has been
              recognized as an important problem in the geological sciences.  Water column
              stratification and consequent anoxia has commonly been the favored hypothesis
              to account for ancient ORF deposition, but in recent years alternate hypotheses
              have emerged that highlight the importance of coupled biogeochemical and
              sedimentological processes (e.g., high productivity, stratigraphic
              condensation), and even suggest that water column anoxia may not have been as
              prevalent as once thought.  Yet oxygen deficiency, whether as a cause or
              consequence of organic carbon burial, has been postulated as a potential
              driving force for evolutionary change and extinction during the Phanerozoic. 
              For example, it was recently implicated as a possible cause of overturn events
              punctuating distinct Silurian and Devonian benthic faunas of the Appalachian
              basin.  These benthic faunas are termed ecological-evolutionary subunits.  The
              pattern of long-term stability and punctuated change at the community level is
              called coordinated stasis, and many of the identified faunal overturns are
              coincident with ORF deposits.  Although coordinated stasis has rapidly become a
              forefront of research in evolutionary paleoecology, very few studies have
              integrated anallyses of faunal changes with independent assessments of coeval
              environmental  change, and none have focused on the role of oxidation-reduction
              chemistry at or near the sediment-water interface (redox dynamics). What are
              the spatial and temporal relationships between organic matter burial events and
              oxygen deficiency?  How does oxygen depletion relate to evolutionary change
              within a community, a basin, or an ecosystem?    This proposal outlines a plan
              to re-evaluate hypotheses for the origin of ORF deposits in the Middle to Late
              Devonian Appalachian basin (late Eifelian through early Famennian), and to use
              the data collected for this purpose to i nvestigate the causes of faunal stasis
              and overturn.  A preliminary data set of geochemical analyses from core samples
              has been generated (Fig. 3, Table 2) that illustrates why previous hypotheses
              for the origin of ORF in the Appalchian basin need to be reconsidered.  This
              data set has provided a foundation for the development of working hypotheses
              relating ORF deposition and coordinated stasis, as well as a trial for
              selection of the best paleoenvironmental parameters to employ in the study. 
              The two year project will focus on two cores from west central New York that
              will be analyzed for sedimentologic and ichnologic trends and sampled for
              geochemical analyses.  Three types of geochemical data sensitive to redox
              dynamics will be collected (carbon isotopes; abundance of C, Fe, S, and P; and
              concentrationof trace metals), and the results will be compared to a
              compilation of published and unpublished data on macrofaunal trends within and
              around the Appalachian basin.  Tests for the statistical covariance of redox
              sensitive proxies and faunas will allow the fundamental hypothesis, that oxygen
              depletion controls faunal turnover, to be confirmed or refuted.  Alternate
              mechanisms, such as species-area effects related to relative sea level changes,
              will also be considered.    Past global climate and environmental changes have
              been linked to variability in ocean circulation and biogeochemical
              processes/cycles.  This study is directed at assessing the linkage between
              physical, chemical, and biological processes within an ancient marine system,
              and the results will provide important constraints for currently evolving ideas
              about past global change.  The research will make a significant contribution to
              the understanding of organic carbon accumulation processes in the evolution of
              epicontinental foreland basins, and of the relationship between carbon cycling,
              redox history, and ecological-evolutionary events in the rock record.
