Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dating Quaternary Deposits and Soils with TIMS U-Series
               on Pedogenic Carbonate and Silica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9725573

Award Number: 9725573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17124              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Amundson earthy@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725573  Amundson    Funds are requested to further develop and apply TIMS
              (Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometry) U-series dating to pedogenic carbonate
              and silica.  The research will seek to understand the potential and limitations
              of U-series dates on chemically/mineralogically-characterized, micro-sampled
              clast rinds by detailed work in two climatically and lithologically distinct
              areas.  Two localities will be studied, using techniques that build on the
              results of recent, independent studies by the P.I.'s.  Kyle Canyon (Nevada)
              provides a sequence of carbonate-clast alluvial deposits and morphologic
              surfaces ranging from Holocene to >780 ka, whereas the Wind River Basin
              (Wyoming) provides a sequence of granitic-clast dominated alluvial deposits
              from Holocene to early Pleistocene age.  In both localities, the Quaternary
              geology and pedology have been well studied by one or more of the investigators
              of this proposal.    This is a collaborative proposal among 3 institutions: Ken
              Ludwig and Warren Sharp at the Berkeley Geochronology Center will be
              responsible for sampling and uranium-series analyses using the new TIMS
              facility and clean lab at BGC; Ron Amundson at U.C. Berkeley and Oliver
              Chadwick at U.C. Santa Barbara will provide field and laboratory expertise in
              Quaternary geology and pedology, as well as familiarity with the study
              localities.  All of the named investigators will participate in the chemical
              and microscopic characterization of the pedogenic carbonate and silica, and
              Amundson will be responsible for the stable-isotopic work and interpretation.  
               The single-sample/single-date approach developed by Ludwig and J.B. Paces for
              a recent study at Crater Flat, Nevada, in which sub-millimeter laminae of
              individual carbonate/silica rinds are micro-sampled to avoid detrital
              contamination, will be applied to carefully-characterized clast rinds of the
              deposits in both localities.  The limitations of the approach will be explored
              including the reliability of the detrital 230Th corrections,  the textural and
              geochemical indicators of open systems, and the practicality of extending the
              method into the Early Pleistocene using 234U/238U.  Analyses of Holocene
              clast-rinds will be of special interest, as these samples will provide an
              understanding of the likely time-lag between clast deposition and the
              accumulation of datable carbonate or carbonate/silica rinds.  Knowledge of this
              time lag (and its variability in different climatic and lithologic contexts)
              will be essential in using U-series dates of innermost clast-rinds to date the
              Quaternary deposits themselves.  Some development of micro-sampling techniques
              will be required to explore the limits of sample size and spatial resolution,
              but this can be done with relatively modest equipment.  The laboratory
              challenges involve mainly those of small-sample 230Th analyses, in which one of
              the P.I.'s has extensive experience.    The results of the dating studies will
              be applied to understanding the history and timing of erosion and sedimentation
              in Kyle Canyon, and of glacial events in the Wind River Basin.  A limited
              number of stable-isotope analyses will be used to evaluate the usefulness of
              the rinds as a paleoclimate record, as well as to check for open-system
              histories of the mid-and early Pleistocene rinds.
