Title       : Phase I and II: Unsing Information Technologies to Support Urban Middle School
               Students in Scientific Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9725927

Award Number: 9725927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Krajcik krajcik@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Marx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elliot M. Soloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis Blumenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725927  Krajcik    We propose to study the process of adapting and sustaining
              an innovation in urban middle schools in Detroit that highlights inquiry
              enabled by computational technology. The innovation includes technology (a
              suite of tools in the Investigator's Workshop), instruction (Project Based
              Science and instructional materials) and an approach to professional
              development. Our model of implementation stresses processes that include
              collaborating with teachers and administrators to adapt the innovation so that
              it is achieveable given the realities of the context of the school, community,
              and the district' s Urban Systemic Initiative. It also emphasizes coordination
              among the elements of the innovation and of policies at the school and district
              level so that in combination they support the innovation. The goal of the
              research is to understand how to build capacity in urban school systems
              necessary to cope with the complexities involved in adopting and sustaining
              technological and pedagogical change. Capacity includes a) infrastructure and
              policies that support the innovation, b) culture in which professionals embrace
              reform and work together to achieve it, and c) capability, teacher and
              administrator know how to mobilize energy and resources to initiate and sustain
              the innovation.  We are already working jointly with middle schools in Detroit.
              The research plan has two phases. In phase 1, using a combination of
              quantitative and qualitative methods, we will study the innovation
              implementation process, adaptations to the innovation as inquiry enabled by
              technology is introduced to seventh and eighth grade classrooms, and how the
              innovation affects students, classrooms and schools over a three year period.
              The focus of Phase 2 will be to explore whether what we learned in phase 1
              about problems and potential solutions contributes to more effective and
              efficient innovation implementation in new, but similar, middle school
              settings. Our assumption is that by drawing on our experiences, schools  and
              districts can be more proactive in anticipating difficulties, responding in
              ways that adapt the innovation to their situations and that increase capacity
              to sustain instructional and technological change.  Products will include
              research reports and materials for use in educational change efforts. The
              knowledge gained will add to the literature on reform and enable educators and
              policy makers to improve the effectiveness of change efforts directed at
              engaging urban students in learning science through inquiry enabled by
              technology.  NSF FORoU t358 (1/94)
