Title       : The Effect of Dams on Riparian Vegetation Dispersal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9725384

Award Number: 9725384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen E. Wohl ellenw@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725384
Wohl

River damming results in modifications of flow regimes and
              geomorphic processes, which lead to changes in riparian vegetation downstream. 
              Changes in existing vegetation may result from modifications in the physical
              habitat and hydrology, and dams may also interfere with critical mechanisms of
              reproduction and early life stages of riparian species.  Dispersal of
              propagules, and the deposition of seeds in sites appropriate for long-term
              survival are important determinants of the persistence of many riparian species
              and influence the composition and structure of riparian plant communities. The
              objective of this study is: 1.) to determine the relative importance of various
              dispersal and storage mechanisms (wind, water, and soil seed banks) in
              colonizing new sites and in structuring riparian plant communities along
              mountain streams; 2.) to measure the degree to which dams interrupt these
              processes;  3.) to document where seeds of various riparian species are
              transported in the water column and the depositional patterns of seeds in
              relation to depositional landforms and hydrologic regimes.  Field studies on
              three regulated, high gradient mountain streams will: 1.) document the relative
              contributions of aerial and water dispersed seeds to the colonization of
              surfaces along river margins and bars,  2.) sample aerially and water dispersed
              seeds at several cross sections both upstream and downstream from impoundments
              and  3.) measure the transport mechanics, duration of buoyancy and viability,
              and patterns of seed deposition of three important riparian plant species (Acer
              negundo, Alnus incana, and Betula fontinalis) in relation to channel form and
              hydrologic processes both in field and flume experiments.  Understanding the
              mechanisms of seed delivery along natural and regulated streams and the
              interactions between the timing of seed release, and the availability of
              exposed seedbeds at appropriate times, will provide a solid scientific basis
              for modifying flow regimes at certain times of the year to facilitate the
              reproductive success of key riparian species.  






