Title       : Surface and Ground Water Mixing and Reactions in aSemi- Confined Karst Aquifer:
               An Example from the Florida Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9725295

Award Number: 9725295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Martin jmartin@geology.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9725295  Martin    The extent of chemical exchange and mixing between surface
              water, ground water, and aquifer rocks has been poorly constrained in karst
              aquifers, although they provide (25% of the world's potable water.  Although
              these aquifers are important sources of water, they appear to be more
              susceptible to contamination than other types of aquifers because of large
              amounts of mixing and rapid subsurface flow.  Mixing, as well as fluid-solid
              reactions in the subsurface, should be reflected in natural chemical variations
              of water discharged from karst aquifers.  This hypothesis will be tested along
              a 10 km stretch of the Santa Fe  river where it flows through the subsurface at
              the boundary of confined and unconfined portions of the Floridan aquifer in
              north-central Florida.  Samples will be collected from the sink and rise at
              high frequency (one sample every two hours) for two 4 day periods: one at low
              discharge and one at high discharge.  Variations in compositions of
              non-reactive solutes (Cl and (18O) with river stage should provide information
              on residence time of the water in the subsurface.  Additional sets of samples
              will be collected at high and low discharge from the sink , rise, and two water
              supply wells, one at the sink and the other at the rise.  Sampling of water at
              the rise  will be delayed by the length of time necessary for water to flow
              from the sink to the rise. The sink, rise, and well samples will  be measured
              for  a suite of solutes (Ca, Mg, Na, K, DIC, NO3, SO4, Cl, F, Si, Mn, Fe
              concentrations, (D and (18O values pH, alkalinity, and DO) that will serve as
              constraints for NETPATH models of mixing and natural fluid-solid reactions. 
              Measurement of residence time, calculation of the extent of mixing, and models
              of fluid-solid reactions should provide information about the susceptibility of
              karst aquifers to contamination including the length of time available for
              natural remediation of polluted water, the quantity of polluted water that
              might recharge the aquifer, and t he background natural chemical variability
              caused by reactions.  These results should be important for management of water
              supplies in the Floridan aquifer, the primary water source for all of Florida.
