Title       : Origin of Basaltic Magmatism in the Tectonically Enigmatic High Lava Plains of
               Southeastern Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1997   
File        : a9725166

Award Number: 9725166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anita L. Grunder grundera@geo.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725166  Grunder  Volcanic rocks of the High Lava Plains (HLP) of central and
              southeastern Oregon are unique because: (1) they lie at the northwestern margin
              of the Basin and Range Province; (2) they mirror Late Tertiary and Quaternary
              volcanism of the Yellowstone-Snake River Plain Province in that silicic
              volcanism is younger to the west; and (3) they are strongly bimodal, being
              composed of basalts with oceanic affinities and high-silica rhyolites.  Because
              of these characteristics, the HLP have been idenfied as an outstanding problem
              in understanding tectonism and volcanism in the western U.S. The tectonic
              models invoked for the formation of the HLP magmas have been associated with :
              a) the evolution of the Yellowstone mantle plume; b) an extensional setting
              related to Late Tertiary development of the Basin and Range Province; and c) a
              back-arc setting related to the Cascadia subduction zone. In order to
              discriminate among these models we will investigate a potential age-progressive
              trend in basaltic volcanism, determine its genetic link to the associated
              silicic volcanism, evaluate the mantle sources involved in the basaltic
              magmatism of the HLP, and determine if geographic and temporal geochemical
              variations are analogous to the Yellowstone hotspot track.  These questions
              will be answered with an integrated field, geochronological and geochemical
              study of basalts from representative areas in the High Lava Plains.  Four areas
              have been selected for mapping and dating by high precision 40Ar-39Ar methods. 
              The most important samples will also be analyzed for major- and trace-element
              composition and Sr, Nd, Pb, O and He isotopic ratios.
