Title       : Cocos: Island of Sharks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9725449

Award Number: 9725449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1850000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula S. Apsell paula apsell@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry R. Schubel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Mallory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne B. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725449   Apsell        The NOVA Large-format Film unit of the WGBH Educational
              Foundation, in conjunction with the New England Aquarium, is producing a large
              format film about Cocos Island, a small, uninhabited island off the coast of
              Costa Rica that has not yet been affected by human activity.  The waters around
              Cocos Island contain an extraordinary abundance of sharks, rays, tuna, marlins,
              swordfish, and other pelagic fishes, thanks to nearby upwellings of cold,
              nutrient-rich water that create a rich food source.  The film will focus on the
              physical oceanography and behavioral marine ecology of Cocos Island,
              highlighting the animal behavior and interactions of the wide diversity of
              marine life.       Executive Producer will be Paula Apsell, head of the WGBH
              science unit and Executive Producer of NOVA.  Susanne Simpson, executive
              producer for NOVA Large-format Films will as a senior producer.  Howard Hall
              Productions will produce and direct the film.  Howard Hall will be
              director/producer, and Michele Hall will serve as producer.  The Halls are
              experts in the field of marine natural history filmmaking and are
              world-renowned for their television programs on such series as National
              Geographic and Nature.  They worked in the large format medium as
              producer/directors of Into the Deep.  Joseph Levine, a marine biologist who has
              written both science textbooks and television scripts, will be the writer. 
              William Spitzer, Associate Director for Education at the New England Aquarium,
              will be responsible for the educational outreach materials.
