Title       : Predictive, Sensor-Assisted Wireless Multimedia Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9725251

Award Number: 9725251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $892465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Wicker wicker@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence L. Fine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Y. Halpern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    NCR-9725251  Stephen Wicker, Terrence Fine, and Joseph Halpern 
              Cornell University  Predictive, Sensor-Assisted Wireless Multimedia Systems   
              The PCS systems of the future will provide a variety of services to mobile
              users, including voice, high speed data, video, e-mail, teleconferencing, and
              the transfer of medical Images.  The intelligent PCS network will be required
              to provide channel access with a minimum of call blocking, negotiate quality of
              service, allocate resources, and track users throughout their sessions.  It is
              proposed to develop a series of expert systems that will optimize random
              access, resource allocation, and mobility management protocols.  These expert
              systems will use a number of technologies and techniques from the fields of
              neural networks, artificial intelligence, and knowledge representation.   
              There are three levels of agents in the proposed intelligent PCS network:
              mobile user, Base Station Controller (BSC), and the Mobile Switching Center
              (MSC). It is assumed that the PCS system is cellular, with several BSC's
              interacting with a single MSC.  It is proposed to determine a means for
              representing and exploiting the information available to each type of agent.   
              At the physical layer, in-band transmitted power levels will be tracked by a
              grid of low-cost sensors (radiometers).  The sensors will provide power
              measurements as a function of time and location.  In the proposal it is shown
              that this information can be used in the development of a BSC-based intelligent
              ALOHA multiple access scheme.  Neural networks are described that can
              efficiently use the sensor data to estimate the number of users involved in
              individual collision events.  This information is used in turn to estimate the
              number of backlogged users and to select an optimal backoff algorithm, thus
              maximizing Aloha channel throughput.    The sensor grid can also be used by the
              BSC and MSC to support resource allocation, handoffs, and the tracking of
              scheduled user transmissions.  In the proposed  research program, sensor-based
              expert systems will be developed for three distinct phases of PCS operation:
              system planning and layout, multiple access, and adaptive resource allocation. 
                Higher level information can be acquired and used at the BSC's and the MSC. 
              The BSC's will obtain information regarding the local users' bandwidth and
              quality of service requirements as a function of time. The BSC's will also
              track local channel conditions, and develop a detailed propagation model for
              the cell.  The model will be used to as an aid to power control within the
              cell.  The BSC is expected to act as an autonomous agent in local resource
              allocation and power control.      The MSC will be responsible for allocating
              resources between cells.  An allocation protocol will be developed to move
              resources between cells in response to traffic information acquired by the
              BSC's and passed to the MSC.  The BSC's will also pass propagation and user
              tracking information to the MSC.  The MSC will use this information to create a
              global propagation and user tracking model that will support the handoff
              decision process.  An effort will be made to develop usage tendency profiles
              for individual users.  The collection of user profiles will be used to develop
              models for global resource allocation.
