Title       : Towards a System Design Discipline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9725148

Award Number: 9725148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pravin P. Varaiya varaiya@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9725148  Varaiya    System design is a craft and a discipline.  Practice of
              the craft requires domain knowledge.  This proposal seeks to formulate a
              discipline of design through a graduated approach to system description
              frameworks, behavior, implementation and performance.  The approach will build
              on existing work in hybrid systems, hierarchical and distributed control, and
              elements of cognitive science and intelligent systems.  Some new theoretical
              and computational material will be developed while filling in gaps and
              exploring promising directions.  The end product of this effort will be: (1)
              articles and a monograph describing our approach to system design; (2) software
              tools that aid in the creation of the design, its validation and
              implementation; and (3) designs that offer solutions to concrete problems in
              transportation and communication networks.  The approach is intended for
              engineers and students engaged in the design of large, distributed dynamical
              systems.    The approach will be elaborated in three passes, successively
              deepening theoretical understanding and examining more difficult, concrete
              problems of design.  Pass I provides a rapid introduction to system modeling in
              SHIFT, a programming language for representing and simulating a dynamic network
              of interconnected hybrid systems.  Pass II is devoted to modeling frameworks,
              analysis of system behavior, and real-time implementation.  Pass III develops a
              theory of system architecture and principles for architecture design.  The
              material for Pass I already exists, so the work here is to create a felicitous
              notation for hybrid systems that is mathematically familiar and syntactically
              convenient as a programming aid.  This effort should last not more than six
              months.    The significant body of hybrid systems theory produced in the last
              five years provides much material for Pass II.  That material will be augmented
              by extending recent results on approximations and robustness of hybrid systems
              behavior.  Also needed will be a formul ation of what is meant by real-time
              implementation, making use of existing work in real-time languages and
              operating systems.  This part will draw upon research in real-time automotive
              control in the California PATH Program.  The first version of Pass II should be
              complete within eighteen months.    Pass III will attempt to develop a theory
              of system architecture as a hierarchical, distributed organization of functions
              necessary for perception and control.  The attempt will draw upon ideas from
              cognitive science, distributed, hierarchical systems, and intelligent systems,
              and upon experience in the design of automated highways and communication
              networks.  This part will also be concerned with the evaluation of system
              performance (including both logical and quantitative criteria) and show how a
              properly structured design assists performance evaluation.  Pass III is the
              riskiest portion of the proposed research.  It should be complete within two
              years.  The third year of the project will be devoted to testing the theory and
              software tools within the context of specific applications.  Art introductory
              graduate-level course developed alongside this work will also serve to evaluate
              how well the approach can be learned.
