Title       : Interagency Agreement: NSF/EPA Partnership for EnvironmentalResearch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9725269

Award Number: 9725269
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Menzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Environ Protection Agency
	      Grants Admin Division (3903R)
	      Washington, DC  20460    /   -

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1237,1238,1239,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robert Menzer  This award transfers funds to the Environmental Protection Agency
              to cover half of the administrative costs of an interagency joint competition
              in FY97 for which EPA is handling the proposals and managing the review
              process. NSF and EPA signed a Memorandum of Understanding in December 1994, 
              and developed a joint extramural grants research program in areas of mutual
              programmatic interest.  Three competitive awards programs began in FY95 and
              have continued through FY97.  Water And Watersheds - emphasizing
              interdisciplinary research that takes a system approach to issues of water and
              watersheds.  Technology for Sustainable Environment - concentrating on
              pollution prevention research.  Decision-Making and Valuation for Environmental
              Policy  - emphasizing research on measurement of values where prices are
              absent.  In the previous two years, NSF had primary responsibility for the
              process, and received funds transferred from EPA; this year, the roles are
              reversed.   The administrative expenses include the cost of a contractor to
              manage proposal handling, postage and mailing, and the travel, per diem, and
              fees for peer review panels. The NSF funding for the administrative costs of
              the Partnership is contributed by several divisions:  DEB, CTS, CHE, and SBER. 
               The NSF-EPA Partnership has stimulated valuable interdisciplinary research
              that advances the fundamental knowledge relevant to environmental protection. 
              The cooperation with NSF and exposure to NSF's peer review procedures has
              spurred EPA to make changes in its procedures to strengthen competitive peer
              review in its extramural research program.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
