Title       : Stars & Our Galaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9725676

Award Number: 9725676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1466977            (Estimated)
Investigator: Evalyn I. Gates gates@oddjob.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adler Planetarium
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60605    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725676  Gates     The Adler Planetarium & Astronomy Museum proposes to develop
              a 10,395 square foot permanent exhibition. Five major exhibit areas - The Milky
              Way; Billions and Billions; The Life Cycle of Stars; Properties of Stars; and
              The Dynamic Galaxy -will orient visitors to the Milky Way, and explore in
              detail the fascinating objects found within.  Each gallery will represent
              different content areas, but there are several underlying connecting themes.   
              1. Science does not distract from the appreciation, beauty, and mystery of the
              Universe, but rather deepens it;  2. The universe is a vast, dynamic, evolving,
              and fascinating place, where we are always learning about new things;  3. We
              can organize our picture of the Universe in ways that help us  understand its
              structure, and our place in it;  4. We can begin to understand the Universe
              through observation and interpretation;  5. Based on the fundamental laws of
              nature, there are some concepts that will help us to explain the phenomenons of
              the universe.    The Adler's new exhibits and programs will reflect the
              principles and pedagogy articulated in the new National Science Education
              Standards. It will also be reflected in the national and local reform efforts
              such as the Urban Systemic Initiative. The Adler staff will collaborate with
              the Chicago Systemic Initiative of the Chicago Public Schools. The CSI
              teachers, parents, and students will be involved the program development and
              evaluation process through focus groups, working teams, and pilot testing
              activities on-site at the museum    The project Principal Investigator (PI) Dr.
              Evalyn L. Gates received her Doctorate in Physics from Case Western Reserve
              University in 1990. Currently, she serves as Chair of the Astronomy Department
              at the Adler Planetarium and Astronomy Museum. Dr. Gates is a Research
              Scientist on the faculty in the Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics at The
              University of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois.     In addition to the project
              team, a broad-based advisory comm ittee will serve as counsel to the project.
              Serving on the project advisory committee are: Minda Borun; Director of
              Research and Evaluation, The Franklin Institute Science Museum; Richard G.
              Kron, Ph.D., Director, Yerkes Observatory and on the faculty at The University
              of Chicago; Catherine A. Pilachowski, Ph.D., Kitt Peak National Observatory;
              Phillip M. Sadler, Ed.D. Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics; James W.
              Thuran, Ph. D., The University of Chicago ; Melanie Wojtulewicz, M.A., the
              Chicago Public Schools; and Fahrad Y. Zadeh, Ph.D. Northwestern University.
