Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9725117

Award Number: 9725117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Watkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City Univ New York
	      535 E 80th Street
	      New York, NY  100210767    212/794-5317

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The City College of New York's Program for the Retention of   Engineering
              Students (PRES), begun in 1987, was established to   increase the number of
              underrepresented minorities in the   engineering field.  PRES concentration is
              on freshman.  Data   indicate that half of engineering students drop out during
              the   first two years of school.  PRES services are focused on improving 
              academic performance and providing career information.  Among the  services
              listed, are, 1) pre-freshman and pre-transfer summer  enrichment programs; 2)
              mathematics and science workshops; 3)  frequent academic monitoring and
              advisement; 4) career orientation  and professional development sessions, and
              5) cooperative education  and summer job placement.  Comparison data provided
              indicate that  student  retention rates are impacted with 90 percent of the 
              students staying in engineering versus 50 percent for those  students not in
              the program.  Another highlight of the proposal is  the program's impressive
              impact on graduation rates and  matriculation into graduate programs.  In
              addition, the proposal  indicates PRES will continue to grow through the
              support it  receives from its 18-member advisory board composed of corporate 
              and foundation representatives.  The strengths of the nominee  include:      . 
              Largest enrollment of engineering students in New York state       (50 percent
              of the state's engineering students).    .  Pre-freshman enrichment, personal
              counseling, block             registration, tutoring by peers and upper
              classmen, required       non-credit course in problem solving, math and science
                    workshops, frequent academic monitoring and advisement, career      
              orientation and professional development services, summer job       placement. 
                   Significant impact on student retention, graduation,             academic
              performance.       90 percent of the students remain in engineering.       PRES
              student graduation rates are twice as high as other            minority
              engineering students.       Founda tion and corporate support.       Innovative
              and replicable.    In summary, PRES is a sophisticated and comprehensive
              student   support system.  The population of assisted students   overwhelmingly
              satisfies the NSF criteria for diversity and   underrepresented populations. 
              The program offered the unique   component of involving transfer students in
              the support process  even before transfer from the feeder school.
