Title       : 1997 Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in Ceramics: New
               Perspectives in Interface Science; Meriden, NH; August 3-8, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1997      
File        : a9725614

Award Number: 9725614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9725614  Storm    The theme of the 1997 Gordon Research Conference for Solid
              State  Studies in Ceramics, to be held August 3-8, 1997, at Kimball  Union
              Academy in Meriden, New Hampshire is New Perspectives in  Interface Science:
              From Fundamentals to Practice.  The promise of  microstructural engineering of
              ceramics relies in large part on  the ability to manipulate interface structure
              and chemistry.  Powder processing techniques for producing high density
              ceramics  rely on our ability to control short and long range forces at 
              surfaces and internal interfaces in a reproducible way.  Silicon  nitride and
              some electronic ceramics, such as lead ruthanate,  have unique properties as a
              result of short range surface forces  that create stable intergranular layers
              on the order of one  nanometer thick.  New measurement tools and new advances
              in  theory have enabled us to take a fresh look at our understanding  of the
              structure, chemistry, and properties of interfaces.  The  aims of this Gordon
              Research Conference are to examine new  interface phenomena from fundamental
              scientific and engineering  points of view, to take a critical look at
              interface science as  it applies to ceramic interfaces, and to learn how to
              exploit  these phenomena in materials and interface design.  The  conference
              format, in keeping with all Gordon Research  Conferences, consists of formal
              presentations by invited speakers  with roughly half of each session devoted to
              in depth discussion.  In addition, a poster session will be held which enables 
              conference participants, especially graduate students, to present  their
              current research ideas in areas relevant to the conference  theme.  %%%  The
              theme of the 1997 Gordon Research Conference for Solid State  studies in
              Ceramics, to be held August 3-8, 1997, at Kimball  Union Academy in Meriden,
              New Hampshire is New Perspectives in  Interface Science: From Fundamentals to
              Practice.  The promise of  microstructural engineering of ceramics relies in
              large part on  the ability to manipu late interface structure and chemistry. 
              Powder processing techniques for producing high density ceramics  rely on our
              ability to control short and long range forces at  surfaces and internal
              interfaces in a reproducible way.  Silicon  nitride and some electronic
              ceramics, such as lead ruthanate,  have unique properties as a result of short
              range surface forces  that create stable intergranular layers on the order of
              one  nanometer thick.  New measurement tools and new advances in  theory have
              enabled us to take a fresh look at our understanding  of the structure,
              chemistry, and properties of interfaces.  The  aims of this Gordon Research
              Conference are to examine new  interface phenomena from fundamental scientific
              and engineering  points of view, to take a critical look at interface science
              as  it applies to ceramic interfaces, and to learn how to exploit  these
              phenomena in materials and interface design.  The  conference format, in
              keeping with all Gordon Research  Conferences, consists of formal presentations
              by invited speakers  with roughly half of each session devoted to in depth
              discussion.  In addition, a poster session will be held which enables 
              conference participants, especially graduate students, to present  their
              current research ideas in areas relevant to the conference  theme.  ***
