Title       : Dolphins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9725769

Award Number: 9725769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1630000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg MacGillivray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MacGillivray Freeman Films
	      P.O. Box 205
	      Laguna Beach, CA  92652    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9725769   MacGillivray      MacGillivray Freeman Films, in collaboration with
              Texan A&M University's Marine Mammal Research Program, Mote Marine Laboratory,
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, ASPIRA Association, Inc, and Media
              Education Consultants, is producing a 40 minute, large format film on wild
              dolphins.  The film will feature the research being done by two scientists: 
              Dr. Kathleen Dudzinski, a young marine scientist investigating dolphin
              communication and social systems, and Alejandro Acevedo-Gutierrez, a young
              Hispanic Ph.D. researching dolphin behavior and ecology.  The film will inform
              the audiences about the methods, tools and significance of dolphin research and
              immerse them in on-going scientific investigations of wild dolphins in their
              natural habitat.    The film will be supported by teacher's guides, a Science
              Career Exploration Unit for Hispanic youth distributed through ASPIRA, a School
              Trip Package for distribution to 11,000 teachers, and a Museum Educator Kit. 
              The project also will provide theaters with 2,000 free passes for minority and
              low-income outreach programs.    Greg MacGillivray, President of MacGillivray
              Freeman Films will be Executive Producer/Co-Producer/Co-Director/Co-Director of
              Photography.  The other Co-Producer will be Alec Lorimore, Vice President for
              Film Production and Development at MacGillivray Freeman Films.  The
              Co-Director/Co-Director of Photography will be Bob Talbot, an independent
              marine photographer.  Dr. Bernd Wursig, Professor of Marine Mammalogy, Director
              of the Marine Mammal research Program, and Co-Director of the Institute of
              Marine Life Science at Texas A&M University will serve as the chief content
              advisor.  Other science advisors include Alejandro Acevedo-Gutierrez, Kathleen
              Dudzinski, Randy Wells, Peter Tyack, and the staff scientists from the Mote
              Marine Laboratory.   Informal science education and outreach advisors include
              Raylene Decatur, David Ellis, Freda Nicholson, Simone Bloom-Nathan, and Hilda
              Crespo.  Project evaluation will  be conducted by Barbara Flagg.
