Title       : The Acquisition of a Computer-controlled Fermentor for High Level Expression of
               Recombinant Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1994      
File        : a9318142

Award Number: 9318142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf E. Christoffersen christof@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norbert O. Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Poole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Samuel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart C. Feinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318142  Christoffersen  The goal of this proposal is to purchase a modem
              computer-  controlled fermentor that will be used to express a wide variety  of
              proteins in microbial cells.  The various projects that will  utilize this
              facility reflect the breadth of interests present on  the UCSB campus.  The
              areas represented include proteins involved  in neural growth factor receptor,
              DNA methylation, interferon  regulation of cellular activities, DNA binding
              domains, plant  hormone biosynthesis, plant secondary metabolism, the cellular 
              cytoskeleton, egg sperm receptor and others.  The common need to  produce large
              amounts of protein for further biochemical or  biophysical studies brings
              together these diverse investigators  on this single proposal.    The need for
              this instrumentation is due to advances in a variety  of disciplines but most
              importantly is the development highly  efficient expression vectors for E. coli
              or yeast cells.  These  simple, easy to growth organisms are extremely
              versatile in their  ability or produce a variety of proteins under the right 
              experimental conditions.  Optimal expression for large scale  experiments
              requires careful control of temperature, dissolved  oxygen and agitation.  The
              proposed fermentor would allow  complete control of culture conditions and thus
              facilitate the  recovery of milligram amounts of these various proteins.
