Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Massively Parallel Monte Carlo Simulation of Positron
               Emission Tomography for Scatter Correction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9318760

Award Number: 9318760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill P. Mesirov   (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Sethian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond F. Muzic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adam Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matt Fitzgibbon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thinking Machines Corp
	      245 First St
	      Cambridge, MA  021421292    617/876-1111

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,9237,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Scattered photons blur positron emission tomography images,  degrading
              image resolution, contrast, and quantitative accuracy.  No general correction
              for scattered photons has been found,  because the spatial distribution of
              scattered photons has yet to  be characterized.  The investigators study photon
              scattering based  on a state-of-the-art Monte Carlo computer program, developed
              at  Los Alamos National Laboratory, that can provide more information  than is
              readily measurable experimentally.  At present, this  powerful analysis
              technique requires enormous computational  resources.  The investigators
              evaluate the advantages of using a  massively parallel supercomputer to conduct
              the computer  experiments and also examine methods for improving the 
              computational efficiency.       Positron emission tomography (PET) is an
              emerging technology  with unique capability for imaging biochemical processes
              in the  human body.  The motivation for this research is that by  accounting
              for scattered photons, the diagnostic and research  value of PET data is
              improved.  Scattered photons is a significant  problem as 10 to 25 percent of
              detected photons are deflected from  their straight path prior to detection. 
              Moreover, the fraction of  photons is even greater, 40 to 50 percent, with the
              latest  generation of PET scanners that use three-dimensional imaging 
              capability to scan the entire body for cancer detection.  Even as  such, PET is
              more sensitive for cancer detection and can detect  cancer earlier than
              computed tomography (CT) and magnetic  resonance imaging (MRI).  PET images can
              show the vast changes in  sugar metabolism associated with cancerous tumors,
              whereas the  tumors must grow to a size sufficent to significantly alter the 
              normal tissue structure in order to be visualized by CT and MRI.  More
              generally, a proper scatter correction will benefit PET's  ability to detect
              and quantify the biochemical changes associated  with numerous diseases and
              particularly those of the heart and  brain.
