Title       : Design and Evaluation of System-Level Fault Tolerance Mechanisms for Parallel
               Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9318495

Award Number: 9318495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Blough   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Recent developments have dramatically increased the importance  of 
              ultra-reliable parallel computing.  First, parallel processing  has moved  from
              a specialized scientific computation tool to an  instrument for 
              general-purpose computing.  At the same time,  computers have begun to control 
              virtually every aspect of human  life and are, therefore, increasingly relied 
              upon to provide  continuous service.  These trends make the development of 
              general  but practical techniques for fault-tolerant multiprocessing a 
              necessity.    This project focuses on loosely-coupled parallel  computers. 
              These systems are ideally suited for ultra-reliable  applications  due to their
              built-in hardware redundancy that can  be used to achieve fault  tolerance. 
              The project has both basic  and applied research components.  The  basic
              research component studies new models and algorithms for the problems  of 
              multiprocessor system fault diagnosis and fault-tolerant routing.  The  applied
              research component involves the development of an  experimental testbed  for
              fault-tolerant multicomputer systems.  A  Transputer-based MIMD  multicomputer
              system provides the  testbed hardware and low-level operating  system. 
              Special-purpose  software is developed to provide a system-level  fault 
              tolerance framework, a fault simulator, and a data collection  tool for  the
              testbed.  The testbed allows experimental  evaluation of the  system-level
              fault tolerance mechanisms  developed in the basic research  component and is
              also made  available to other research groups working on  multiprocessor 
              system fault tolerance.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
