Title       : Current Sheet Equilibria and Disruptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9318548

Award Number: 9318548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Dusenbery dusenbery@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Harold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Grant R. Burkhart  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Space Science Institute
	      3100 Marine Street
	      Boulder, CO  803091058    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    In this proposal, we will address the physics of local and global 
              conversion of magnetic free energy to particle kinetic energy  during
              substorms.  An understanding of these processes will be  important implications
              to the global response of the magnetosphere  to solar wind variations.  For
              example, this could lead to an  understanding of the partitioning of substorm
              released free energy  between energy lost down the tail and work done on the
              inner  magnetosphere and ionosphere.  Also, such a theory of the global 
              release of stored magnetic energy during substorms could have  important
              implications for energy release phenomena in other space  physics and
              astrophysical contexts.  The difference between the  presently proposed study
              and similar studies of the past is that  our study will be based upon the
              current sheet catastrophe model  for local current disruption  c.f. Lui et al.,
              1988 .  This model  arises from time independent and time dependent
              calculations of 1D  current sheet configurations with a nonzero Ey and nonzero
              Bz   Burkhart et al., 1992a; Pritchett and Coroniti, 1993; Burkhart et  al.,
              1993 .  It was found in these calculations that under the  quasi-static
              evolution of the boundary conditions a force  imbalance, which we have called
              the current sheet catastrophe,  develops.  Subsequent time development leads to
              the turbulent  destruction of the current sheet over some time interval and the
               conversion of the associated magnetic field energy to particle  energy.  In
              the proposed research, we shall perform ID calculations for a  variety of
              initial conditions and boundary conditions to determine  the robustness and
              scaling of the signatures of the current sheet  catastrophe.  We shall study
              the radial expansion of current  disruption in a 2D, time-dependent, hybrid
              code, using, for the  first cut, x-independent initial equilibria.  We shall
              extend the  1D equilibrium calculations to include x-dependence and we shall 
              study the expansion of activity and the corresponding local  and  global
              conversion of magnetic field energy to plasma energy using  the x-dependent
              initial equilibria in a time-dependent, hybrid  simulation code.
