Title       : Instrumentation for High Resolution Capacitance Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9318259

Award Number: 9318259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Bookman rb@chroma.med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318259  Bookman  Support from the NSF is requested for the development of new 
              instrumentation to measure rapid changes in the capacitance  of biological
              membranes with high resolution. These  measurements of changes in capacitance
              will permit the  investigation of a number of biologically important 
              phenomena. The principal use of this instrument is likely to  be the detection
              of increases in cell surface area arising  from the fusion of one or more
              secretory vesicles with the  cell's plasma membrane during the process of
              exocytosis. The  study of secretory vesicle fusion events and the  quantitative
              characterization of the kinetics of secretion  made possible by this instrument
              can improve our  understanding of a fundamental process in cell biology. An 
              additional component of membrane capacitance arises from the  mobility of
              charged groups on proteins lying within the  electric field of the membrane.
              Recent results show that the  detection of such charge movements from
              voltage-dependent  ion channels as a capacitance signal can provide new 
              information about ion channel gating and its modification by  toxins. Thus it
              is expected that the proposed instrument can  help to establish new methods for
              studying conformational  changes of membrane proteins.        The project
              consists of the development of software to  implement a stimulus synthesizer,
              the development of  improved and user-tunable algorithms for measuring membrane
               capacitance, their implementation in software, development  of new analysis
              and data base tools for the data produced by  this instrument, and
              documentation of the instrument for  both users and programmers. The
              fundamental assumptions  behind this instrument include: 1) that the cell under
              study  can be represented by an equivalent electrical circuit, and  2) that a
              cell under voltage clamp can be driven by a  band-limited, arbitrary-frequency
              voltage stimulus and the  resulting current can be faithfully sampled with high
               resolution. Based on these assumptions, the inst rument will  be able to
              combine traditional transient membrane  depolarization with more spectrally
              complicated waveforms in  order to study processes activated by the cell's
              electrical  activity. This proposed instrument will attempt to resolve  changes
              in membrane capacitance that are on the order of  10-1s Farads and to resolve
              such changes occurring in a 1kHz  bandwidth.    This instrument is an example
              of a new class of  instrumentation made possible by developments in three areas
               of technology: 1) high speed general purpose  microprocessors, 2) fast, high
              resolution A/D and D/A  converters, and 3) special purpose digital signal
              processing  algorithms. A key feature of this project is the reliance  upon
              hardware components that already exist in most  laboratories, i.e., a personal
              computer and a data  acquisition interface. With the increasing power of the 
              scientist's data acquisition computer, new types of  measurements become
              possible solely by the addition of  software. With its implementation of
              appropriate algorithms,  the proposed instrument will provide information that
              is  unattainable with any commercial instrument and make  possible new types of
              experiments to study membrane  processes. A particular advantage is that the
              proposed  instrument can be widely and rapidly disseminated to the  research
              community electronically (i.e., through Internet))  at no additional capital
              cost to the nation's laboratories.
