Title       : The Role of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Regulation of Auxin Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1997  
File        : a9318250

Award Number: 9318250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria K. Muday muday@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      9318250  Muday  Recent evidence from this laboratory indicates that the
              regulatory  or inhibitor binding subunit of the auxin efflux carrier from 
              zucchini is associated with the actin cytoskeleton.  In recent  years, the role
              of the actin cytoskeleton has been shown to be more  than structural.  This
              filamentous network functions in  intracellular movement, polarity development,
              and integration of  cellular signals in a variety of organisms.  Although the
              role of  the actin cytoskeleton in the growth and development of higher  plants
              has so far received limited study, the role of actin  microfilaments in the
              environmentally controlled development of  polarity of the brown alga, Fucus,
              has been elegantly described.   It is likely that changes in the actin
              cytoskeleton play equally  important roles in the development and environmental
              responses of  flowering plants.  The plant cytoskeleton is uniquely suited to
              act  as the signal transducer from the membrane and extracellular  matrix,
              which sense external events, to the auxin transport stream  which allows
              response to these signals.    The experiments in this proposal are designed to
              test the new  hypothesis that polar auxin transport is regulated by
              interactions  of the regulatory protein of the auxin efflux carrier with the 
              cytoskeleton.  In order to understand the nature of the regulation  of auxin
              transport, the interaction between the inhibitor or  napthylphthalamic acid
              (NPA) binding protein of the auxin efflux  carrier and actin must be further
              delineated.  Using molecular  probes and basic biochemical approaches, the
              interactions between  the NPA binding protein and the actin cytoskeleton during
              polar  development will be examined.  These experiments will be performed 
              using Fucus as a simplified model system.      Although it has been more than
              one hundred years since Darwin  suggested the importance of polar hormone
              transport in plants, the  mechanisms by which auxin transport is regulated
              still remain  unclear.  The polarity a nd quantity of auxin transported are 
              controlled at the site of auxin efflux from cells.  A regulatory  protein has
              been identified which binds specific inhibitors of  auxin transport that act at
              the site of auxin efflux.   Characterization of this inhibitor binding protein,
              and the  mechanisms by which it controls auxin transport, is the critical 
              first step in the dissection of the regulatory pathway of auxin  transport. 
              ***
