Title       : Micromechanical Oscillators for Imaging Molecules by Magnetic Resonance Force
               Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9318002

Award Number: 9318002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $503818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Garbini garbini@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Sidles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318002  Garbini  A recent series of articles by Joe Garbini, John Sidles, and 
              Gary Drobny of the University of Washington has described a  new method for
              imaging individual molecules.  The proposed  imaging technology is based on a
              variation of the Stern-  Gerlach experiment, in which the linear particle 
              trajectories of the classic Stern-Gerlach experiment are  replaced by the
              "folded" trajectory of a micrometer-scale  mechanical oscillator.    In theory,
              this new approach to magnetic resonance imaging  combines the single-particle
              sensitivity of the Stern-  Gerlach experiment, the nondestructive 3D imaging
              capability  of magnetic resonance, and the subAngstrom spatial  resolution of
              scanning probe techniques.  It might therefore  serve as the basis of a
              technology for imaging biomolecular  structure.    More recently, Dan Rugar and
              Nino Yannoni of IBM Almaden  Laboratories have reported the first experimental
              detection  of magnetic resonance by force microscope means.  It  is  noteworthy
              that this first experiment achieved a room-  temperature sensitivity comparable
              to the best available  room-temperature inductive coils.    The broad objective
              of the proposed research is to develop  practical instruments for imaging
              individual biological  molecules in situ.  This imaging technology would be 
              nondestructive, fully three-dimensional, and would achieve  subAngstrom spatial
              resolution.    Published theoretical work indicates that successful  molecular
              imaging will require a force sensitivity of  approximately 10-19 N/Hz.  In
              comparison, the room-  temperature cantilever in the UW/IBM experiment 
              experimentally demonstrated a sensitivity of 10-15 N/Hz.  One goal of the
              proposed research is to attain a sensitivity  of 10-17N/Hz suing commercially
              available cantilevers.  On a  logarithmic scale, this represents progress
              half-way toward  the overall goal of developing a practical molecular imaging 
              technology.  As discussed in the body of this proposal, it  is reasonable to
              expect substantial impro vements in  sensitivity from:    (1) operating a t
              cryogenic temperatures (3-10K), instead of  room temperature,  (2) operating in
              a high vacuum, as opposed to a millitorr  vacuum,  (3) removing the gold
              metallic coating from the cantilever,  (4) baking surface contaminants off the
              cantilever,  (5) annealing the cantilever material to reduce dislocation 
              density.    A primary focus of our research is to do these experiments,  which
              will serve to establish a reliable and experimentally  validated understanding
              of noise mechanical oscillators.  This applied knowledge base will serve as the
              necessary  foundation for developing a practical biomolecular imaging 
              technology.    A more fundamental objective of our program is to establish  a
              reliable and experimentally validated understanding o  noise mechanisms in
              microscale mechanical oscillators.  This  applied knowledge base will serve as
              the necessary  foundation for developing a practical biomolecular imaging 
              technology.    There reasonable scientific grounds to expect that the next 
              generation o molecular biologist will routinely, quickly,  and easily obtain
              images showing the full three-dimensional  structure of the molecules they are
              studying, in situ, with  all their ligands, cross-links, and glycosylation in
              place.  This structural imaging capability, if it can be achieved,  will
              complement and enhance the value of existing  instruments for the rapid
              sequencing of genes and proteins,  by providing a structural context for
              interpretation of  sequence information.  Our hope is that this will 
              substantially accelerate the development of effective  treatments for presently
              intractable disorders.
