Title       : Gene Regulation of Dormancy in Avena fatua Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9318055

Award Number: 9318055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Foley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        9318055  Foley  The goal of this project is to elucidate the
              physiological basis for seed  dormancy and afterripening-induced breaking of
              dormancy.  The aim of this  project is to investigate the molecular basis for
              dormancy/breaking dormancy  using complementary molecular and genetic
              approaches.    Research on seed dormancy has been approached mainly by studying
              breaking of  dormancy which complicates interpretation by confounding breaking
              of dormancy  with germination.  The molecular and genetic approaches described
              herein are  distinct in that they focus primarily on maintenance of dormancy. 
              The  hypothesis to be tested states that specific genes or their products which
               are expressed in dormant embryos maintain seed in the dormant state.  The 
              expression of these genes is repressed during afterripening of dormant  embryos
              which facilitates subsequent germination.    Using in vivo and in vitro
              translation procedures, about 10 polypeptides have  been identified that occur
              in dormant but not afterripened embryos soon after  imbibition.  A
              dormancy-specific recombinant library has been developed and  sixteen putative
              dormancy-specific positive clones, whose expression is  modulated by
              afterripening, have been selected.  These clones will be further  characterized
              as to their general expression and nucleic acid sequence.  To  complement this
              approach it is proposed that molecular markers be identified  for major genes
              associated with the dormancy trait and simultaneously  evaluate/refine the
              tentative genetic model explaining dormancy in A. fatua.   In addition, to
              confirm any genetic modelbased on F2 populations derived for  bulk segregant
              analysis and to better understand the inheritance of dormancy  it is proposed
              that advanced-generation, F2-derived lines that vary in their  degree of
              dormancy be developed and genetically evaluated.    This molecular and genetic
              approach should provide significant information  toward understanding the
              physiological basis for this arrested stage of  plant  development.   ***
