Title       : LTREB: Sustainability of Soil Fertility in Reconstructed Tropical Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9318403

Award Number: 9318403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Ewel jewel@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9318403  Ewel     Maintenance of soil fertility is a major challenge to forest
              restoration and sustainable development in the humid tropics, where organic
              matter breaks down quickly, weathering of mineral matter is fast, and high
              rainfall leaches nutrients essential for plant growth.  Among the many factors
              that control soil fertility, two are likely to be of great importance: the
              number of plant life forms (trees, palms, shrubs, vines, etc.), and the
              frequency with which the plant community is harvested or disturbed.  Replicated
              plantations consisting of fast-growing tropical tree species (Hyeronima,
              Cordia,and Cedrela), established in 1991 at La Selva Biological Station in
              Costa Rica, will be used to study the controls that these two factors exert on
              soil fertility.  In some of the plantations, the trees are grown in
              monoculture; these will be harvested and replanted at intervals of 1, 4, and 16
              years.  Other plantations contain the trees plus plants of other life forms,
              such as palms and banana-like herbs.   Leaching is determined by characterizing
              the chemistry of soil water and by multiplying the concentrations of nutrients
              in the water by the rate of its downward movement.  Downward movement will be
              estimated from a water-balance model that incorporates evaporation from the
              soil and transpiration, which is derived from energy balance measurements
              (solar radiation, wind speed), the ability of the plants to pass water through
              their leaves (stomatal conductance), and the evaporative power of the air (from
              temperature and humidity measurements in the tree canopies).  Leaching rates
              are expected to diminish with increasing time intervals between rotations and
              with increasing diversity of plant life forms.   The effectiveness with which
              plant communities exploit soil resource is also important to sustaining soil
              fertility, and it, too, is likely to vary with biotic complexity and frequency
              of harvest or disturbance.  To assess this effectiveness, efficiencies of
              nutrient uptake, recovery, and us e will be obtained from measures of changes
              in nutrient storage and turnover in both plants and soil.  Coupled with the
              nutrient leaching data, comparison of these efficiencies among stands will
              provide ecologically sound guides to tropical forest restoration and the
              sustainable use of tropical soils.
