Title       : Hurricane Disturbance Regimens in Tropical and Temperate Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9318552

Award Number: 9318552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Emery R. Boose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Foster  Hurricanes have been one o the most important natural disturbance
              affecting coastal areas from northern South America through the Caribbean to
              eastern North America.  They regulate the hydrological, energy, and nutrient
              regimes of forest and coastal ecosystems, and act as a determinant of
              landscape-level patterning of temperate and tropical forests.  Recent studies
              suggest that human-induced global warming may lead to increases in the
              frequency, intensity, and latitudinal extent  of hurricanes.  If this happens,
              the impacts on human life and property and on coastal ecosystems could be
              dramatic.    To improve our understanding of the ecological impacts of
              hurricanes, we have developed an integrative approach.  A simple meteorological
              model (HURRECON) reconstructs wind conditions during a hurricane, a simple
              topographic exposure model (EXPOS) identifies areas exposed to peak winds on a
              landscape scale, and actual forest damage is assessed through aerial
              photographs, archival records, and field measurements.  This approach has been
              validated in detailed studies of Hurricane Hugo in Puerto Rico and the 1938 New
              England Hurricane.    We will use this approach to reconstruct characteristics
              of hurricanes (1600 to present) that have affected Puerto Rico and New England.
               These two regions represent tropical and temperate forests subject to
              recurring hurricanes, and are contrasts in climate, topography, and vegetation.
               At the continental scale w will examine the differences between tropical and
              temperate hurricanes and their impacts on forest.  At the regional scale we
              will define long-term coastal to inland gradients in hurricane frequency and
              intensity.  At the landscape scale we will analyze spatial patterns of exposure
              to hurricane winds created by local topography at the Luquillo and Harvard
              Forest LTER sites.  Regional results will be applicable to other research sites
              throughout Puerto Rico and New England.    The proposed study represents the
              first effort to develop a comprehensive unde rstanding of the disturbance
              regime imposed in forest ecosystems by hurricanes.  The project will also yield
              general models of hurricane meteorology and landscape exposure that will be
              applicable to other regions, and may be used to explore the potential impacts
              of increased hurricane activity under conditions of global change.
