Title       : Equipment for Upgrading the Optical Sectioning Microscope Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9318071

Award Number: 9318071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46701              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn G. Miller miller@biodec.wust.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah C. Elgin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. McNally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ursula W. Goodenough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this application, we propose to upgrade the existing  Department of Biology
              Optical Sectioning Microscope (OSM)  Facility.  We are requesting several
              pieces of equipment  that will facilitate the use of the instrument and provide
               new capabilities that will enhance the facility.  The OSM  uses the
              computational methods of out-of-focus light removal  to provide high resolution
              3-D images of both living and  fixed specimens.  Its main advantage over
              confocal  microscopy is that is uses far lower levels of illumination  to
              generate high quality images, thereby minimizing the  damage to living
              specimens.  Our request for upgrading the  facility has four main components. 
              First, we wish to add  confocal and partially confocal optics to the OSM, so
              that  depending on the sensitivity of the specimen, we may choose  to apply
              computational methods to either non-confocal,  partially confocal or fully
              confocal images.  Second, we  propose to add the capability for producing video
              output so  that we have a means to store many movies of 3-D time-lapse 
              sequences for our own analysis, and also a means to record  representative
              movies for presentation to seminar audiences.  Third, we request improvements
              that will facilitate the  storage, retrieval and hard copy output of the
              massive data  sets that we work with, so that the data are more easily 
              accessible.  Fourth, we seek to add the capability for  microinjection to the
              OSM, so that several different sorts  of in vivo injection experiments can be
              performed  expeditiously,  The main purpose of all of these  enhancements is to
              make the instrument more accessible to  the users and to remedy current
              shortcomings in the  facility.  With the addition of these components, our OSM 
              facility will remain on the forefront of biological imaging  and continue to
              facilitate our research for many years to  come.
