Title       : Telomere Structure and Function in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9318918

Award Number: 9318918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Lustig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318918  Lustig  The long-term goal of this research is to understand the 
              protein-DNA interactions that confer the unique structural,  replication and
              functional properties of telomeres.  RAP1 is the  first eukaryotic telomere
              binding protein amenable to both genetic  and molecular analysis.  A wide array
              of telomere-related  phenotypes have been observed in rap1 mutant strains of
              the yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae, including loss of telomere size control 
              and stability, as well as the altered expression of telomere-    adjacent
              genes.  The genetic and molecular analysis of these rap1  mutant strains
              addresses three critical questions.  First, what is  the nature of  binding
              protein interactions that influence telomere  position effects, size control
              and stability? Second, what is the  role of telomere structure in regulating
              long range position  effects and telomere size control? Finally, what other
              factors  associate with the telomere to maintain its structure and function? 
              This project addresses these questions with three specific  interrelated aims. 
              The first aim is to evaluate the role of RAP1  in maintaining the fidelity of
              telomere addition or repair.  The  second aim is to investigate the domains of
              RAP1 important in  telomere function.   The third aim is to identify and
              characterize  extragenic suppressors of rap1 nonsense and missense alleles.   
              %%%  Telomeres, the unique protein-DNA structures present at  the termini of
              linear eukaryotic chromosomes, are essential for  maintaining chromosome
              stability and structure.  First, telomeres  serves as "caps" to protect
              chromosomes against degradation and  rearrangement.  Second, telomeric DNA
              serves as substrate for a  unique non-DNA templated mechanism of replication
              that prevents the  loss of terminal (and ultimately essential) sequences. 
              Third,  telomeres have long range effects on the transcription,  replication,
              and chromatin structures of adjacent genes and  sequences.  The functional
              importance of telomeres is underscored  by ev idence linking loss of telomeric
              sequences to cellular  senescence, tumor formation , and oncogenesis.  Hence,
              an  understanding of the proteins that interact with telomeric DNA is  of
              general importance. This project is a genetic and molecular  analysis of such a
              protein, designated RAP1, from the yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  ***
