Title       : Video-Imaging Technique for an Experimental Analysis of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1994      
File        : a9318217

Award Number: 9318217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Astrid Kodric-Brown kodric@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Nicoletto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Understanding how animals choose mates is both a theoretical and   a
              methodological challenge.  Many studies on diverse organisms   have shown that
              females choose mates and that this choice is   based on variation among males
              in physical and behavioral traits.    However, little is known about how the
              choice is made and how it   is affected by genetic and environmental factmrs.  
               Drs. Kodric-Brown and Nicoletto will develop and apply a video-  imaging
              technique that will allow assessment of the relative   importance of courtship
              displays and color patterns of male   guppies in attracting females. 
              Advantages of using such an   imaging technique are:  (a) precise control of
              male color   patterns and courtship behavior, (b) high degree of  
              repeatability, because the same male images are presented to   females, (c)
              ability to manipulate individual behavioral and   morphological components
              independently of each other and in   combination, which will allow assessment
              of their relative   importance in female choice, and (d) ability to present
              exactly   the same choices to different females in the population or to the  
              same female at different stages of her life or experience.    The research
              should yield answers to such important questions as:    (a) How much variation
              is there in mate preferences among females   within and between populations? 
              (b) How consistent are the   preferences of individuals. and do they change
              with age or   experience?  (c) How do different traits combine to produce  
              attractive courtship signals?  Results of this project will also   be relevant
              to other areas of behavior, such as the use of   signals in communication
              systems.
