Title       : LTREB: Long-Term Studies of a Gypsy Moth-Impacted Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9318073

Award Number: 9318073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack C. Schultz ujq@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9318073  Schultz    It has been established that oaks, like other tree species,
              experience altered leaf quality as a consequence of being attacked by gypsy
              moth (GM) caterpillars.  These changes have at least two important effects on
              the GM: they reduce fecundity and decrease mortality due to disease.  Either
              effect could influence population dynamics of GM (and other insects), but
              because their influences appear to be opposite, it is difficult to determine
              what the net effect of tree responses might be.  No study of
              defoliation-induced changes in leaf quality has ever extended beyond 2 or 3
              years.  Since GM outbreaks recur every 9 or 10 years, these short-term studies
              can tell us little about the importance of tree responses to the overall
              pattern of population fluctuation.  It is critical to establish the period over
              which leaf quality is altered, and how long changes last after defoliation has
              declined if we are to understand the role of the tree.  This cannot be done
              with short-term studies.  GM outbreaks must also alter the quality and quantity
              of leaves available to other herbivores in the same forest.  Documented changes
              in leaf chemistry and the dramatic reduction in leaf standing crop during an
              outbreak must produce interactions - probably negative, or competitive -
              between the GM and other species.  For the past 20 years, the ecological
              literature has been dominated by the view that such food-mediated interactions
              among herbivorous insects were unlikely.  More recently, researchers have begun
              to appreciate the subtle, but significant, impact one herbivore may have
              another by altering host plant quality.  It i s obvious that outbreaks provide
              an opportunity to quantify the impact of one herbivore (e.g., the GM) on other,
              yet this has not been done; there has never been a "before, during, and after"
              study of this type.    This project addresses the first 5 years of a long-term
              (10-20 years) research program aimed at addressing these two major ecological
              problems.  In a series of specific studies of defoliation-induced changes in
              oak leaf chemistry at a typical gypsy moth-impacted site in central
              Pennsylvania, three years of post-outbreak data on gypsy moth-impacted site in
              central Pennsylvania, three years of post-outbreak data on gypsy moth
              populations and oak leaf traits. have been accumulated.  The traits of greatest
              importance are phenolics, especially hydrolyzable tannins, and oxidative
              capacity (e.g., phenoloxidase and peroxidase enzyme activity).  These vary
              dramatically among trees, influence the gypsy moth and its diseases, and at
              least the phenolic constituents are altered by defoliation.  Critical leaf
              traits of a large sample of 3 oak species will be monitored through two GM
              outbreaks, establishing the pattern of tree response in relation to measured
              insect population densities and defoliation levels.  The relationship between
              leaf traits and virus prevalence in GM populations will be assessed by tracking
              infection levels in relation to insect density, defoliation, and tree leaf
              traits.  At the same time, the possible impact of GM populations on other
              herbivorous insect will be investigated, by censuring those coexisting on the
              focal oaks and one non-host, red maple.  Densities of non-GM herbivores will be
              related statistically to GM density,  defoliation levels, and tree leaf traits.
               Although a long-term monitoring effort is the core of this program, the
              data-gathering is designed to test specific hypotheses right from the start and
              throughout the study.  BY undertaking this long term program, for the first
              time it will be determined whether induced plant responses can be ecologically
              mea ningful, and whether negative interactions among herbivorous insects occur
              or are common in forested systems.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           K 
               M                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               K   M                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 F           
                                                                             M         M    
              ?    Dutch (scalable)  R Symbol  " Swiss (scalable)  1 Courier                 
                             "             h     _   _             H             ;       
              Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
