Title       : Interrelationships of Major Gastropod Clades: Mathildidae and the 'Lower
               Heterobranchs' (Mollusca)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9318231

Award Number: 9318231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudiger Bieler bieler@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318231  BIELER  Gastropods (snails and slugs) are the largest group of
              mollusks, which in turn are only outnumbered by arthropods (insects, crabs,
              etc.) in living species diversity.  Gastropods play important roles as food
              items (escargot, abolone, conch, etc.) as crop pests, as vectors for human and
              farm animal diseases (schistosoma, flukes), and as important elements of the
              reef building community in the world's oceans.  However, the interrelationships
              of the various groups of snails have remained unclear.  The present study
              concentrates on a group of marine gastropods, the family Mathildidae.  Better
              biological knowledge of this morphologically "intermediate" group may provide
              insight into how the major snail groups (e.g. land snails and sea slugs) are
              related to one another.  This knowledge, in turn, will provide key information
              for a variety of scientific and applied fields.  For instance, close
              relationship of certain groups may suggest the presence of similar biochemical
              properties of these organisms, a knowledge that can be useful in the search for
              "new" biochemical components in drug research.  The project will involve field
              collecting, studies of available material of living and fossil species in
              museum collections, anatomical studies, histology, scanning electron
              microscopy, and computer-assisted modelling of three dimensional morphologies. 
              %%%  This study will clarify higher level relationships among gastropods
              (snails, slugs, etc.).  Such informnation could be of utility in identifying
              relatives of organisms found to have chemicals of potential pharmaceutical
              importance.  ***
