Title       : Origin and Evolution of Nuclear pre-mRNA Introns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9318858

Award Number: 9318858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Palmer jpalmer@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Palmer  MCB-9318858  Abstract  An attempt to provide a more rationale resolution
              to the ongoing  controversy of whether introns appeared early or late as a part
              of  the structure of genes will be made. We will develop a  comprehensive,
              computerized intron database. We will test five key  predictions of both
              theories by determining in diverse eukaryotes  the intron structure of the gene
              triphophate isomerase (TPI), the  gene which has most often been utilized in
              this controversy. We  will also use the database to evaluate the temporal
              dynamics of  intron gain and loss among the major groups of erkaryotes and, 
              finally, we will examine recent cases of the apparent insertion or  sliding of
              introns in order to gain insight into possible  mechanisms.  %%%  Introns -
              noncoding sequences that interrupt genes and which are  removed at the RNA
              level via RNA splicing - are the hallmarks of  many eukaryotic protein genes. 
              Nowhere is this more true than in  humans and other vertebrates, where they
              occupy 80-90% of a gene's  length and number nearly a million.  Ever since
              their discovery 16  years ago (for which a Nobel Prize was awarded this year),
              a  fundamental controversy has raged concerning the evolutionary  origin and
              importance of introns.  In order to directly address,  and attempt to resolve,
              this long-standing controversy, we will  develop a comprehensive, computerized
              intron database and use it to  assess whether the distribution of introns
              across eukaryotes best  fits the tenets of the competing "introns-early" or
              "introns-late"  theories.  In addition, we will test five key predictions of
              these  two theories by determining, in various diverse eukaryotes, the  intron
              structure of the gene TPI that has figured most prominently  in this
              controversy.  We will also move beyond this debate by using  the intron
              database to evaluate the temporal dynamics of intron  gain and loss among the
              major groups of eukaryotic, especially  animals, plants and fungi.  Preliminary
              analyses suggest a highly  episodi c pattern, which raises striking mechanistic
              and selective  questions.  Finally, we will examine especially recent cases of
              the  apparent insertion or sliding of introns in order to understand how  these
              events occur.  ***
