Title       : Wavelength Converting and Wavelength Routing for High- Efficiency
               Almost-All-Optical Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9318497

Award Number: 9318497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $729540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor O. Li vli@irving.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan E. Willner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Daniel Dapkus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1510,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9318497  Li       The rapid development of fiber-optic technology has made 
              high-speed network services possible.  However, the current gap  between the
              bandwidth of the standardized optical networks and the  theoretical limit of
              optical fiber bandwidth suggests that a great  deal of research remains before
              an effective optical network can be  deployed.  The objective of this research
              is to explore the  possible architectures, routing protocols, and system and
              device  implementations for the metropolitan-area or wide-area 
              wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) all-optical networks.  Such  a wide-area
              network will present certain challenges which are not  found in a local-area
              network.  The researchers will explore  wavelength-division-multiplexing as the
              fundamental shifting  technology for all-optical networks due to its potential
              impact for  significant capacity upgrades through parallel transmissions on an 
              optical fiber.  Work will done to enhance dramatically the  efficiency and
              throughput of such a WDM all-optical network by  introducing the novel concept
              of wavelength converting (or  wavelength shifting) and by developing unique
              wavelength routing  schemes which consider new models and requirements of
              all-optical  networks.  The throughput and utilization of WDM networks is 
              expected to be at least doubled under the expected traffic loads.   Moreover,
              incurred disruptions are expected to be reduced by 2  orders of magnitude. 
              This will advance the art of previously  conceived wavelength-continuous WDM
              networks.   A close  collaboration will be formed between experts in the
              networks,  systems, and device areas of photonics.  ***
