Title       : Dissertation Research: Maya Wetlands Project: Ecology and Subsistence in
               Prehispanic Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1993  
File        : a9318930

Award Number: 9318930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11976              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Patrick Culbert tpc@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9318930  Culbert    Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Culbert, Mr. Jeffrey
              Baker will  collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct 
              geoarchaeological research in lowland Belize. Mr. Baker wishes to  reconstruct
              agricultural practices of prehistoric Mayan peoples. In  particular he wants to
              understand cultivation techniques which were  practiced in lowland areas or
              "bajos" which are waterlogged for  portions of the year. He will employ both
              geological and ecological  techniques to study the nature of bajo soils, their
              chemistry and  their water retention characteristics. He will study the
              vegetation  of a number of bajo types to understand the relationship between 
              soil, water and vegetation. Finally he will also conduct  archaeological
              excavation to determine whether fields underwent  human modification and how
              Mayan peoples used them.    Archaeological evidence demonstrates that ancient
              Mayan peoples  were able to farm low-lying tropical areas and produce enough
              food  to support large populations. While many archaeologists believe  that
              this was accomplished through a system of raised fields and  that landscape was
              extensively modified, others disagree.  Unfortunately the basic geological and
              ecological data necessary to  address this question does not exist. The
              research which Mr. Baker  will conduct should help to remedy this problem.   
              This project is important for several reasons. Ancient Mayan  peoples thrived
              in regions which today support only small  populations. Prehistoric peoples had
              developed agricultural  techniques which, if reconstructed could have direct
              practical  benefit. The project will also further the development of an 
              extremely promising young scientist.  ***
