Title       : Biotechnolgy Facility for Analytical Ultracentrifugation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9318373

Award Number: 9318373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2233001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Emory H. Braswell emory.braswell@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd M. Schuster  (Principal Investigator former)
              David A. Yphantis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Analytical Ultracentrifugation facility will be heavily  involved in the
              development and the application of  methodology, hardware and software for
              advanced analytical  ultracentrifugation.  Optical and data acquisition system 
              improvements will be applied to both absorption and  interference optics of the
              new XL-A centrifuge.  These  innovations will have direct application to
              increasing the  scope and power of this new second-generation centrifuge. 
              Applications will deal largely with equilibrium  sedimentation studies of
              macromolecular interactions with  particular emphasis on hetero-association. 
              This will also  involve the development of software for data analysis as  well
              as research strategies to optimize such studies.  New  technical developments
              will be engineered and applied to  increase the accuracy and efficiency of
              velocity  sedimentation measurements, a technique which did not  receive high
              priority under the previous grant.    These resources have been made available
              to the scientific  community over the past three and a half years.  The 
              Facility has participated in or is still involved with 31  research projects
              (17 completed) involving over 100  combinations of macromolecular samples and
              experimental  conditions.  During the next five years this collaboration  with
              academic and industrial researchers and the publication  of the results of such
              research will continue to be the  central focus of the Facility.    The
              Facility also assists researchers to make use of the  newly developed
              technology in their own laboratories by  upgrading their instrumentation and
              computational methods.  This transfer is promoted by presentations at national 
              meetings and conferences, and by workshops held at the  Facility for
              investigators, students, and technicians.  This  training, along with the
              distribution of software and of the  schematics and construction diagrams for
              hardware, will  constitute the heart of the technology-transfer mission of  the
              Facility.
