Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of a Flexible Flatjack for Quantitative Evaluation of
               Masonry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9318470

Award Number: 9318470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Schuller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Atkinson-Noland Assoc Inc
	      2619 Spruce Street
	      Boulder, CO  803023808    303/444-3620

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9318740  Schuller     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project is designed to develop a reliable and inexpensive method for obtaining
              insitu measurements of the state of compressive stresses and deformation
              properties of masonry buildings.  Such measurements are essential elements in
              the evaluation of the structural integrity of existing masonry buildings. 
              Currently these measurements are made using flatjacks (bladders using thin
              metal sheets welded together at the edges and with inlet and outlet ports). 
              Present flatjack technology has some serious limitations which reduce the
              accuracy of measurements, limit the types of masonry that can be evaluated and
              may result in visual damage to the structure.  Phase I research surveyed
              candidate materials that could be used to fabricate a flexible flatjack,
              designed and fabricated prototypes of flexible flatjacks, and tested the
              prototypes for applicability to masonry walls.  In Phase II, prototype designs
              will be further developed to improve performance, increase service life and
              decrease manufacturing costs.  Incorporation of deformation sensors will be
              accomplished and full scale evaluations will also be conducted. 
              Recommendations for modifying existing testing standards, both domestic and
              foreign, will also  be developed as part of the Phase II effort.   The need for
              a new flatjack technology is driven by requirements to rehabilitate existing
              masonry structures to meet new, more stringent  seismic loadings and for use in
              renovating such structures for changing uses.  The large number of existing
              masonry buildings in the U. S. and the rest of the world and the demonstrated
              need for evaluation as a basis for retrofit portend a high level of use for a
              successful new flatjack technology.    ***
