Title       : Cell Fusion Organelles in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1997     
File        : a9318708

Award Number: 9318708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Snell snell03@utsw.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318708  Snell    Dr. Snell proposes to study cell fusion in the biflagellated
              alga, Chlamydomonas.  During the mating reaction of this unicellular organism,
              gametes of opposite mating types initially adhere to each other via adhesion
              molecules, agglutinins, on their flagella.  Adhesion and fusion of the cell
              bodies of the two interacting gametes occur at the tips of protuberances termed
              mating structures, whose activation at the apical ends of the cell bodies is
              induced by signals generated during the initial flagellar adhesion.  The
              activated mt minus mating structure is a dome-shaped, apical swelling of the
              plasma membrane, whereas the activated mt plus mating structure is a
              microvillus-like, actin-filled tubule called the fertilization tubule, that
              extends several microns from the surface of the mt plus gamete.  Dr. Snell will
              use an integrated approach to identify and characterize the molecules on these
              fusion organelles that bring about their adhesion and fusion.  He will isolate
              mt plus fertilization tubules and apply biochemical and immunological methods
              to identify the membrane proteins that are responsible for adhesion/fusion with
              the tip of the mt minus mating structure.  These experiments will be
              complemented by both biochemical and molecular genetic studies on mutants with
              non-adhesive fertilization tubules, including new fusion-defective mt plus
              mutants generated in his laboratory by insertional mutagenesis.  Dr. Snell will
              clone the genes that were tagged by the inserted DNA and will study their role
              in cell fusion.  The distinctive properties of these fusion organelles in
              Chlamydomonas, along with excit ing new developments in molecular methods for
              studying this organism, offer a unique possibility for learning more about the
              molecular and chemical mechanisms underlying fusion of cellular membranes.  ***
                   (                                                                         
                    4                                              (                         
                                                   9318708  Snell    Dr. Snell proposes to
              study cell fusion in the biflagellated alga, Chlamydomonas.  During the mating
              reaction                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        !         !          
                 F                             <             <                               
               (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                 "     
                     h      C e#                           +        Dana Brigham Dana Brigham
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
