Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Cell-Signaling in Development in
               Caenorhabditis Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9318709

Award Number: 9318709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor M. Maine emmaine@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318709  Maine    The long range goal of this proposal is to elucidate the 
              molecular basis of regulatory cell signaling during  development of
              multicellular organisms. In particular this  proposal investigates the
              mechanisms underlying two such  regulatory interactions in the nematode,
              Caenorhabditis  elegans: induction of mitosis in the germ line and induction 
              of the anterior pharynx in the early embryo. Although these  two cell signaling
              processes occur in different tissues and  at different times in development,
              they share at least one  common component: the glp-1 gene.  Extensive genetic, 
              molecular, and immunocytochemical studies suggest that glp-1  acts as a signal
              receptor in each of these induced tissues.  Cell signaling pathways mediated by
              glp-1 related receptors  play a general role in metazoan development and growth
               control: Drosophila and C. elegans homologs mediate  regulatory cell signaling
              during development and vertebrate  homologs are proto-oncogenes. Relatively
              little is known  about the intercellular signaling pathways mediated by glp-1 
              and related receptors. As a means of identifying other  components of the glp-1
              mediated pathway, extragenic  suppressors and enhancers of glp-1 mutation were
              generated.  Suppressors and enhancers of glp-1 are likely to be  mutations in
              other genes in the intercellular signaling  pathway mediated by glp-1. This
              proposal focuses on two  genes identified as recessive suppressors, sog-1 and
              sog-10,  and on a set of recessive enhancer (ego) mutations.  Genetic  and
              molecular studies that analyze the roles of these  suppressor and enhancer
              genes in germline and embryonic cell-  cell interactions are proposed. 1) 
              sog-1  has been well  characterized genetically; it may be a member of a
              redundant  gene family. Here, a molecular analysis is outlined that  will
              describe the sog-1 product and its expression and  localization patterns during
              development. 2) A preliminary  genetic and phenotypic analysis of sog-10 has
              been  completed; here, a more det ailed genetic analysis is  proposed that will
              describe the general role of sog-10 in  development. A subsequent molecular
              analysis will describe  the gene product and its expression and localization 
              patterns during development. 3) A limited genetic analysis  of a set of ego
              mutations will be done to identify which ego  gene is most likely to encode a
              component of the glp-1  mediated intercellular signaling pathway. This
              particular  ego gene will be genetically analyzed to determine its role  in
              germline proliferation and other aspects of development.  ***
