Title       : Analysis of Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions Using Phosphor Imaging Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9318111

Award Number: 9318111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68575              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Ares ares@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry F. Noller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Peck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. Puglisi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Silverthorne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318111  Ares  Nucleic acid-protein interactions are critical to the  correct
              expression and retrieval of genetic information.  Selective transcription of
              genes requires selective  interactions between protein and DNA. Construction of
              a  messenger RNA containing the protein coding information of  eukaryotic genes
              requires the recognition and removal of  introns and RNA splicing, a process
              dependent on an  elaborate set of RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions. The 
              translation of messenger RNA into protein is carried out by  a machinery made
              of RNA and protein as well, requiring  another elaborate set of RNA-RNA and
              RNA-protein  interactions. Control of the level of mRNA is a means by  which
              the expression of genes is regulated, often governed  by RNA structural
              elements in the mRNA. Detailed knowledge  of how and when these DNA-protein,
              RNA-protein, and RNA-RNA  interactions are established, maintained and disolved
              will  be essential for understanding the expression of genetic  information.   
              A set of powerful "footprinting" or "structure probing"  techniques for
              measuring the environments of nucleotides  along a nucleic acid chain is well
              developed and is in  general use among students of nucleic acid structure and 
              function. These approaches rely on detecting differences in  accessibility of
              the nucleic acid under study to some probe  (a chemical or nuclease), capable
              of reacting with nucleic  acid. The positions of reaction are mapped on the
              chain  using a variety of techniques, all of which require  radioactive
              labeling of the chain either directly or  indirectly. The radioactive products
              are separated by size  on a gel and the sites of reaction are calculated from
              the  size of radioactive products. The amount of reaction at a  particular site
              can be determined by the amout of  radioactive material present in products of
              a particular  size. For example, a protein that binds to a specific site  on a
              nucleic acid chain will protect the chain from attack  by the probe. After
              separation and com parison of bound  andunbound nucleic acid, gel bands
              representing protected  sites will contain less label. The technical
              limitations of  this general approach are two fold. First, it is often 
              difficult to isolate sufficient amounts of functionally  relevant
              protein-nucleic acid complexes to obtain detectable  signals, and second, some
              interactions are sufficiently  subtle that protection from probes, though
              meaningful, may  be only partial, and require careful quantitation of signal. 
              Both of these limitations arise from a single cause: the  requirement for
              exposure of radioactive gels to photographic  film for detection and
              quantitation of radioactive signal.  These limitations can be skirted by the
              use of a new  technology, storage phosphor imaging, rather than 
              autoradiography.    Phosphor imaging involves exposure of the footprinting gel 
              to a special storage phosphor screen, on which a compound  sensitive to
              radiation is bound. The compound is converted  by absorption of a radioactive
              particle. The screen is then  inserted into a laser scanning device that
              determines the  amount of converted compound present at every coordinate on 
              the screen.  This data is used to build a computer file that  expresses the
              amount of radiactive material at each position  as an image using a grey scale
              or color. The investigator  can inspect the image on a monitor and with the
              image  analysis software, analyze the data quantitatively. This  technique is
              orders of magnitude more sensitive than  autoradiography allowing better
              detection of signal, and  unlike photographic film the response of the phosphor
              to  radiation is linear, allowing accurate quantitation.    This proposal aims
              for a material extension of our  understanding of the function of nucleic
              acid-protein  complexes and RNA-RNA interactions through the analysis of 
              available footprinting data by the purchase and use of  phosphor imaging
              technology. The Noller and Puglisi groups  will use the device in their studies
              of ribosome structure  and func tion in the process of translation. The Ares
              group  will use it in their studies of the role of small nuclear  RNAs in
              spliceosome assembly and pre-messenger RNA splicing.  The Peck group will
              require this technology for  understanding the assembly and function of RNA
              polymerase  111 transcription complexes, and the Silverthorne group will  use
              it to study the role of mRNA structure in the regulation  of mRNA stability.
