Title       : Peroxisomes: Endosymbiotic Organelles without a Genome?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9318594

Award Number: 9318594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Palmer jpalmer@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318594  PALMER   The peroxisome is a small, membrane-bound organelle found in
              the cells of all animals and other higher organisms.  Peroxisomes lack a genome
              of their own, but a number of important biochemical reactions and enzymes
              (coded for by nuclear genes) occur within the peroxisome, and a large number of
              human diseases, mostly lethal, are caused by defects in peroxisomal function. 
              Although much is known about the function of the peroxisome, we know nothing
              about its origin.  This project seeks to remedy this situation by gathering
              evidence to test the two competing hypotheses for the origin of the peroxisome:
              1) that it arose by internal compartmentation of a subset of metabolic enzymes,
              or 2) that, like chloroplasts and mitochondria, it arose endosymbiotically,
              i.e. by the permanent uptake of a bacterium (which turned into the peroxisome)
              by a primitive eukaryotic cell.  In preliminary studies, we have identified
              four peroxisomal proteins that show provocatively high levels of similarity to
              bacterial homologs, and which thus provide suggestive evidence in support of
              hypothesis #2.  To provide a rigorous test of the endosymbiotic hypothesis of
              peroxisomal origins, we will sequence and phylogenetically analyze the genes
              for each of these four proteins from about 20 diverse bacteria and from several
              representative eukaryotes.  In addition, we will sequence several other genes,
              such as those encoding for the heat shock proteins, as they become available to
              this project.  In the absence of a peroxisomal genome, it is imperative that
              congruent data be sought for as many different peroxisomal proteins as
              possible.  The strongest answer to the question "Is the peroxisome an
              endosymbiont?" will come if multiple nuclear genes for peroxisomal proteins all
              trace back to the same place within a bacterial phylogenetic tree, a place
              distinct from that of both mitochondria and plastids.  If such an answer is
              forthcoming, it would provide a rationale for reassessing the possibility that
              a residual perox isomal genome might still lurk in some eukaryotes.   This
              project is being jointly funded by the Systematic and Population Biology
              programs of the Division of Environmental Biology (DEB) and the Metabolic
              Biochemistry program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
              (MCB).  %%%   Peroxisomes are small cellular organelles that are very important
              to the metabolism and effective functioning of cells.  Several lethal human
              diseases are attributed to defects in peroxisomal functioning.  This study will
              investigate the origin of these important organelles.  ***
