Title       : Systematics and Evolution of Cenococcum Geophilum Fr.: An Old Asexual Lineage?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1994      
File        : a9318119

Award Number: 9318119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Taylor jtaylor@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318119  Taylor       Molecular methods of DNA analysis, including nucleotide 
              sequencing and restriction enzyme mapping, are revolutionizing the  study of
              fungal evolution and taxonomy.  The most problematic  groups of fungi, the
              asexual forms that do not undergo meiosis and  do not form spores, are
              especially troublesome because it is  morphological features of the
              spore-bearing structures that have  traditionally served as characters for
              taxonomic identification and  classification.  Molecular data provide a
              solution to the dilemma.   Postdoctoral associate Dr. Karen LoBuglio under the
              guidance of Dr.  John Taylor at University of California-Berkeley is using
              modern  molecular procedures in a novel attack on this problem, emphasizing 
              the well-known mycorrhizal fungus Cenococcum geophilum, which has  been found
              throughout the world but never with spores.  Data from  proteins and from
              nuclear ribosomal DNA will help determine the  closest living phylogenetic
              relatives of this fungus in the  ascomycete lineage; under molecular clock
              assumptions, these data  will also suggest the time of origin of the taxon. 
              Molecular data  will also indicate the extent of genetic variation within local
              and  regional populations of the fungus, and thereby test whether  cryptic
              cellular processes of recombination might generate  variation in what has been
              considered an asexual, dead-end mode of  life.       New DNA-based data from a
              widespread but asexual mycorrhizal  fungus will help answer two important
              questions: the proper  classification and phylogenetic position of Cenococcum
              geophilum  and the possibility that asexual taxa of fungi are able to generate 
              genetic variability, perhaps through cryptic cellular processes of 
              recombination.
