Title       : Immunological Mechanisms of Nutritional-Induced Regulation of Offspring Survival
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9318066

Award Number: 9318066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Lochmiller rllzool@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318066  Lochmiller    Wild animal populations are known to fluctuate in size
              from  season to season and year to year. Scientists have offered  many
              explanations for such fluctuations, and most,  ultimately have attributed these
              fluctuations to individuals  in populations responding to environmental factors
              via  altered mortality and reproduction. Evidence suggests that  survival of
              newborns may be the single most important  mechanism influencing overall
              reproductive success and size  of plant-eating animal populations.
              Unfortunately,  difficulties associated with mortality in the wild makes  this
              one of the most poorly understood aspects of  animal  ecology. Studies in the
              PI's laboratory on the development  of immunity in wild cotton rats (Sigmodon
              hispidus) will  provide a physiological approach to the problem;  specifically,
              concentrating on immunological mechanisms by  which the environment influences
              survival. Initial studies  have implicated involvement of the immune system  in
               determining the chances of survival in newborn plant-eating  animals as a
              result of protein malnutrition of their mothers  during pregnancy or during
              early juvenile life. This study  will examine that proposed mechanism in two
              plant-eating  rodents whose populations are known to fluctuate either 
              erratically (cotton rats) or cyclically (prairie vole,  Microtus ochrogaster)
              in numbers from year to year, using a  series of controlled laboratory feeding
              trials and  monitoring individuals from low and high density populations  in
              the wild. The ability of the immune system to develop and  provide protection
              against disease agents in newborn animals  when their mothers are confronted
              with diets deficient in  protein during pregnancy and lactation will be
              examined, as  well if size of populations influences immunity in the wild.  ***
