Title       : Tissue-Specific Expression and Subcellular Localization of Maize
               Beta-Glucosidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9318134

Award Number: 9318134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Asim Esen aevatan@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9318134  Esen  A cDNA library was constructed in a bacteriophage lambda
              vector,  positive clones selected, and the entire sequence of a Beta- 
              glucosidase allele determined.  To identify the conserved and  variable regions
              of the maize Beta-glucosidase gene and its protein  product, sequences of the
              sorghum and teosinte genes will be  determined by polymerase chain reaction
              based methods and compared  to that of maize.  The hydroxamic acid glucoside
              DIMBOA-glucoside  was purified and shown to be the major natural substrate of
              maize  Beta-glucosidase.  Other hydroxamic acid glucosides and natural 
              substrates will be identified by extracting Beta-glycosides from  maize
              tissues.  They will be fractionated and tested for substances  that
              competitively inhibit the hydrolysis of artificial substrates  (e.g.,
              p-nitrophenol-Beta-glucopyranoside) by maize Beta-  glucosidase and yield
              glucose and an aglycone when incubated with  the enzyme.  The inhibitory
              glucosides and glycosides (i.e.,  putative substrates) will be purified by
              chromatography and  identified by NMR.  The hydrolysis of the identified
              natural  substrates will be studied by appropriate spectrophotometric and 
              chromatographic assays, and their kinetic constants (e.g., Km,  Vmax, Vmax/Km)
              will be determined.  Temporal and spatial occurrence  of DIMBOA-glucoside and
              other hydroxamic acid glucosides will be  studied.  The glucosides will be
              extracted from different organs  and plant parts sampled during ontogeny.  The
              extracts will be  analyzed for quantitative and qualitative changes in the 
              distribution of hydroxamic acid glucosides.  These changes will be  related to
              those of the enzyme in the same organs and parts.  In  addition, plant organs
              and parts will be sectioned and reacted with  the Ferric Chloride Reagent,
              which specifically yields a purplish  blue complex with hydroxamic acids, to
              determine histochemically  the organ and tissue distribution of hydroxamic acid
              glucosides.   Subcellular location of hydroxamic acid glucosides  will be
              studied  by franctionating cell components by differential contrifugation 
              procedures.  Determining in which tissues the enzyme occurs will be  done by
              infusing tissue sections with chromogenic Beta-D-glucosides  (e.g.,
              5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl Beta-D-glucoside or 6-bromo-2-  naphthyl
              Beta-D-glucoside), which produce colored precipitates when  cleaved by
              Beta-glucosidase.  Color location can then be observed  under the light
              microscope.  Temporal and spatial expression of the  Glu1 gene will be studied
              by activity assays, immunoblotting, in  situ hybridizaiton, and Northern
              blotting.  ***
