Title       : New Fluorescent Indicators for Subcellular Calcium and Protein Kinase C
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9318538

Award Number: 9318538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Poenie poenie@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318538  Poenie    The goal of this project is to develop and apply new
              fluorescent  probes that will ultimately make it possible to dissect the 
              relationships between intracellular calcium, protein kinase C, and 
              cytoskeletal organization that give rise to directional movements  of cells and
              organelles.  Three specific probes will be developed:   1) Calcium indicators
              based on the PE3 model which resist leakage  and compartmentalization.  The
              current generation of fluorescent  calcium indicators such as fura-2, fluo-3,
              indo-1 and others are  plagued by the problems of leakage and
              compartmentalization.  The  problem of leakage means that cells can only be
              reliably studied  for a few minutes after they have been loaded.  The problem
              of  compartmentalization is that the dye may be sequestered in  organelles
              either as the free anion or as the AM ester.  This  creates numerous apparent
              artifacts regarding the distribution of  free calcium ions in the cell.  At
              present, PE3 loads uniformly,  but for many cells, little dye gets inside. 
              Specific changes in  the structure of these dyes will be made to rectify this
              problem.  2) Near-membrane calcium indicators will be developed based on the 
              FFP18 model.  FFP18, a fura-2 analog developed in this laboratory,  has the
              potential to reveal differences between calcium ions near  cell membranes as
              compared to the bulk cytosol.  Because this  indicator cannot diffuse freely
              through the cytosol it should not  dissipate calcium gradients as fura-2 and
              other BAPTA-type  indicators may.  Improvements in FFP18 are needed, however,
              to  realize the full potential of this type of indicator.  FFP18 tends  to form
              complexes or aggregates that distort its spectra and  complicate calibrations. 
              FFP18 analogs will be made that are  negatively charged which should eliminate
              aggregation.  Further,  preliminary data indicate that calcium near membranes
              is higher  than FFP18 can track.  To solve this problem, FFP18 analogs with 
              lower affinity for calcium will be synthesized.   Analogs with  higher
              selectivity for the plasma membrane will also be made. 3)  New and improved
              fluorescent probes for protein kinase C (PKC)  based on the fim-1 model will be
              developed.  Fim-1 is a fluorescent  probe that binds to protein kinase C.  It
              exhibits good specificity  for PKC when used with fixed and permeabilized
              cells.  New fim-1  analogs will be developed that have brighter fluorescence
              and  higher affinity for PKC, with the goal of obtaining a fluorescent  probe
              for use in studying PKC in living cells.  Fim-1 analogs that  can indicate
              changes in PKC activation will also be developed.  %%%  The goal of this
              project is to develop and apply new fluorescent  chemical probes that will
              ultimately make it possible to study the  chemical signals that give rise to
              cellular organization and  directional movements of cells and their internal
              structures.  The  signal molecules that will be tracked by these probes are
              calcium  and a critical enzyme known as protein kinase C.  A variety of 
              evidence suggests that these signal molecules play major roles in  controlling
              the dynamics of the cell's internal skeleton.  These  tools should allow direct
              visualization of where and when signals  occur that direct the movements of
              cells.***
