Title       : Collaborative Research: Phylogenetic Analysis Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae) Using
               DNA and Morphological Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9318640

Award Number: 9318640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126238             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Scott Armbruster ffwsa@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent E. Schwaegerle  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9318640 Schwaegerle          Understanding the taxonomic relationships,
              evolution, and biogeographic history of organisms depends upon accurate
              phylogenetic information, that is, knowledge of the genealogy of the group. 
              Dr. Scott Armbruster of the University of Alaska in collaboration with Dr.
              Bruce Baldwin of Duke University is reconstructing the phylogeny of Old and New
              World species of the pantropical plant genus    Dalechampia    (Euphorbiaceae
              family) in order to gain insights into the evolution of the group's pollination
              system and its biogeographic history.  Specific objectives include: 1. to
              collect liquid preserved and herbarium specimens for morphological analysis and
              for DNA sequencing of chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal genes; 2. to determine
              the pollination ecology of a sample of Old World taxa, thus complementing
              knowledge of New World species; 3. to reconstruct the phylogenetic pattern of
              species divergences using nuclear and chloroplast DNA data and morphology; and
              4. to use the phylogeny to trace the biogeographic history of the group and to
              generate testable hypotheses about change in pollination ecology and floral
              form.          The application of phylogenetic information to evolutionary
              biology and ecology has generated considerable excitement in recent times. 
              Important features of studying evolution with an estimated phylogeny include
              the ability to infer long term evolutionary history of characteristics not
              preserved in the fossil record, such as ecological relationships between plants
              and animals, and to distinguish adaptive evolution from the effects of
              phylogenetic constraint and past stochastic events.  The Armbruster and Baldwin
              project will advanc e that agenda.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
