Title       : Protein Engineering of Citric Acid Cycle Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9318699

Award Number: 9318699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Banaszak len_b@dcmir.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9318699 Banaszak  The citric acid consists of nine enzymatic reactions which
              together form the major source of chemical energy in all living systems.  Two
              carbon compounds derived from fats, carbohydrate and/or protein enter this
              cycle in the form of a metabolite called acetyl coenzyme A and in the presence
              of oxygen are broken down to generate and ATP   an important storage form of
              chemical energy. Each of the nine chemical reactions in the cycle is catalyzed
              by an enzyme. In eukaryotic cells (organisms beyond bacteria and viruses), the
              enzymes are located in an organelle called a mitochondrion.  The enzymes are
              coded for by nuclear genes and biosynthesized in the cytosol.  If in eukaryotic
              cells, the citric acid cycle enzymes are made in the cytosol but operate in the
              mitochondria, the cell must have a way of identifying these enzymes and
              translocating them into mitochondria.  Attempts to define structural factors
              which are important to both targeting and translocation of mitochondrial
              enzymes is the first problem which will be studied in this project.  In a
              mitochondrion, the protein concentration is very high and the fluid within it
              is very viscous.  It has been proposed that sequential enzymes in the citric
              acid cycle may form weak complexes facilitating the diffusion of metabolites. 
              Studies of the possible structures for such enzyme:enzyme complexes is a second
              facet to the project.  The molecular structures of most of the citric acid
              cycle enzymes are known.  However, the structure of the enzyme fumarase which
              catalyzes a dehydration hydration reaction between the 4 carbon carboxylic
              acids, L malate and fumarase, is not known.  The grant will support studies on
              the stru cture determination of the enzyme from both eukaryotic and prokaryotic
              cells.  The studies will be carried out using x ray crystallography. Last of
              all using recombinant DNA techniques, systematic changes will be made in two of
              the enzymes of the citric acid cycle, fumarase and malate to probe their
              catalytic chemistry. %%% The focus of the proposed study involves the
              determination of the structure/function relationships of two citric acid cycle
              enzymes, fumarase and malate dehydrogenase (MDH) using a combination of site
              directed mutagenesis and x ray crystallographic analyses.  The specific
              objectives are: (1) to complete the crystal structure of fumarase (fumc) from
              E. Coli, (2) to crystallize the intact precursor of fumarase from yeast, (3) to
              truncate our recombinant yeast fumarase DNA and to reclone in the putative
              forms of the cytosolic and mitochondrial fumarases, (4) to examine the
              catalytic mechanism of both fumarase and MDH using crystallographic coordinates
              and static intermediates derived from crystallographic studies, (5) to initiate
              studies on the preparation of crystalline forms of such enzyme:enzyme
              complexes, and (6) to study the structural aspects of mitochondrial recognition
              and translocation for fumarase and MDH.  The significance of the latter derives
              from the fact that in eukaryotic cells, the reactions of the citric acid cycle
              occur within the mitochondrial inner membrane matrix but the enzymes are
              synthesized in the cylosal.  This is possible because the eukaryotic forms of
              fumarase and MDH undergo a series of cell      h)          0*0*0*        
              recognition/processing steps.  Unique contributions of the proposed experiments
              include the determination of the molecular structure of a non iron containing
              hydratase (fumarase), a class of enzymes for which no crystallographic
              information is currently available.  In addition, structural data on
              mitochondrial protein import and enzyme:enzyme complex recognition should be
              possible from the combined crystallographic and mutagenic  studies.  Other
              significant contributions include a better understanding of the catalytic
              mechanism of fumarase and MDH and the identification of critical atoms from
              engineering specificity and kinetic changes in the two enzymes.   ***          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
