Title       : Enchancement and Upgrade of the DNA Sequencing Facility: Upgrade of Automated
               Sequencer (ABI 37 3A)/Electrophoresis Unit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9318078

Award Number: 9318078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Travis travis@neuro.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura R. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence G. Abele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Imre Friedmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We are proposing to purchase a number of items of equipment  and software that
              will enhance the capabilities and services  of our DNA Sequencing Core Facility
              by upgrading our Applied  Biosystems 373A Electrophoresis Unit (= automated
              sequencer)  and its associated equipment and providing the users with  enhanced
              access to data-analysis work stations.  The  hardware includes a five-filter
              wheel (to permit sequencing  with T7 DNA polymerase), a liner upgrade (to
              permit the  option of using several variable well-to-read gel plates), 
              vertical agarose gel plates (to facilitate analysis of 2-3  kb-fragments and
              random amplified polymorphic DNA), and  computer equipment (to increase
              analytical speed and  accommodate multiple users).  The software includes
              material  to facilitate sequence alignment, increase the speed of  scoring
              fragments, and create consensus sequences.  The  enhancements will serve a
              diversity of research projects in  different disciplines, from phylogenetic
              reconstructions  (cyanobacteria from extreme environments, the major 
              crustacean lineages) to examinations of gene expression  (flagellar
              regeneration in Chlamydomonas, acclimatory change  in muscle tissue) to the
              determination of reproductive  patterns in natural populations (mating in
              livebearing  fishes).  The upgrade will expand the range of  applications  that
              the facility can offer and permit more rapid sample  analysis, thereby enabling
              users from several disciplines to  expand readily the scope of their work and
              to increase their  productivity.
