Title       : Dimorphic Traits and Evolution of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9318246

Award Number: 9318246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Westneat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9164,9169,9183,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              IBN 9318246  Westneat                              ABSTRACT                     
                          Contemporary biological studies of social systems, which  take an
              interdisciplinary approach combining evolution and  behavior, have revealed
              that there are general principles  underlying the ways in which characteristics
              of each sex can  affect the other sex.  Fuller understanding of how those 
              traits in which males and females differ, including  behavioral traits,
              influence both the actions of other  animals and biological success are
              important in a number of  applied areas, particularly in designing optimal
              breeding  programs for endangered species.  In the long run, a full 
              understanding of these basic biological processes will  provide clues to
              understanding male and female interactions  in other species, including humans.
                 Dr. Westneat will employ experimental manipulations,  observations of the
              behavior of free-living individuals, and  analyses of the genetic consequences
              of behavior to provide  an understanding of the evolutionary forces acting on
              the  interactions between males and females.  Five experiments on  red-winged
              blackbirds will be carried out.  Three will  investigate how individual
              variation in appearance among  free-living males affects three components of
              mating success  (number of females nesting on the territory, proportion of 
              their young sired by the territory owner, and number of  young sired in other
              males' territories) using molecular  genetic techniques.  The other two
              experiments will test  different factors that influence female responses to
              males.  Dr. Westneat's research will help us comprehend the  evolutionary
              consequences of the relationship between  appearance and behavior in the
              context of male-female  interactions.
