Title       : Pliocene Paleontology and Geology of the Middle Awash Valley Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1995     
File        : a9318698

Award Number: 9318698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim D. White timwhite@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5928,9278,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT    P.I. Tim White   SBR- 9318698    Some time ago,
              paleontological work in southern Africa established Australopithecus as an
              ancestor of the human family and also revealed extensive diversity in the early
              human fossil record.  Subsequent  work in eastern Africa at Olduvai Gorge (the
              Leakey's) and elsewhere, including Hadar (Johansen), extended the known
              geographic and temporal distributions of early hominids and led to the
              recognition of even greater diversity and complexity.    The Middle Awash in
              Ethiopia, with rocks spanning the Late Miocene through Late Pleistocene, is the
              continent's most important natural laboratory for the study of human origins
              and evolution.  Data from here bear on issues as wide-ranging as the tempo and
              mode of hominid evolution across the last five million years, the origins and
              evolution of stone tool technology and subsistence patterns, and the
              relationships between global climate change and events in hominid evolution.   
               The earlier work of this outstanding team has shown that the Awash basin
              provides 'snapshots' of life through time rather than a continuous succession
              of fossil bearing sediments.  They have discovered a variety of new
              archaeological occurrences and fossil vertebrates, including early hominid
              remains from six separate time horizons spanning 3.5 million years.  The survey
              phase of the research is drawing to a close, and it is now possible to match
              ongoing problems in human evolutionary studies with the resources of this rich
              and complex repository.    The work to be supported by this grant will work on
              three sets of hominid-bearing Pliocene deposits, whic h have already yielded
              some very interesting early hominid fossils.  The fieldwork will contribute
              critical data on key issues - 1) the earliest known hominids, 2) the skeletal
              biology of Australopithecus afarensis, and the origin of the genus Homo.  To
              date, paleontologists have been unable to resolve these issues because of
              inadequate fossil and contextual data sets, which this site will provide.   
              This project also has an unparalleled record of training of, and collaboration
              with, professionals from an  undeveloped country.  *** 
              P\anthro\jfried\9318698.abs                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                )                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        r   t   U   W                           '   )                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  !         !         !      
                !              D                                                            
              )         )     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial       _   _     _ _ _  
                  ^   "             h     (4 %54 %-4 %  #   I             =        Jonathan
              Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
