Title       : Internet Connection: Georgetown University and Four Teaching Hospitals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1993 
File        : a9318076

Award Number: 9318076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi C. Broering   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kapur Rajiv  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9318076  Broering  The Georgetown University Medical Center Library will extend 
              multicampus network access to four teaching hospitals, Arlington  Hospital, DC
              General Hospital, DC Veterans Affairs Medical Center  and the Georgetown
              University Hospital.  The network will provide  faculty, staff, students and
              researchers with access to the  Library's Knowledge Network of databases, to
              the Internet system,  and to E-Mail services on the campus high speed network. 
              The  project will promote collaboration, sharing and information  exchange to
              support education and related patient care and  research.  It will facilitate
              Georgetown's goals to enhance  education at clinical rotation sites and to
              provide outreach  services in the community.  This proposed Internet link is a 
              logical step in sharing resources generated through the Integrated  Advanced
              Information Management System (IAIMS) project at  Georgetown.  The four project
              objectives are to   1.  Establish a network link to the affiliated teaching
              hospitals.  2.  Share resources, by providing access to the Library's Knowledge
               Network of bibliographic informational, document delivery and full-  text
              databases.  3.  Provide access to the Internet to promote collaboration and 
              information exchange.  4.  Provide E-Mail services to students, residents and
              faculty to  improve communication in the learning process.  The network
              architecture will include routers, cables and modems  needed to install the
              link to each hospital.  The project will  include (1) a connection via leased
              telephone lines for Arlington  Hospital (2) a security controlled Internet
              connection for the  Georgetown University Hospital (3) dial-up access for
              initial  experimentation at DC General Hospital and the Veterans Affairs 
              Medical Center.  Georgetown will extend dial-up Internet access to  local
              practitioners. Library access is a major emphasis of the  project as the
              Knowledge Network's bibliographic, informational,  document delivery and
              full-text databases are a vital element  of  the clinical teaching programs. 
              The security control system to be  developed by the Georgetown University
              Hospital will be shared with  the participating hospitals as their network
              needs evolve.   Collaboration between the hospitals will emerge through the 
              teaching programs.  The project will benefit nearly 5,000 health  professionals
              at the four hospitals and over 1,000 Georgetown  students and residents. 
              Increased use of the network is envisioned  as the potential benefits are
              realized.
