Title       : Transport Processes in Two-Phase Macroscopically Homogeneous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1996     
File        : a9318820

Award Number: 9318820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Acrivos acrivos@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Mauri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9318820  Acrivos    This project involves the theoretical study of transport
              processes in two-phase, macroscopically homogenous materials.  A variety of
              analytical and numerical techniques are used to extend the prior work of the
              P.I.'s on infinitely dilute suspensions to concentrated suspensions and to
              extend their work on the shear-induced longitudinal and transverse
              self-diffusivity of particles to the shear-induced gradient diffusivity.  This
              work may lead to fundamental advances in the field of diffusive transport in
              suspensions because it moves from the basic, simplified, and asymptotic
              theoretical limiting cases toward the more complex systems in which the
              potential applications lie.    There are many potential applications because of
              the very fundamental nature of the proposed study.  The range of potential
              applications includes sedimentation, formation of plugs in non-homogeneous
              shear flow and the re-suspension of settled particles, separation of gas
              bubbles from liquids under near weightless conditions (production of ultra high
              purity materials in space) by thermophoresis, and prediction of effective
              thermal conductivity, permeability, and other transport properties in two-phase
              media.    The effective medium technique for determining the effective
              properties of composite materials will be put on a firmer theoretical
              foundation and a kinetic model for computing particle distribution functions in
              flowing suspensions will be developed.    The theoretical studies in this
              project will be coordinated with the P.I.'s experimental program (funded
              through U.S. Dept. of Energy) and the data form the literature will be used to
              test the theoretical results.  ***
