Title       : Towards a Toolkit for Active Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9318326

Award Number: 9318326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. King roger@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9222926  Ghandeharizadeh    Towards a Toolkit for Active Databases    This is
              the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.   This is an
              interinstitutional collaborative research. Design,  implementation and
              experimentation activities are conducted at both  sites.  Active databases
              present a novel and promising paradigm for  programming databases.  The
              Heraclitus project supported by this  grant is focused on the development and
              application of database  programming language constructs and techniques that
              can be used to  specify and implement active databases.  A central thesis of
              the  project is to elevate "deltas", i.e., sets of proposed  modifications to
              the database state, to be first-class citizens in  database programming
              languages (DBPLs).  While deltas have been  used before in limited contexts and
              ad hoc ways, the Heraclitus  languages permit programmers and users to freely
              create, manipulate  and apply deltas.  This offers the potential of developing
              novel  mechanisms for supporting a variety of applications including  active
              databases, database interoperation, hypothetical database  access, concurrency
              control protocols, backup and recovery  protocols, and resolving conflicts
              between updates.  The research  is centered around the development of a DBPL
              called  Heraclitus Alg,C , an extension of C that incorporates the  relational
              algebra and deltas, and persistence for relations and  deltas.  A variety of
              topics are being studied in connection with  Heraclitus Alg,C , including
              language design, optimizations,  parallel implementations, theoretical issues,
              and applications to  active databases and database interoperation.  The
              research will  yield fundamental insights into active database technology, and 
              also methodologies for using this technology so that diverse  databases
              connected by the "information highway" can be used in a  coherent manner.   ***
