Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Recursion Theoretic Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1994  
File        : a9214048

Award Number: 9214048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo A. Harrington leo@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A set is recursively enumerable (r.e.) if there is a                      
              computable enumeration of its elements.  An r.e. set also has an               
              information content called its Turing-degree; an r.e. set with                 
              maximum information content is called Turing complete.  The                    
              collection of r.e. sets form a lattice, and this lattice is the                
              most natural setting for studying r.e. sets as sets.  A property of            
              r.e. sets is invariant if it is respected by all automorphisms of              
              this lattice.  This project will study invariant sets, and                     
              automorphisms of this lattice, and their relationship to the                   
              degrees of r.e. sets.  In particular it will continue the recent               
              research with Soare studying r.e. sets which are not automorphic to            
              any complete set (with the hope of finding some general classes of             
              invariant sets), and studying r.e. sets which are automorphic to a             
              complete set (with the hope of finding some general constructions              
              of automorphisms).                                                             
                   Recursion theory treats an abstract model for computability               
              that ignores practical limitations of time and space.  In other                
              words something is theoretically computable according to this model            
              if memory and run-time requirements can be shown merely to be                  
              finite without regard to how large they might actually be.  This               
              simplification permits a deeper understanding of the nature of                 
              computability.  Furthermore, it is also clear that in cases where              
              something can be shown not to be recursively computable, it has                
              certainly also been shown not to be computable in any practical                
              sense.  Finally, the habits of mind developed by the study of                  
              recursion theory turn out also to be of practical value, and former            
              students of this investigator can be found in industry doing                   
              software development as well as in mathematics departments training            
              another generation of logicians.
