Title       : Constrained H-infinity Optimiztion: An Approach for the Robust Control of
               Systems with Time-Domain Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9214993

Award Number: 9214993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101086             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Schmitendorf weschmit@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Athanasios Sideris  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop an Hoo optimization                                      
              approach which will allow in addition to the                                   
              customary frequency-domain specifications,                                     
              explicit time-domain specifications.  The latter                               
              specifications include shaping of the transient                                
              characteristics of the system by requiring that                                
              the step response lies in a given envelope,                                    
              specifying that actuator signals do not exceed                                 
              certain hard bounds in order to avoid                                          
              saturation, etc.  We refer to this approach as                                 
              Constrained Hoo optimization.                                                  
                                                                                             
              In the proposed approach the time-domain                                       
              specifications are introduced as constraints onto                              
              the Hoo optimization.  We expect to establish a                                
              decomposition of the latter problem to i) a finite                             
              dimensional convex optimization problem and ii)                                
              a standard Hoo optimization problem.  This                                     
              method will be capable of handling structured                                  
              model uncertainty in as much the same way as                                   
              Hoo optimization methods such as u-synthesis                                   
              do.  The approach will also inherit the                                        
              algorithmic nature of Hoo optimization methods                                 
              and systematically provide trade-offs between                                  
              conflicting specifications, including specifications                           
              posed directly in the time-domain.  It will be                                 
              capable of revealing the achievable performance                                
              limits at a reasonable computational cost.  We                                 
              expect to establish that the controllers produced                              
              within this framework will have properties that                                
              guarantee effective degree reduction to the level                              
              of standard Hoo optimal controllers and                                        
              specialized controller reduction schemes will be                               
              developed.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              In summary, our expected results should provide                                
              a general, systematic and practical approach for                               
              robust multivariable control system design with                                
              structured uncertainty, in which established                                   
              measures of performance in the time-domain are                                 
              incorporated explicitly, while the applicability of                            
              standard Hoo methods is retained in full.  We                                  
              believe that the proposed research offers a                                    
              unique approach to the important subject of                                    
              Robust Control of Constrained Systems.
