Title       : Renovation of Chemistry Research and Research Training acilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1992 
File        : a9214533

Award Number: 9214533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $512000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradford P. Mundy bpmundy@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Whitney King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Bourgaize  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Shattuck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Colby College requests funds for the                                      
              renovation of advanced chemistry research and                                  
              research training facilities in Keyes Chemistry                                
              Building.  The renovated facilities will strengthen                            
              advanced laboratory instruction in Chemistry; will                             
              support emerging interdisciplinary programs in cell                            
              and molecular biology/ biochemistry and                                        
              environmental science; and will facilitate                                     
              collaborative student-faculty research - a hallmark                            
              of Colby's new undergraduate science curriculum.                               
                   Specifically, the proposed renovation will                                
              upgrade facilities for three general areas of                                  
              chemistry on two floors of Keyes - biochemistry,                               
              analytical/physical chemistry, and chemical                                    
              synthesis.  In addition, the project includes an                               
              instrumentation laboratory area which encourages                               
              shared use of instrumentation and collaboration.                               
              The chemistry faculty, comprised of six members,                               
              will conduct research or research training in the                              
              proposed renovated facilities.                                                 
                   The successful completion of the plan to                                  
              modernize Keyes will help Colby attract more                                   
              students to major in the natural and physical                                  
              sciences, will nurture the skills and enthusiasm                               
              that will lead them to go on to earn higher                                    
              degrees, and will motivate them, through excellence                            
              in teaching and research, to make contributions to                             
              the strengthening of America's scientific base.                                
              Further, the availability of improved chemistry                                
              research facilities will make Colby more                                       
              competitive as it seeks to recruit outstanding                                 
              young science faculty.
