Title       : Metabolic Control of Intracellular Organic Solute Accumulation During Salt
               Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9214472

Award Number: 9214472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Bishop sbishop@molebio.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A wide variety of plants, marine or estuarine animals,                         
              microorganisms and certain cells in the tissues of higher animals              
              (gut, kidneys, etc.) show resistance to salt stress (highly                    
              concentrated salt solutions) by using a variety of small molecular             
              weight, electrically neutral organic molecules as intracellular                
              osmotic buffers. The mechanism of drought resistance is closely                
              tied to the mechanism of salt stress resistance. Cells that cannot             
              regulate these organic solute concentrations are not salt stress               
              resistant. The proposed research builds on previous work and                   
              focuses on the mechanisms used by cells to regulate the                        
              intracellular concentration of these organic solutes. We propose               
              that production and metabolic turnover of these solutes are                    
              compartmentalized within intracellular organelles such as the                  
              mitochondria and/or chloroplasts and that the rest of the cell                 
              serves as the compartment of accumulation. Using gill tissue from              
              a highly salt stress resistant bivalve mollusc as a model system,              
              we plan to identify the elements (enzymes) regulating production of            
              these solutes in the mitochondria and study how the cell controls              
              the regulation of these elements so as to adjust the internal                  
              osmotic pressure of the cell to be more or less equal to that of               
              the media bathing cell. The research involves use of a variety of              
              analytical chemical equipment, radiochemical tracers, some tissue              
              culture studies, enzymatic assays and the separation of metabolic              
              elements using various centrifugation, chromatographic,                        
              electrophoretic, and antibody precipitation techniques for specific            
              analysis. The result will be a better understanding of the                     
              mechanisms of cellular salt stress resistance and the physiological            
              controls regulating these processes.
