Title       : Mechanistic Studies of Combustion Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9214009

Award Number: 9214009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Varma avarma@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,5939,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this program, two techniques will be used to study the                      
              fundamentals of materials synthesis via SHS processing; the                    
              first involves quenching pellets during the reaction, while                    
              the second involves study of powder particles on a heated                      
              surface of a substrate.  The first procedure will be carried                   
              out by reacting a wedge-shaped sample imbedded in a high                       
              thermal conductivity block,  resulting in extinguishment of a                  
              combustion wave propagating through the sample towards the                     
              apex of the wedge.  After quenching, the sample will be cut                    
              and polished for metallography study and a layer-by-layer X-                   
              ray diffraction analysis will be performmed to quantitate                      
              variation of phase content as a function of position.                          
              SEM/EDXS studies combined with quantitative optical microscopy                 
                                                                                             
              will be used to observe changes in local composition, grain                    
              size, and pore distributions.  Effects of sample preparation                   
              conditions, such as powder particle sizes and green density,                   
              will be studied.  These experiments will provide information                   
              on evolution of mixture micro-structure as the reaction front                  
              propagates, yielding insight into mechanisms which can be used                 
                                                                                             
              to control the process and  tailor the product properties.  In                 
                                                                                             
              the second procedure, a narrow size cut of reactant powder                     
              (lower-melting component) will be dispersed on a foil of the                   
              other reactant, which will be electrically heated at rates                     
              typically encountered in SHS processing.  Upon heating, the                    
              powder will melt and spread on the foli surface; the dynamics                  
              of spreading (important in SHS processing) will be studied at                  
              various heating rates and particle sizes.  Upon further                        
              heating, reactions will occur; these will be quenched by                       
              current shutoff, and the resulting samples analyzed with                       
              SEM/EDXS, delineating reaction and microstructure evolution.                   
              Initially, attention will be focussed on Ni3Al synthesis, with                 
                                                                                             
              later extension to other intermetallics.                                       
                                                                                             
              The synthesis of advanced materials by combustion reactions is                 
                                                                                             
              an  attractive alternative to other methods of materials                       
              preparation due to simplicity, relatively low energy                           
              requirements, high product purity potential, and (probably                     
              most important) opportunity for formation of metastable                        
              products resulting from the combination of rapid cooling and                   
              high reaction rates.  In combustion synthesis, highly                          
              exothermic self-sustaining reactions in a powder bed yield                     
              final products; in one variant of this procedure, self-                        
              propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS), reaction                         
              initiated at one end of the powder sample self-propagates                      
              through it as a combustion wave, while in another (thermal                     
              explosion mode) the sample is heated uniformly until reaction                  
              is initiated throughout the sample.  One very important task                   
              in further development of combustion synthesis processing is                   
              establishment of control of product properties via control of                  
              microstructure; attainment of such control depends on                          
              fundamental understanding of chemical and structural transfor-                 
                                                                                             
              mations taking place in and behind the propagating combustion                  
              front.
