Title       : Surface Fluxes over the Warm Pool of TOGA-COARE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9214789

Award Number: 9214789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar-Rao Mopidevi                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275400             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. N. Krishnamurti tnk@met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Air-sea interaction studies require surface fluxes of momentum,                
              heat and moisture.  This research will determine these fluxes by               
              using a sophisticated physical initialization procedure that                   
              invokes detailed "observed" rain which is based on a mix of SSMI               
              (Special Sensor Microwave Instruments), OLR (Outgoing Longwave                 
              Radiation), and rain-gauge data sets.  The powerful rainfall                   
              algorithm calibrates the rain rates for ground truth as the daily              
              fields are produced.  The fluxes, in turn, are obtained by using a             
              series of reverse physical parameterization algorithms within the              
              initialization of a high resolution numerical prediction model.                
              This physical initialization technique is one of the most powerful             
              and consistent procedures for determining surface fluxes.  Fluxes              
              for the western Pacific warm pool region will be determined for a              
              five year period starting in January 1987.  In addition, this                  
              research will include a detailed comparison and critical evaluation            
              of the following fluxes obtained during the TOGA COARE observation             
              program:                                                                       
                                                                                             
              a)   Bulk aerodynamic fluxes,                                                  
                                                                                             
              b)   Fluxes based on surface similarity theory and corrected as                
                   needed for low/high wind speeds and the free convection limit,            
                                                                                             
              c)   Fluxes based on the physical initialization technique                     
                   discussed above,                                                          
                                                                                             
              d)   Fluxes based on the NMC (National Meteorological Center)                  
                   operation forecast model,                                                 
                                                                                             
              e)   Fluxes based on the ECMWF (European Centre for Medium-range               
                   Weather Forecasting) operational forecast model.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it is one of the TOGA/TOGA COARE            
              studies that investigates air-sea interactions, particularly                   
              surface fluxes,  in the context of the numerical representation of             
              the physical processes that impact climate variability in an                   
              especially climate sensitive region of the world, the western                  
              Pacific Ocean, the field site of the TOGA COARE program.
