Title       : Surveys of Federal Funds for Research and Development and Federal Support to
               Universities, Colleges, and Non-Profit Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9214509

Award Number: 9214509
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 16,  1992     
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $712584             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Nozicka gnozicka@qrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Research Corp
	      
	      Chevy Chase, MD  20825    /   -

NSF Program : 8802      RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT STATIST
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The contractor for this project will conduct two surveys for              
              the National Science Foundation (NSF).  The Survey of Federal                  
              Funds for Research and Development (R&D) provides detailed annual              
              time series data on all federal R&D funding; and the Survey of                 
              Federal Support to Universities, Colleges, and Selected Nonprofit              
              Institutions provides detailed annual time series data on federal              
              R&D and science and engineering (S&E) obligations to individual                
              institutions of higher education, nonprofit institutions, and                  
              federally funded research and development centers.  The work will              
              include development and implementation of a new, integrated,                   
              state-of-the-art software system; data processing services; and                
              technical support for statistical information collected with                   
              these two surveys.  The contractor will be responsible for                     
              creating and mailing the survey instruments, processing and                    
              editing the data, and generating final data tabulations in the                 
              form of camera-ready detailed statistical tables.  The contractor              
              shall also provide additional technical support and respond to ad              
              hoc requests, as required by NSF.                                              
                   The two surveys are conducted to fulfill legislative                      
              mandates that require NSF to collect and disseminate data on                   
              federal R&D and S&E activities.  The availability of timely                    
              statistics depends on an effective data processing system.  Data               
              collected with these surveys are used by individuals in both the               
              public and private sectors to address key questions on Federal                 
              R&D funding levels and activities.
