Title       : Renovation of Environmental Biology Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1992 
File        : a9214204

Award Number: 9214204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213925             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. McConville dmcconvi@rex.mnsmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rory N. Vose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Faber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/452-4430

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Saint Mary's College requires its biology                                 
              majors to conduct an original research project and                             
              to write an undergraduate thesis.  Undergraduate                               
              research and research training are key curricular                              
              components in developing graduates who go on to                                
              advanced degrees in the life sciences.  Saint                                  
              Mary's is ranked the number one Catholic college                               
              or university in the nation in the ratio of                                    
              graduates going on to earn the Ph.D.  This                                     
              commitment to undergraduate research serves to                                 
              create an unusually "research active" faculty.                                 
                   A new addition meets the needs of traditional                             
              fields of cellular and molecular biology,                                      
              genetics, anatomy and physiology, etc.  Renovation                             
              of three research facilities is essential to: 1)                               
              build on our successful environmental program; 2)                              
              continue to obtain outside research support; 3)                                
              provide more research opportunities for both staff                             
              and students; 4) provide the best possible                                     
              research training for students; and 5) make the                                
              facilities handicap-accessible.                                                
                   The more efficient renovated facilities will                              
              increase both the quantity and diversity of                                    
              research and research training, increase student                               
              retention and recruitment and, ultimately result                               
              in more students entering graduate school and                                  
              eventually scientific careers.  Outside                                        
              researchers also will make use of the remodeled                                
              facilities.
