Title       : Bio-Molecular Thermodynamics of Protein Precipitation in Aqueous Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9214653

Award Number: 9214653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey W. Blanch blanch@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Prausnitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9106,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Experimental and theoretical bio-processing studies are                        
              directed toward the development of a molecular-thermodyamic                    
              model for separationg a target protein from a mixture of                       
              proteins in aqueuous solution.  Protein separation is achieved                 
              by precipitation induced by salts, nonionic polymers, or both.                 
              The resulting system consists of two liquid phases in                          
              equilbrium, with one enriched in the target protein.  A                        
              molecular-thermosynamic model is outlined for describing                       
              protein-precipitation phase equilibria.  This model is derived                 
              from an understanding of the intermolecular forces in the                      
              precipitating solutions; it uses the mean-spherical-                           
              approximation to define the reference system as a mixture of                   
              charged hard spheres.  Pertubations to this reference system                   
              result from the dispersion forces, dipole-dipole forces and                    
              perhaps, specific association forces.  Osmotic pressures                       
              calculated from the model will be compared to osmotic-pressure                 
              data obtained from membrane osmometry and to osmotic second                    
              virial coefficients measured by low-angle laser-light                          
              scattering.  Experimental phase-equilibrium (precipitation)                    
              measurements will provide data against which the molecular-                    
              thermodynamic model can be compared.  Protein aggregate size                   
              distribution data from light scattering will be used to                        
              augment the theory when significant aggregation occurs.  The                   
              goal of this reech is to establish an engineering-oriented                     
              correlation for the rational design of protein-precipitation                   
              processes.  The long-range benefit of this research is that it                 
              is likely to provide useful knowledge for a better                             
              understanding of protein crystallization bioprocesses.
