Title       : Image Analysis Facility Expansion: Acquisition of Confocal Microscope System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9214434

Award Number: 9214434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Scanlon scanlon@msm.auc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehouse Sch of Medicine
	      720 Westview Drive, S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303101458    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An inverted Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope (CLSM) system                   
              is requested.  There is no confocal system at the medical                      
              school nor, to the best of our knowledge, in the entire                        
              Atlanta University Center Complex ( includes the Atlanta                       
              University Center,  Morehouse College, Selman College, Clark-                  
              Atlanta University, Morris Brown College).  The requested                      
              instrumentation will greatly expand the research                               
              capabilities at the medical school and provide a resource                      
              for minority graduate and undergraduate schools in the                         
              complex.  Within the medical school, the requested                             
              instrumentation will be used to support five major research                    
              projects headed by senior investigators plus occasional used                   
              by a number of other investigators.  All laboratories in the                   
              proposal are presently, or have plans to be involved in the                    
              training of graduate students and/or postdoctoral fellows                      
              with an emphasis on the training of minorities.  Several                       
              laboratories have also participated in summer programs to                      
              expose minority medical  students to research.  Area of                        
              research (major projects) the requested instrumentation will                   
              support include fluorescent immunolocalization/co-                             
              localization/ 3-D reconstruction of cytoskeletal and other                     
              cellular proteins in tissue sections and fixed cell layer                      
              (Chew, Lo, Bailey,  Scanlon), detection and 3-D                                
              reconstruction of transcripts detected using fluorescent in                    
              situ hybridization technique (Bond), and fluorescent                           
              localization of intracellular  calcium storage/release sites                   
              in living cells along with co-localization of relevant                         
              cellular structures (Scanlon, Chew. ).  The 3D                                 
              reconstruction capabilities of the system will provide                         
              investigators with insights into cell structure that cannot                    
              be obtained with conventional fluorescent microscopy.
