Title       : Participation of American Physiologists in Inaugural Congress of African
               Association of Physiological Sciences, Nairobi, Kenya, September 21-28, 1992.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9214031

Award Number: 9214031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Richardson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this request for an International Travel Grant is               
              to help offset the costs involved in enabling four (4) members of              
              the American Physiological Society (APS) to attend and participate             
              in the Inaugural Congress of the African Association of                        
              Physiological Sciences (AAPS). The venue for the Congress will be              
              Nairobi, Kenya from September 21 through 2, 1992.                              
                                                                                             
              All four individuals have been specifically invited to participate             
              in the Congress by either the Secretary-General of the AAPS, Dr.               
              K.O. Adeniyi of the University of Jos in Jos, Nigeria, and/or the              
              Congress Chairman, Dr. John Ibu, also of the University of Jos. The            
              letter of invitation to Dr. Daniel Richardson, the PI of this grant            
              proposal, is attached. Letters to the other three invited                      
              individuals can be produced if their specific rolls in the Congress            
              are provided in this proposal.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The purpose of the AAPS Congress is to provide a forum for                     
              scientists from the African countries to interact with their                   
              International counterparts. The Congress will consist of invited               
              lectures, research symposia and a considerable number of education             
              workshops. As such the interactions between American and African               
              physiologists is expected to lead to the formation of joint                    
              scientific and education projects that would be executed in Africa             
              with the aim of fostering biomedical science teaching and research             
              in African nations. According to K.O. Adeniyi, AAPS Secretary-                 
              General, one potential benefit of such interactions is that they               
              would help to stem the tide of scientific brain drain from these               
              regions.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The invited American physiologists are expected not only to present            
              lectures on their invited topics, but to participate in the                    
              organizational aspects of the congress as well. For the most part              
              the latter will take the form of chairing symposia and/or                      
              workshops. Finally, the Americans are encouraged to interact with              
              young members and help direct them towards achieving greater                   
              heights in science and education. //
