Title       : Spin Order Due to Disorder in Frustrated Antiferromagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1994   
File        : a9214943

Award Number: 9214943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Henley clh@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Heisenberg antiferromagnets on the Kagome lattices will be studied             
              for quantum spins at large spin values and for classical spins at              
              low temperature.  Starting from the spin-wave approximation with               
              anharmonic terms, effective Hamiltonians will be found expressing              
              selection of (1) coplanar states, out of a continuum of degenerate             
              classical ground states, and, (2) a particular ordered state, out              
              of the discrete infinity of coplanar ground states.  This ongoing              
              work will be extended to study dilution disorder, spin tunneling,              
              and (in the Kagome case) interlayer couplings.  Certain discrete               
              spin models in two dimensions can be mapped to solid-on-solid                  
              models in higher dimensions.  Monte Carlo will be used to study the            
              constrained Potts model, a new family of this type in higher                   
              dimension.  The degree of order in the ground state of the spin                
              one-half triangular antiferromagnet near the Ising limit will also             
              be studied.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              This theoretical research will focus on properties of frustrated               
              antiferromagnets.  The PI is a former Presidential Young                       
              Investigator.  Frustrated antiferromagnets are of interest for a               
              variety of reasons.  The new high temperature superconductors are              
              antiferromagnets in their normal state and this antiferromagnetism             
              is thought to possibly play a role in producing their unique                   
              superconducting properties.  The role played by the competition                
              between disorder and magnetism in determining the properties of                
              magnetic materials is a basic one which has eluded explanation.                
              Finally, the statistical mechanics of novel lattice systems is also            
              of basic interest.
