Title       : Modernization of a Coastal Marine Laboratory in North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9214313

Award Number: 9214313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $970500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dirk Frankenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,
Abstract    :
                   The Coastal Laboratory Consortium, comprised                              
              of four North Carolina Universities, operates                                  
              degree granting programs in marine science research                            
              and research training.  This award will provide                                
              funding for the modernization of the University of                             
              North Carolina, Chapel Hill's Institute of Marine                              
              Science.  Interdisciplinary research activities                                
              currently performed at the institute are in five                               
              general areas:  experimental analyses of ecological                            
              processes of sea floor communities, biogeochemical                             
              cycling and productivity in coastal waters, geology                            
              of sedimentary coastlines, ecology of coastal                                  
              organisms and air and sea interactions in near                                 
              shore waters.  The Institute of Marine Science                                 
              attracts visiting scientists from many institutions                            
              in the US and abroad, fostering strong research                                
              collaborations.  Both graduate and undergraduate                               
              students participate in research training                                      
              activities at the facility, including a large                                  
              percentage of minority studnets from historically                              
              minority colleges and universities.                                            
                   Present conditions, at the 25 year old                                    
              facility, are unsafe and laboratories are                                      
              inadequate for conducting research.  The lack of                               
              climate control, proper electrical and air supply,                             
              incubation facilities, clean rooms, and modernized                             
              laboratory space adds to the problems researchers                              
              encounter daily.  Funds are requested to upgrade                               
              laboratory space that is designed to accommodate                               
              sophisticated chemical, biotechnological,                                      
              analytical research activities and equipment.                                  
              Modern research facilities at the Institute of                                 
              Marine Science will contribute to the productive                               
              research and research training within the marine                               
              science programs of the consortium institutions and                            
              strengthen the nation's scientific infrastructure.
