Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Behaviour of Vortices and Monopoles in
               Classical Gauge Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9214067

Award Number: 9214067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58809              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Stuart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is on the time-dependent Yang-Mills-Higgs                    
              equations. These are nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential                 
              equations which are invariant under the Lorentz group and the                  
              infinite dimensional gauge group.  The investigator has proved                 
              that under certain situations it is possible to construct                      
              solutions to the equations which correspond to motion of the                   
              vortices or   monopoles according to a finite dimensional                      
              Hamiltonian system on the configuration space.  These                          
              approximations are known to be valid on long but finite time                   
              intervals.  The present aim of this investigation is to extend                 
              this understanding to more general   situations, in particular to              
              monopole scattering which is described by geodesics with respect               
              to the Atiyah-Hitchin metric on the moduli space.  A longer term               
              aim is to extend the understanding to infinite time -- it is                   
              conceivable that asymptotically the solution approaches a                      
              combination of vortices and monopoles moving according to the                  
              Hamiltonian system on the configuration space in the maximum                   
              norm.  The reason for this   conjecture is the dispersion of                   
              radiation.  Another long term aim is to extend the understanding               
              to the equations of general relativity in which black holes take               
              the place of vortices and monopoles.                                           
                   The work has possible applications to superconductivity and               
              particle physics in addition to being of mathematical interest.
