Title       : Renovation of Laboratory for Far Infrared Free Electron Laser System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9214332

Award Number: 9214332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl D. Shaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A unique free electron laser (FEL) system,                                
              tunable in the far-infrared (FIR) system portion                               
              of the electromagnetic spectrum will be acquired                               
              from AT&T Bell Laboratories and installed in                                   
              renovated laboratory space at Rutgers University.                              
              The instrument consists of a high current                                      
              microtron electron accelerator, an electron                                    
              beamline with quadruple and dipole magnets, a                                  
              helical undulator electromagnet, ancillary optics,                             
              optical devices and high vacuum equipment.                                     
              Laboratory renovation required for installation of                             
              the instrumentation consists primarily of the                                  
              excavation and masonry of an underground vault for                             
              radiation shielding of the FEL and modernization                               
              of existing laboratory space for a                                             
              multidisciplinary research program utilizing the                               
              system.                                                                        
                   The FEL laboratory will be the major                                      
              scientific research facility of its type in the                                
              eastern United States.  Research will be conducted                             
              in the fields of physics, chemistry, biophysics                                
              and materials science.  Initial areas for study                                
              include linear and nonlinear time resolved FIR                                 
              spectroscopy , relativistic electron physics, and                              
              advanced instrumentation development.  Specific                                
              experiments planned include the study of                                       
              superconductors including high Tc materials and                                
              Buckyball superconductors, compound semiconductors                             
              and devices, DNA and other important biological                                
              molecules, and chemical kinetics.  Training of                                 
              undergraduate and graduate students will be                                    
              included in this facility.
