Title       : Rapid Scan EPR Spectrometer and Eximer Laser
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1992  
File        : a9214315

Award Number: 9214315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Squier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daryle H. Busch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diana J. Bigelow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Heppert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin Bowman Mertes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Our goal is to expand the EPR capabilities at the University                   
              of Kansas to include a modern state-of-the-art EPR machine                     
              with kinetic capabilities in the millisecond time-range.  To                   
              use this millisecond time-resolution, we require a pulsed                      
              photolysis source such as the requested excimer laser that                     
              can deliver high energies (i.e., greater than 20 mJ per                        
              pulse) in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum to release                    
              caged ligands within the submillisecond time scale.  This                      
              latter capability will permit the resolution of time-                          
              dependent structural changes associated with the activation                    
              or assembly of biological molecules.  Equally important is                     
              the availability of a machine with the magnetic field                          
              stability necessary to reproducibly measure the positions of                   
              metal resonances in order to permit a systematic                               
              identification of their structure.  These new capabilities                     
              will enhance research efforts ranging from the elucidation                     
              of structural and assembly properties of macromolecules                        
              (e.g., biological membranes, tubulin), and the mechanistic                     
              features associated with energy transduction processes                         
              (e.g., ATP Synthase, Ca-ATPase,  and Na+/Ca2+ Antiporter),                     
              to the detailed relationship between the ligand                                
              complexation surrounding a given metal atom and the physical                   
              properties of functionally significant metal complexes that                    
              serve as model systems for understanding the activation                        
              dioxygen (e.g., cyclidene cobalt complexes).
