Title       : A Technique for Incorporating Uncertain Environmental Factors into the Utility
               Planning Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1995   
File        : a9214655

Award Number: 9214655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Chanan Singh                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saifur Rahman Srahman@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research effort attempts to develop a                             
              technique to model and study the effects of                                    
              uncertain environmental factors in the electric                                
              utility planning process.  The electric utility deals                          
              with uncertainties with respect to the availability                            
              and costs of alternative generation, fuels, and new                            
              emission reduction technologies.  There are also                               
              uncertainties in demand an energy projections, and                             
              the impact of demand side management programs.                                 
              Emissions caps and emissions trading features                                  
              provide for by the Clean Air Act Amendments                                    
              (CAAA) of 1990 have added a new dimension to                                   
              the problem of uncertainty.  There are wide                                    
              variations in estimates on the market price of                                 
              emission allowances.  At the same time experts                                 
              disagree on the extent to which government                                     
              legislation and regulations should and will be used                            
              to limit emissions.  In the light of those                                     
              uncertainties, the utility planner must explore a                              
              variety of probable scenarios in order to settle on a                          
              robust generation plan.  The evaluation tools which                            
              are currently being applied assume the availability                            
              of the measures of uncertainty and of experts                                  
              furnishing them.  This is obviously not always the                             
              case.  The proposed technique is designed to                                   
              facilitate the strategic power system planning under                           
              uncertainty by generating probability estimates for                            
              expert opinions using the interdependent data                                  
              analysis (IDA) technique being developed at                                    
              Virginia Tech.  This enables the decision maker to                             
              model opinions which are still forming.  Applied                               
              with decision tree/influence diagram analysis, this                            
              can result in a robust methodology to quantify                                 
              uncertainties related to environmental factors in the                          
              utility planning process.
