Title       : Replacement of Research Laboratories 2, 4 & 5 Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9214455

Award Number: 9214455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Paigen ken@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project replaces obsolete research                                   
              laboratories and research support facilities at The                            
              Jackson Laboratory which cannot be rehabilitated                               
              cost-effectively.                                                              
                   The new scope of the project affects only                                 
              Laboratories that are in direct research use, and                              
              involves the replacement of 5,408 net square feet                              
              located in our Research Laboratory-2, Reserach                                 
              Laboratory-4 and Research Laboratory-5 buildings                               
              (hereafter known as RL-2, RL-4, and RL-5).                                     
                   The research programs at The Jackson                                      
              Laboratory encompass four areas:  Genetics,                                    
              Developmental Biology, Molecular Biology and                                   
              Biochemistry and Physiology.  Our training programs                            
              are designed to meet the needs of high school and                              
              college students, postdoctoral trainees, graduate                              
              students and established scientists.  In addition,                             
              this space houses the Transgenic Mouse Service,                                
              Flow Cyometry Service, Microchemistry Service and                              
              Gene Targeting/Cell Biology Service.                                           
                   The project will provide state-of-the-art                                 
              facilities to improve the creativity and                                       
              productivity of research, and enhance the quality                              
              of our training programs.  The new facilities will                             
              correct overcrowded conditions and critical safety                             
              and fire code deficiencies; they will also provide                             
              mechanical, electrical and ventilation systems                                 
              required to support our current and future research                            
              and research training activities.  Accessibility to                            
              the new facility by disabled persons will be fully                             
              addressed.  The modernization of this research                                 
              space will not only create a healthful and safe                                
              work place for the staff, it will also                                         
              significantly reduce high operating costs                                      
              associated with the operation and maintenance of                               
              outdated research facilities.
