Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for the Study of Defects in II-VI Semiconductor
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1992 
File        : a9214350

Award Number: 9214350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy C. Giles   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Halliburton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The II-VI semiconductors feature bandgaps ranging from the                     
              ultraviolet to the far infrared, creating the potential to                     
              form the basis of a wide variety of electronic and                             
              optoelectronic devices.  II-VI semiconductors are not as                       
              developed as their III-V counterparts, primarily because of                    
              difficulties encountered in understanding and controlling                      
              defects arising during growth.  This proposal is for                           
              acquisition of equipment to address the common problem of                      
              defects in wide bandgap II-VI semiconductors.  To address                      
              this problem, we propose to (1) build a custom Molecular                       
              Beam Enitaxy system with in-situ instrumentation to                            
              investigate growth kinetics; (2) assemble a high resolution                    
              optical spectroscopy system for low temperature                                
              photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy using a double                        
              monochromator and tunable laser system; and (3) assemble an                    
              optically detected magnetic resonance system which allows                      
              magnetic resonance identification of point defects in                          
              semiconductors.  The magnetic resonance experiments will                       
              involve use of the double monochromator and tunable laser                      
              system, in addition to a 4 Tesla magnet dewar with optical                     
              access and associated microwave bridge.  Acquisition of the                    
              proposed equipment allows original research to improve the                     
              understanding of the optical, electrical, magnetic, and                        
              defect properties of these difficult materials.  In                            
              particular, special emphasis will be placed on                                 
              understanding the relationship between growth mechanisms                       
              and defect formation in these materials, thus leading to                       
              both improvement and better control of basic properties.                       
              This equipment will immediately contribute to the research                     
              programs of the three principal investigators.  The planned                    
              research efforts will involve two postdoctoral scientists                      
              and six or more graduate students.  It has always been the                     
              practice of investigators to include undergraduates, thus                      
              it is anticipated that this equipment will also influence                      
              the career of two to three undergraduates each year.
