Title       : U.S.-Japan Collaborative Project on Microbial Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9214685

Award Number: 9214685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1143030            (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tiedje tiedjej@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1128,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a series of short and long-term visits to              
              Japan by students and faculty located at the Center for Microbial              
              Ecology at Michigan State University.  These visits will be under              
              the auspices of a five-year agreement that the Center has with                 
              the Japan Research and Development Corporation (JRDC).  The joint              
              research project is headed by Professor James Tiedje, Director of              
              the MSU Center for Microbial Ecology at the University of                      
              Michigan and Professor Keiji Yano at the Nagaoka University of                 
              Technology.  In Japan the research will be preformed at Nagaoka                
              University of Technology and at the Institute for Physical and                 
              Chemical Research (RIKEN) in the Tokyo area.  The Center for                   
              Microbial Ecology is dedicated to understanding the underlying                 
              principles of microbial and function of microorganisms in natural              
              and managed habitats.  Research projects will include identifying              
              microbes that have some ability to degrade pollutants, examining               
              the genetic chemistry that gives them that ability and                         
              determining what evolutionary changes may be taking place to make              
              them more effective.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Research results should reveal new information about natural gene              
              transfer among microbial species.  Although the focus of the                   
              research is on basic knowledge, it is also expected to produce                 
              practical benefits in areas of environmental protection such as                
              the microbial degradation of toxic wastes, groundwater quality,                
              plant productivity and the regulation of agricultural and                      
              environmental biotechnologies.  Americans are generally                        
              acknowledged leaders in microbial ecology whereas the Japanese's               
              expertise lies in the area of molecular biology of genes involved              
              in biodegradation.  It is expected that this research, and the                 
              exchanges, will provide intellectually and culturally broadening               
              experiences for every researcher taking part in the program.
