Title       : Acquisition of Electrospray Tandem Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9214371

Award Number: 9214371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max L. Deinzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas F. Barofsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Department of Agricultural Chemistry and the                               
              Environmental Health Sciences Center at Oregon State                           
              University request funds from the National Science                             
              Foundation to purchase an electrospray tandem quadrupole                       
              mass spectrometer.  Research projects which will depend on                     
              this equipment are in the areas of biochemistry and                            
              biotechnology.  More specifically the instrument will be                       
              used in the research goals of ten projects described in this                   
              application to:   (a) provide molecular weights of proteins,                   
              (b) sequence N-terminally blocked or modified proteins, (c)                    
              determine the sites and structures of carbohydrates on                         
              glycoproteins, (d) determine the sites of alkylation                           
              reactions on protein, (e) locate the receptor sites in the                     
              enzyme of a substrate-enzyme complex (f) determine the sites                   
              of linkage of protein-DNA covalent units (g) determine the                     
              disulfide linkages of several proteins, and (h) determine                      
              the structures of elecitors in aphid resistant hop plants.                     
              These projects cannot be efficiently or even successfully                      
              completed without the instrument for which funds are being                     
              requested.  The present mass spectrometers available for                       
              these projects, which includes a Krotos MS 50TC-RF                             
              instrument, lack  the sensitivity, mass range and tandem                       
              mass spectrometry capability to do the necessary sequencing                    
              and structure analyses.  The increasing emphasis of                            
              biochemical and biotechnology research and the recent                          
              addition of new faculty in these areas on the Oregon State                     
              University campus, has created a growing need for this                         
              equipment.
