Title       : Weak Links, Interfaces and Mechanisms of High Temperature Superconductivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9214707

Award Number: 9214707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2047000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Larbalestier larbales@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,9165,9178,9251,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is for the renewal of funding of the Materials                      
              Research Group at the University of Wisconsin at Madison on the                
              topic of weak links, interfaces, and mechanisms of high                        
              temperature superconductivity.  The original award (DMR-8911332)               
              provided funding for a period of forty two months.  The research               
              to be performed under this award is a combination of continuation              
              of research started under the original award plus new areas under              
              the same general topic.  Research to be continued includes                     
              coupled electromagnetic and microstructural characterization of                
              flux-grown yttrium-barium-copper oxide bicrystals, cation-doped                
              bicrystals, doped and undoped single crystals, melt-processed and              
              solid state sintered polycrystals, as well as development of a                 
              high-speed position-sensitive atom  probe.  New programs starting              
              under this award include coupled local electrical and                          
              microstructural characterization by patterning of thin-film and                
              bulk-scale superconducting materials, coupled electromagnetic and              
              microstructural  characterization of step-edge superconducting                 
              junctions, coupled electromagnetic and microstructural                         
              characterization of grain boundaries in bismuth-strontium-calcium-             
              copper oxide bicrystals, studies of local intergranular and                    
              intragranular compositional variations using the position-                     
              sensitive atom probe, characterization of the grain boundaries                 
              using high-spatial-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy,               
              and investigation of the superconducting gap as a function of                  
              temperature and  location in the Brillouin zone.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The research is aimed at understanding why and how grain                       
              boundaries limit the transport critical current density of high                
              temperature superconductivity.  This is one of the most important              
              problems in high temperature superconductivity.  The challenging               
              experimental procedures required for this research have been                   
              demonstrated in the first three years of the Materials Research                
              Group.  The group is the only one to have performed coupled                    
              electromagnetic and microstructural characterization on the same               
              specimen of  superconducting  material.  The issue of critical                 
              current density must be solved to achieve the full potential of                
              high temperature superconductivity for national technological                  
              competitiveness.
