Title       : U.S.-Sweden-Norway Cooperative Research: Measurement and Interpretation of
               Postglacial Rebound-Induced Crustal Deformation Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1993        
File        : a9214090

Award Number: 9214090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8716               (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Davis jdavis@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5914,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This one-year award supports U.S.-Sweden-Norway cooperative                    
              research between James Davis of the Smithsonian's Astrophysics                 
              Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts and Bernt O. Ronnang                   
              of the Onsala Space Observatory, Chalmers University of                        
              Technology, Onsala, Sweden.  The objective of the research is to               
              take measurements of three-dimensional crustal motion at                       
              locations in Sweden and Norway (Fennoscandia).  The estimates                  
              of crustal velocity will be used to determine viscosity of the                 
              Earth's mantle beneath Fennoscandia and to correct estimates of                
              sea-level change associated with local vertical crustal motion.                
              Knowledge of the mantle's viscosity is required for understanding              
              mantle convection, the driving force of plate tectonic motion.                 
              The estimates of sea-level change for crustal motion is required               
              for determining global sea-level change, an important gauge of                 
              global warming.  Satellite surveying techniques are to be                      
              employed for estimating crustal velocity.                                      
                                                                                             
              The project takes advantage of complementary expertise of the                  
              U.S. and Swedish research groups and Swedish coordination with                 
              the Nordic Council funding agencies.  The U.S. investigators have              
              extensive experience in the processing of space geodetic data and              
              using this data to estimate geophysical parameters.  This is                   
              complemented by the Swedish group's knowledge of the region.                   
              They will plan the surveys, the site reconnaissance and coordinate             
              the effort with the Nordic Council.
