Title       : Renovation of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences/Environmental Engineering
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1992 
File        : a9214457

Award Number: 9214457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $746861             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Michael Saunders   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. W. Ray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chia S. Kiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlene W. Bayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The concern for environmental contaminants in                             
              all media continues to expand as greater emphasis                              
              is placed on environmental problems.  Global                                   
              climate change, groundwater contamination,                                     
              potable-water quality, photochemical smog, sludge                              
              reclamation and disposal, indoor air quality, and                              
              toxic and hazardous substances are environmental                               
              problems which are pertinent to multiple                                       
              environmental media.  These problems demand                                    
              multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches                             
              to research if adequate, comprehensive solutions                               
              are to be developed.  The challenge is to develop                              
              the capacity to manage environmental changes                                   
              effectively in a manner that facilitates                                       
              opportunities for economic development.                                        
                   The goal at Georgia Tech is to foster                                     
              environmental management and economic development                              
              by establishing a nationally and internationally                               
              significant research base in environmental                                     
              technologies.  The high quality of the Georgia                                 
              Tech faculty and students, and the commitment of                               
              Georgia Research Alliance to endow chairs for                                  
              eminent scholars will provide the human resources                              
              to respond to this challenge.  However, the major                              
              hurdle faced by the university and its researchers                             
              in accomplishing these goals is the improvement of                             
              inadequate facilities.  This award is the first                                
              step toward overcoming this hurdle; it will                                    
              modernize research facilities, and consolidate                                 
              several research programs into the modernized                                  
              facilities.
