Title       : International Conference on Advances in Computational Mathematics, New Delhi,
               January 4-9, 1993, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1992  
File        : a9214094

Award Number: 9214094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $613840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. DeVore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Micchelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Carolina Cen Of
	      
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-0411

NSF Program : 6164      INDIA - INDIVIDUAL TRAVEL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5919,5976,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This proposal is for group travel                                
              to an international conference "Advances in                                    
              Computational Mathematics" to be held in New                                   
              Delhi, India from January 4-9, 1993.  Co-                                      
              organizers of the meeting are H.P. Dikshit,                                    
              pro-vice chancellor of Indira Gandhi National                                  
              Open University and Charles Micchelli, IBM T.J.                                
              Watson Research Center.  Most Indian                                           
              participants come from a wide spectrum of                                      
              Indian researchers in Applied Mathematics.  The                                
              main purpose of the meeting is to foster the                                   
              development of research in Computational                                       
              Mathematics in India through the exchange of                                   
              the latest developments in this field.                                         
              The technical subjects that will be highlighted                                
              include: wavelet analysis, solution of                                         
              nonlinear equations, information based                                         
              complexity, finite element analysis for the                                    
              solution of partial differential equations,                                    
              computational complex approximation,                                           
              applications of orthogonal polynomials,                                        
              multivariate data fitting and spline functions,                                
              and computer aided geometric design.  These are                                
              among the most active fields in numerical                                      
              computation.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This proposal will support the cost of                                 
              airfare for eight distinguished research                                       
              mathematicians and computer scientists from the                                
              United States.  This is one of the most active                                 
              fields in Indian science.  As the attendance of                                
              Ph.D. students and young faculty members will                                  
              be encouraged explicitly, this conference                                      
              should make an important contribution to the                                   
              training of young Indian scientists in                                         
              computation.  Applied Mathematics offers a                                     
              developing country, particularly India, the                                    
              tools to address some of their important                                       
              technological problems.  It also provides a                                    
              natural context to make best use of their                                      
              scientific and mathematical talents.  This                                     
              meeting should contribute to this process and                                  
              encourage  US-Indo collaborative research.
