Title       : Region Segmentation by Time Series Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9214839

Award Number: 9214839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George Lea                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jadwiga Rogowska   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The main purpose of this study is to analyze                                   
              new region segmentation techniques based on                                    
              the temporal properties of image sequences.                                    
              These techniques will enable precise definition                                
              of regions with similar or dissimilar temporal                                 
              patterns with respect to a reference pixel or                                  
              reference ROI (region of interest).  Different                                 
              similarity measures (correlation coefficient,                                  
              covariance, Tanimoto coefficient, etc.) will be                                
              tested on sequences of image ROI's (regions                                    
              of interest) of various sized and spacings.  The                               
              computational effectiveness of each similarity                                 
              measure will also be evaluated.                                                
              In addition, a method for automatic selection                                  
              of reference ROIs will be designed and tested                                  
              based on a new idea for maximum entropy                                        
              histogramming.  All of the ideas will be tested                                
              by (1) mathematical modeling, (2) application                                  
              to earth resources imagery, (3) application to                                 
              medical imagery.                                                               
              The significance of this research is that these                                
              new methods are of great importance in                                         
              dynamic image analysis due to the enormous                                     
              size of the data base to be processed.  For                                    
              example, a single spectral component of                                        
              Landsat imagery taken of a single region on                                    
              the surface of the earth over 10 years is                                      
              composed of about three billion data points                                    
              (pixels).  Clearly, extremely efficient                                        
              computational techniques are necessary to                                      
              analyze dynamic temporal changes and they                                      
              will have a potential use as a research tool in                                
              quantitative imaging.  Fortunately, the                                        
              segmentation techniques developed for time                                     
              series analysis of one type of image data can                                  
              be employed for time series segmentation of                                    
              other type of image data.  For example, the                                    
              techniques developed for satellite image                                       
              sequences can be used for analyzing medical                                    
              data, and vice versa.                                                          
              The results obtained in this study will lead                                   
              into a long term goal of establishing models                                   
              and techniques for the study of temporal                                       
              behavior of imaged structures and improve our                                  
              ability to extract quantitative information                                    
              contained in dynamic images.
