Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research: An Analysis of Peptide Release from
               Cerebellar Afferents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9214089

Award Number: 9214089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia A. Bishop   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5950,
Abstract    :
              9214089  Bishop  This award supports Professor Georgia A. Bishop of Ohio State
              University  and a postdoctoral associate to collaborate in neurobiological
              research  with Dr. K. Q. Do of the Brain Research Institute of the University
              of  Zurich, Switzerland.  Dr. Bishop has been studying the anatomical 
              distribution, brainstem origin and electrophysiological effects of  several
              chemical messengers in the mammalian cerebellum.  Dr. Do and her  research
              group have worked on defining mechanisms of release and  reuptake of various
              amino acids and peptides from brain tissue in vitro.   Together they plan to
              study the mechanisms which regulate the release of  the neuropeptide
              corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) from nerve  terminals within the rodent
              cerebellum.  Their approach combines their  complementary expertise and
              facilities for physiological methods (Dr.  Bishop) and biochemical techniques
              (Dr. Do).  Dr. Bishop will work for  several months in Dr. Do's well-equipped
              laboratory to begin the joint  research and learn certain techniques which she
              will carry back to her  research group in the U.S. for further use in
              coordinated but parallel  studies.    This research is an attempt to resolve
              technically challenging  analytical problems in order to further our
              understanding of the role of  neuromodulators in the central nervous system. 
              CRF has been ascribed  such a role; however, to date, there are no data
              available on the  conditions under which this peptide is released from axon
              terminals.   The goal of the proposed cooperative research, determining how CRF
              is  released from terminals in the cerebellum, is a necessary step toward 
              understanding how neuromodulators regulate the activity of neurons.
