Title       : Renovation of Materials Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9214280

Award Number: 9214280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1041687            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Ackerman ackerman@wuchem.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9162,
Abstract    :
                   The Washington University Departments of                                  
              Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Electrical                                    
              Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Physics                                
              have entered into a cross disciplinary program that                            
              seeks to advance the state of modern materials                                 
              research at the University.  Modern materials                                  
              science requires that traditional disciplinary                                 
              boundaries be broached and that researchers from a                             
              range of core areas join together to focus on                                  
              modern material problems such as the design and                                
              control of nanostructure, and novel processing and                             
              fabrication strategies.  Although Washington                                   
              University has an ongoing interdisciplinary                                    
              materials science effort, critical infrastructural                             
              deficiencies exist.                                                            
                   The present conditions in the materials                                   
              chemistry laboratories are hazardous and unsuitable                            
              for modern chemistry.  This award will provide                                 
              funding for the renovation of synthetic laboratory                             
              space that is used entirely for research and                                   
              research training activities.  Renovations will                                
              include substantial hood space needed for the                                  
              conduction of synthetic procedures critical to                                 
              developing new experimental materials with novel                               
              and important properties.   A single network of                                
              continuous ducting with vertical risers will                                   
              provide the laboratories with proper ventilation                               
              and a safe environment for studnets and staff.                                 
              Open modular work spaces will be provided to                                   
              promote interaction among colleagues.  Modern                                  
              interdisciplinary material research will become a                              
              strong and thriving enterprise with revitalized                                
              facilities.
