Title       : Renovation of Civil Engineering Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9214552

Award Number: 9214552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yatish T. Shah   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley O. Pipes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nihat M. Bilgutay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Research funding for the Department of Civil                              
              and Architectural Engineering at Drexel University                             
              has grown 370% over five years.  This increase                                 
              occurred although the laboratories are outdated,                               
              poorly organized, improperly ventilated and                                    
              inefficient.  This Award will renovate most of the                             
              Department's civil engineering laboratories so                                 
              that they may accommodate the increased research                               
              effort and allow continued growth of the research                              
              program.                                                                       
                   The laboratories were built forty to eighty                               
              years ago and were last renovated over twenty                                  
              years ago.  Within these labs the Department                                   
              trains undergraduate and graduate students and                                 
              conducts its extensive research program.  The                                  
              current condition of the space greatly hampers all                             
              aspects of this training and research.  Test                                   
              samples cannot be installed and removed                                        
              effectively.  Faculty and students are forced to                               
              work in areas where temperatures routinely reach                               
              110oF.  Dust from abraded concrete floors                                      
              threatens to contaminate experiments.                                          
                   Research efforts within the Department                                    
              include the world-renowned Geosynthetic Research                               
              Institute; geotechnical and environmental                                      
              engineering addressing issues of pollution                                     
              abatement, structural engineering focusing on                                  
              earthquake safety and innovative methods in                                    
              masonry construction; and civil engineering                                    
              materials research developing improved methods of                              
              testing and using materials.
