Title       : Symposium on Phylogeny and Biogeography of Hawaiian Terrestrial Biota; Honolulu,
               HI; August, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1992       
File        : a9214264

Award Number: 9214264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren L. Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki A. Funk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc of Plant Taxon
	      Department of Biology
	      Notre Dame, IN      /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Each participant in the symposium on patterns of speciation               
              and biogeography of the Hawaiian biota will apply phylogenetic                 
              methods to their data, generating hypotheses of relationships and              
              biogeography.  Using a consistent methodology will allow patterns              
              of radiation for the different groups to be directly contrasted.               
              Detected patterns can be used to explore adaptive radiation and                
              ecology of that group.  A broad spectrum of organisms (insects,                
              spiders, birds, dicot flowering plants) will be used to test                   
              ideas of island speciation and biogeography.  These will be the                
              first detailed biogeographical analyses for Hawaiian organisms                 
              (other than the well known Hawaiian Drosophila).  Finally, this                
              effort represents the first attempt to test the idea that                      
              independent lineages of Hawaiian organisms exhibit similar                     
              patters of colonization and differentiation directly related to                
              the unique geological of this archipelago.
