Title       : Dissertation Research: Household Economy in a Precolumbian State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9214649

Award Number: 9214649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8655               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Kolata a-kolata@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Giesso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Professor of Anthropology              
              at the University of Chicago, Mr. Martin Giesso will collect data              
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze lithic materials                
              derived from the Bolivian site of Tiwanaku. In past work he has                
              collected surface artifacts from many areas of this large site.                
              With National Science Foundation support he will continue this                 
              work and conduct limited excavation at a locale believed to be a               
              lithics production workshop. He will also analyze the large                    
              sample already collected. He will collect data on variations in                
              areal density, raw materials and types of stone implements                     
              represented. He will also reconstruct the production process to                
              determine the degree of standardization. This will permit him to               
              examine the issue of craft specialization and through it the                   
              degree of economic specialization at the site. Mr. Giesso will                 
              also conduct a geological survey to locate raw material sources                
              and then use neutron activation to tie worked material to point                
              of origin. These latter data also will shed light on economic                  
              organization.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Tiwanaku is a large archaeological site located in the Lake                    
              Titicaca Basin of Bolivia. Given its size, monumental                          
              architecture and broad influence it may defined as a "State" and               
              as such is the earliest one known in South America. It's origins               
              may be traced to ca. 300 B.C. While archaeologists know that                   
              states arose at about this time in many parts of the world, they               
              still do not understand in the detail the economic and political               
              processes involved. For example it is not clear whether craft                  
              specialization played either a causal role or was a result of                  
              such centralization. Mr. Giesso's research will help to answer                 
              this question.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will produce                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of how complex societies such as our own arose and               
              were maintained and will assist in the training of a promising                 
              young scientist.
