Title       : Dissertation Research: Late Magdalenian Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9214940

Award Number: 9214940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia-Anne Dobres  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, MS. Marcia-Anne Dobres               
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will examine              
              bone and antler artifacts from 16 archaeological sites from the                
              Pyrenees region of France which date from the end of the last Ice              
              Age. This wide variety of artifacts include tool types such as                 
              harpoons, needles, points and spear throwers. On a macro level she             
              will describe the formal attributes of these tools: their size and             
              conformation. Using microscopic techniques she will also attempt to            
              reconstruct the processes by which they were made. Through study of            
              resharpening and breakage she should be able to trace the                      
              functional history of individual objects. By comparison of                     
              sequential levels within a single site as well as roughly                      
              synchronic assemblages between sites she will attempt to set the               
              use of these objects into a broader regional perspective and show              
              how this pattern changed over time.                                            
                                                                                             
              The cultural achievements of Magdalenian and related peoples set               
              the stage for the emergence of complex societies. The Magdalenians             
              are responsible for the magnificent cave paintings in Southern                 
              France and adjacent regions of Spain. They developed specialized               
              subsistence economies which focussed on seasonal resources such as             
              salmon and they fabricated finely made bone objects. While many                
              Magdalenian sites have been excavated no reseacher has looked in               
              detail at bone working from a cross-site perspective. The goal of              
              this work is not to understand bone working per se but rather use              
              indicators such as variation in form and manufacturing technique to            
              gain insight into Magdalenian social, subsistence and technological            
              organization.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on the             
              emergence of complex societies and will assist in the training of              
              an extremely promising student.
