Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: The Early Development of Physical Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9214114

Award Number: 9214114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Spelke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 5937,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award will support U.S.-Sweden cooperative                     
              research in cognitive psychology between Elizabeth S. Spelke of                
              the University of Cornell and Claes von Hofsten of Umea                        
              University, Umea, Sweden.  The investigators propose to study the              
              early development of knowledge of motion of physical objects                   
              through two different, yet parallel sets of experiments:  one using            
              looking methods of object identification (Cornell) and the other               
              utilizing predictive reaching methods (Umea).   They will                      
              investigate infants' knowledge and perception of physical properties           
              of objects such as gravity, inertia, continuity and solidity. Infants          
              will be presented with a fully visible or partly occluded moving               
              object and their responses measured accordingly.  The research                 
              attempts to answer two questions:  how infants' knowledge of the               
              physical world is developed and whether the same knowledge                     
              guides their inferences either through visual perception (looking) or          
              physical action (reaching).                                                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Spelke brings to this collaboration her extensive background               
              and work on infants' understanding of physical properties of objects           
              and events.  This is complemented by Dr. von Hofsten's expertise               
              in the development of action and perception/action relationships in            
              infants.  The proposed experiments could not be conducted without              
              the unique equipment for investigating object-directed reaching in             
              infants which is only available in the Umea laboratory.  This                  
              cooperative research effort will advance knowledge of two larger               
              issues in cognitive psychology:  how humans learn to operate in                
              and understand the physical world.
