Title       : Plasma Oxidation/Anodization of Silicon Films for Photovoltaic and Flat Panel
               Display Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9214138

Award Number: 9214138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Hess   (Principal Investigator current)
              Miltiadis K. Hatalis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9163,9294,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research on electronic devices fabricated in thin films of                     
              amorphous silicon (a-Si) or polycrystalline silicon (p-Si) has                 
              recently gained momentum due to a variety of new applications                  
              for these devices.  For example, the efficiency of                             
              experimental solar cells produced using a-Si films currently                   
              exceeds 12%.  These efficiencies make such devices attractive                  
              for the realization of large area, low cost photovoltaic                       
              energy conversion systems.  Another example is a-Si and p-Si                   
              thin film transistors (TFTs) which have made possible the                      
              fabrication of full color, flat panel displays.  Such displays                 
              can be used in laptop computers and in future high definition                  
              TV.  In addition to flat panel displays, TFTs fabricated in a-                 
              Si or p-Si can be used as switching elements in other large                    
              area electronic systems such as lenseless contact-type image                   
              sensors and position sensitive detectors.  All of these                        
              devices (flat panel displays, image sensors and position                       
              sensitive detectors) are fabricated on low cost glass                          
              substrates; therefore the manufacturing temperatures must be                   
              kept below 600 C to avoid glass distortion.  In the case of                    
              hydrogenated a-Si devices, the process temperatures should be                  
              below 450 C to avoid deterioration of the electronic                           
              properties of the a-Si.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Oxidation of single crystal silicon (c-Si) has been used in                    
              the successful development and manufacture of integrated                       
              circuits.  The importance of silicon oxidation is that thermal                 
              oxidation of silicon results in the growth of a high quality                   
              insulator and passivation layer with an interface to silicon                   
              that has relatively few surface traps which alter device                       
              properties and affect device stability.  Oxidation                             
              temperatures used in the production of silicon integrated                      
              circuits is in the range of 800 to 1100 C.                                     
              An alternative method will be tested in this research, the                     
              plasma oxidation or anodization process, in which the grown                    
              film is exposed to reactive ions, electron, atomic oxygen, and                 
              ultra violet (UV) photons during oxidation.  This exposure                     
              leads to enhancement of the oxidation rates at low                             
              temperatures.  Electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) plasmas will                 
              be used to oxidize or anodize a-Si and p-Si films.  The                        
              oxidation kinetics of these processes will be studied as                       
              functions of the substrate temperature and plasma process                      
              conditions.  Electronic devices will be fabricated and their                   
              characteristics correlated with growth conditions.  This                       
              technology could impact the manufacture of low cost, high                      
              reliability, flat panel displays and solar cells.***//
