Title       : LMER: Plum Island Sound Comparative Ecosystems Study (PISCES): Effects of Land
               Use and Organic Matter - Nutrient Interactions on Estuarine Trophic Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9214461

Award Number: 9214461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1780000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Hopkinson chopkins@lupine.mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Fry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Giblin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Hobbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Deegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1129,1316,1577,1650,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Nutrient movement into estuaries and the resulting effects on                  
              primary productivity, the depletion of oxygen, habitat structure,              
              and trophic changes in coastal waters have dominated estuarine                 
              research for decades.  Another, and neglected, linkage between land            
              and coastal waters is the input of dissolved and particulate                   
              organic carbon and organic nitrogen. Organic nitrogen inputs are               
              frequently greater than inorganic nitrogen inputs and in many cases            
              the input of organic carbon from land is greater than the in situ              
              production of organic carbon.  Despite the quantitative importance             
              of organic matter inputs from land, there is little data on its                
              actual use in coastal waters and even less data on effects of                  
              organic matter loading on coastal ecosystem structure and function.            
              Recent developments in the chemical analysis of dissolved organic              
              C and N and stable isotope tracer technology now make it possible              
              to refine the input-output budgets and also address the fate and               
              importance of organic matter entering coastal waters from land.                
              Two broad questions addressed in this project are: (1) What is the             
              importance to estuarine ecosystems of organic carbon and organic               
              nitrogen inputs from watersheds with various land covers and uses?             
              and  (2) Does the interaction of inorganic nutrients with the                  
              quantity and quality of organic carbon and organic nitrogen play an            
              important role in determining the trophic structure, production,               
              and trophic efficiency in estuaries?                                           
                                                                                             
              This project will attempt to answer these questions through                    
              measurements of the quantity of dissolved and particulate organic              
              carbon and organic nitrogen entering coastal waters from land,                 
              through experiments to determine the effects of various nutrient               
              and organic matter inputs and interactions on the flow and                     
              recycling of C and N through pelagic and benthic food webs                     
              including higher trophic levels, and through modeling of food chain            
              transformations and the effects of changes in land use and land                
              cover.  The proposed research integrates estuarine biogeochemistry             
              with studies of food webs and population biology of higher trophic             
              levels.  Site-specific research will be focused in the Plum Island             
              Sound System of the cold-water Acadian Biogeographic Province in               
              northern New England.  This projects seeks conclusions and models              
              that are applicable across a wide range of coastal waters;                     
              hypothesis testing of specific questions across ecosystems is the              
              most effective way to achieve this goal. This project will combine             
              experimental studies in the Plum Island Sound Ecosystem with                   
              comparative studies at different coastal sites (LMER/LTER) chosen              
              to represent end-members in an analysis of interactions between                
              organic matter and inorganic nutrient loading.
