Title       : Science & Technology Center for Molecular Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9214821

Award Number: 9214821
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23116406           (Estimated)
Investigator: Leroy E. Hood   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 9171      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9126,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides renewed support for The Center for                    
              Molecular Biotechnology, a Science and Technology Center                       
              (STC) first  established at the California Institute of                        
              Technology in 1989.  The STC will move in stages to the                        
              University of Washington during 1992-1993, and will be                         
              located entirely at the University by early 1994.  The                         
              Center sponsors research and development activities aimed at                   
              the creation of new or improved instrumentation in several                     
              key areas of modern biotechnology. These include the                           
              sequencing of sub-picomole amounts of purified proteins, the                   
              large scale mapping and sequencing of genomic DNA and the 2-                   
              dimensional gel electrophoresis of highly complex mixtures                     
              of proteins.  Other research activities include development                    
              of mass spectrometric instrumentation, accompanying software                   
              and a variety of other computational tools useful in the                       
              Center's development of new technology and data analysis.                      
              In addition, the STC also sponsors education and outreach                      
              programs aimed at providing research experience and training                   
              for high school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral                      
              students.  These include programs expected to encourage                        
              increased participation by members of underrepresented                         
              minority groups in scientific research.  Other activities of                   
              the Center provide for transfer of the Center developed                        
              technology to the academic and commercial sector, and for                      
              research collaborations with academic, industrial and                          
              Federal scientists.  Support of these various activities                       
              within a center maximizes the benefit of all research                          
              activities from progress to new developments and facilitates                   
              the transfer of new ideas, technologies and research results                   
              to basic research and commercial development activities in                     
              other institutions and sectors.                                                
                  The recent, enormous progress in our understanding of                      
              basic cellular processes and the concomitant growth in our                     
              ability to analyze and manipulate basic genetic phenomena                      
              for the benefit of mankind have derived from a variety of                      
              techniques for the separation, analysis and synthesis of the                   
              protein and nucleic acid components of all living organisms.                   
              Key to this progress has been the development of automatic                     
              microchemical instrumentation and computational tools of the                   
              type being developed by this Center.  The new devices and                      
              methodology created by the Center are expected to have                         
              impacts on areas of basic and applied research as diverse as                   
              anthropology, molecular biophysics, forensic and clinical                      
              medicine, and agriculture.
