Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Synthesis and Reactivity ofNew Ruthenium
               Coordination Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1995    
File        : a9214955

Award Number: 9214955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Takeuchi takeuchi@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5946,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in                 
              inorganic chemistry between Kenneth J. Takeuchi of the State                   
              University of New York at Buffalo and James Cameron of                         
              Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland.  The investigators                
              propose to synthesize new ruthenium (II) complexes which utilize               
              novel macrocyclic ligands. Dr. Takeuchi brings to this                         
              collaboration his expertise in the synthesis of novel catalytic                
              systems and ruthenium complexes.  This is complemented by Dr.                  
              Cameron's background in organic chemistry and his expertise in                 
              the design and production of these unique organic ligands.                     
              Within the context of this collaboration, Dr. Takeuchi's advanced              
              graduate students will travel to Scotland to work with Dr.                     
              Cameron and his group. Initially, the collaborative research will              
              take place at Heriot Watt University, where Dr. Cameron and                    
              the U.S. graduate students will jointly synthesis and characterize             
              the macrocyclic ligands.  At SUNY Buffalo Dr. Takeuchi and his                 
              group will then substitute ruthenium into the macrocylic ligands               
              to produce new ruthenium complexes.  Subsequently, kinetic                     
              studies of inorganic and organic substances using the new                      
              complexes will be initiated.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This collaborative effort on ruthenium complexes will enhance                  
              our general understanding of catalytic systems.  The new                       
              ruthenium complexes could lead to more effective catalysts and                 
              further understanding of effects of catalytic performance.
