Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Development of Immunological Detection
               Systems for Plant-Associated Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1996  
File        : a9214004

Award Number: 9214004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Kloepper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5948,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. Joseph W. Kloepper and a graduate student of           
              Auburn University to collaborate in biological research with Dr. Jim           
              W. L. van Vuurde of the Bacteriology Department of the Research                
              Institute for Plant Protection in Wageningen, the Netherlands.  Their          
              goal in working with the Dutch group is to acquire state of the art            
              experience in research related to detecting and monitoring bacteria            
              in complex ecosystems, and to apply these techniques to future                 
              research in the U.S.   In particular, the objectives of their work             
              are to learn and evaluate advanced immunological techniques to                 
              quantify and differentiate introduced wild-type plant-associated               
              bacteria.  They will evaluate selected immunological methods and               
              compare them with model genetic marking systems for assessing overall          
              bacterial colonization of plants.  The project links two research              
              groups with complementary expertise: the Dutch have been innovators            
              in immunological approaches to bacterial detection and the U.S. group          
              has particular expertise in the microbial ecology of beneficial                
              plant-associated bacteria.  The U.S. graduate student will gain                
              research experience at a European center of excellence which will              
              contribute to his dissertation project.                                        
                                                                                             
              In situ detection of and monitoring the population dynamics of                 
              specific bacteria in complex ecosystems has historically been an               
              important aspect of microbial ecology with natural populations of              
              bacteria.  These processes have recently received renewed emphasis             
              for studying introductions of genetically engineered microorganisms.           
              The principal limiting factor in such ecological investigations has            
              been the difficulty of differentiating the target strain from                  
              indigenous or other background microflora.  Genetic markers are                
              currently used to provide such differentiation, but marking may cause          
              other genetic changes which alter the strain's behavior in natural             
              environments.  Immunological techniques such as those to be studied            
              in this collaboration offer a promising alternative for marking                
              strains without causing genetic alterations.
