Title       : Acquisition of Atomic Force Microscope and Surface Forces Apparatus for Studies
               of Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9214376

Award Number: 9214376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed S. El-Aasser mse0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E D. Sudol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olga Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An Atomic Force Microscope with a Scanning Tunneling head                      
              and a Surface Force Apparatus will be utilized to study                        
              polymer interfaces at Lehigh University's new Polymer                          
              Interface Center.  These instruments have the respective                       
              ability to image surfaces on the nanometer scale and to                        
              measure the forces of interaction between surfaces.  They                      
              are essential complements to existing microscopic and                          
              spectroscopic instrumentation in the ongoing and planned                       
              research at Lehigh on well-defined model polymer/substrate                     
              systems.  The polymer/substrate interface will be                              
              characterized, and the adsorption/desorption of polymers on                    
              the substrate and the relationship between polymer                             
              morphology and the physical and chemical properties of the                     
              substrate surface will be studied.  In addition, these                         
              instruments will enable direct measurement of the force of                     
              interaction between colloidal particles and enhance                            
              research in other multidisciplinary materials-related areas                    
              such as bioseparation, catalysis, and microelectronic                          
              packaging.  Placing them in the Polymer Interface Center                       
              will ensure that they will be utilized by a wide variety of                    
              research groups both at Lehigh and from industry.    //
