Title       : Floods in Bangladesh, Alternative Solution Strategies, Seminar at the University
               of Illinois, Urbana, December 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9214025

Award Number: 9214025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mir M. Ali   (Principal Investigator current)
              Salim Rashid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304030   Flood                                   
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports a seminar                                  
              on "Floods in Bangladesh, Alternative Solution                                 
              Strategies" to be conducted at the University                                  
              of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) by the                                  
              Bangladesh Environment and Flood Committee in                                  
              America (BEFCA) in conjunction with the                                        
              Institute for Flood Control and Drainage                                       
              Research (IFCDR) of the Bangladesh University                                  
              of Engineering and Technology (BUET).  The                                     
              Water Resources Center and the International                                   
              Programs and Studies Unit of UIUC are both                                     
              collaborating in the organization and conduct                                  
              of the conference.  The conference is to                                       
              address the currently proposed ideas to deal                                   
              with the floods and resulting destruction in                                   
              Bangladesh with special consideration to the                                   
              impact on life protection, environmental                                       
              issues, and availability of needed resources.                                  
              Sessions will include:  existent plans; pre-                                   
              feasibility studies; engineering and                                           
              hydrological issues; agriculture and economy;                                  
              and environment and society.  Summary and                                      
              recommendations will be discussed in a separate                                
              session.   The meeting is to include in                                        
              addition to the U.S. and invited Bangladeshi                                   
              scientists, experts from France and Japan, and                                 
              from other European countries.  The results                                    
              will be published in a Proceedings Volume to be                                
              made available to international agencies and to                                
              the Government of bangladesh for consideration                                 
              and implementation.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The flood problems in Bangladesh are                                   
              well known for their frequency and wide                                        
              destruction.  Less known is the main benefits                                  
              to food production that they normally provide.                                 
              Learning to minimize one and maximize the other                                
              is part of national and international efforts.                                 
              A sound scientific basis for these efforts is                                  
              what is planned for this meeting.  The results                                 
              could be of more generic benefit for countries                                 
              with similar problems.
