Title       : Renovation of Science Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1994   
File        : a9214287

Award Number: 9214287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305710             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Pitts   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Lubot  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Holtzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albright College
	      13th & Exeter Sts.
	      Reading, PA  19604    215/921-2381

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Albright College seeks support to improve the                             
              utility systems serving research in the Merner-                                
              Pfeiffer Hall of Science.  The advent of research                              
              activities requiring environmental controls has                                
              overtaxed the electrical system of the building.                               
              Neither the capacity nor the reliability of the                                
              existing electrical distribution system is                                     
              commensurate with the needs of modern science.                                 
              Appropriate temperature and humidity control                                   
              equipment will be installed in laboratories,                                   
              instrumentation rooms, faculty/student research                                
              and research training areas.  A state-of-the-art                               
              electronic energy management system will be                                    
              installed and integrated with existing systems,                                
              and insulation will be added to the roof and attic                             
              of the building.  Walk-in refrigeration facilities                             
              will be upgraded.  An existing dumbwaiter will be                              
              converted to a passenger elevator to provide                                   
              handicapped access.                                                            
                   The provision of an adequate electrical                                   
              distribution system will permit the continued                                  
              installation and use of new instrumentation, with                              
              appropriate environmental controls.  Air                                       
              conditioning will be installed to provide an                                   
              appropriate environment for equipment and                                      
              researchers.  Summer research opportunities for                                
              sophomores and juniors will be offered as well as                              
              provision of in-service training for teachers and                              
              special summer modules to stimulate interest among                             
              high school students in the natural sciences.
