Title       : Particle Acceleration in Solar Flares
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1994   
File        : a9214678

Award Number: 9214678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean F. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Brecht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berkeley Res Assoc Inc
	      P O Box 241
	      Berkeley, CA  947010241    703/750-3434

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   This project will study particle acceleration in solar flares.            
              A key problem in solar flare physics is the manner in which protons            
              and other particles are accelerated to several tens of MeV in a few            
              seconds as evidenced by impulsive -ray emission. This process is              
              called first-phase ion acceleration. The most widely accepted                  
              models in explaining this acceleration are shock acceleration and              
              stochastic acceleration by Alfven or magnetosonic waves. Neither of            
              these models has been developed self-consistently or has direct                
              observational verification. This project examines the consistent               
              development of a single-loop manetohydrodynamic (MHD) wave                     
              stochastic acceleration model. A half-loop is divided into 2                   
              coronal sections attached to a model chromosphere and photosphere.             
              The coronal sections include the source where time-dependent                   
              acceleration including wave-particle and wave-wave interactions                
              occurs, and a transport section in which protons propagate                     
              diffusively. Unlike previous work, it will be a complete model for             
              nonrelativistic energies including a nuclear interaction                       
              calculation. Thus, it will be possible to study the effect of                  
              changing the spectrum and/or power of turbulence in the source, the            
              loop size, etc., throughout the whole loop. In short, we shall be              
              able to put the stochastic acceleration model to a very thorough               
              test. Observational consequences in prompt -ray emission come from            
              the nuclear interaction part of the calculation. These results will            
              increase our understanding in this important area of solar                     
              research.                                                                      
              #
