Title       : Renovation of Engineering Research Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9214640

Award Number: 9214640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1002984            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Green dgreen@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore O. Poehler  (Principal Investigator current)
              Murray B. Sachs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Westgate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal requests fund for renovation of                             
              laboratory facilities in Krieger Hall, a primary                               
              research laboratory building.  The renovation and                              
              remodeling will provide the resources to locate                                
              more members of the Department of Biomedical                                   
              Engineering in proximity to other engineering                                  
              departments with a greater opportunity for joint                               
              research in areas including biomedical sensors,                                
              biomaterial and biomedical imaging systems.  Funds                             
              will also be used for renovating an                                            
              interdisciplinary, interdepartmental                                           
              microfabrication facility for researchers in the                               
              G.W.C. Whiting School of Engineering.  The                                     
              development of such a facility will require major                              
              renovation or replacement of an existing clean room                            
              to add exhaust systems for safe use of chemicals                               
              and gases needed in microfabrication, and an                                   
              improved air filtration systems to reduce particle                             
              counts.                                                                        
                   The facility will be used by faculty                                      
              throughout the engineering school including faculty                            
              in biomedical, electrical, chemical engineering,                               
              and materials science in the conduct of sponsored                              
              research. Ongoing projects in diverse areas such as                            
              microfabricated biomedical sensors, compound                                   
              semiconductors lasers, microwave devices, analog                               
              integrated circuits, electoractive polymers, porous                            
              silicon studies, barrier properties of polyamide                               
              layers, would benefit from this facility.  Use of                              
              this common facility by the participants and their                             
              trainees (postdocs, graduate and undergraduate                                 
              students) will improve the interdisciplinary                                   
              interactions in this technical area.
