Title       : Seminar on Climatic Environment: Influence on PhysiologicalFunctions - African
               Association of Physiological Sciences Nairobi, Kenya (Science in Developing
               Countries).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9214231

Award Number: 9214231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Li                              
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20326              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark M. Blatteis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 5224      U.S. CIVILIAN RES & DEVEL FDN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This conference grant supports the travel costs                                
              of the PI and eight African environmental                                      
              physiologists speaking at a research seminar on                                
              "The Climatic Environment: Influence on                                        
              Physiological Functions".  This seminar will be                                
              held in Nairobi, Kenya, September 21-28, 1992,                                 
              during the First International Congress of the                                 
              African Association of Physiological Sciences,                                 
              a new, continent-wide organization.  The                                       
              congress is sponsored by the International                                     
              Union of Physiological Sciences.  The seminar                                  
              will address issues currently particularly                                     
              relevant to African countries, many of which                                   
              are experiencing unusual weather changes.                                      
              Besides the scientists funded under this grant,                                
              an additional eight scientists from developed                                  
              countries will participate.  The main                                          
              objectives of the overall congress are to                                      
              stimulate scientific interchange and                                           
              cooperative research among African                                             
              physiologists, and to promote collaborative                                    
              research between scientists based in developed                                 
              countries with colleagues in Africa.                                           
              The seminar promises to be mutually beneficial                                 
              for U.S. and African scientists by providing a                                 
              forum for exchange of data on thermal                                          
              physiology in various species, and advancing                                   
              understanding of physiological adaptation to                                   
              drought.  The establishment of active Africa-                                  
              wide professional societies will promote                                       
              research cooperation and networking throughout                                 
              the region.  This project is relevant to the                                   
              objectives of the Science in Developing                                        
              Countries (SDC) Program with regard to                                         
              strengthening the scientific infrastructure in                                 
              developing countries, and increasing the level                                 
              of cooperation between U.S. scientists and                                     
              their counterparts in developing countries.
