Title       : Development of Strongly Focusing Hard X-ray Optics for Brilliant Synchrotron
               Radiation Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9214163

Award Number: 9214163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1395052            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfried Schildkamp wilfried@carsl.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Moffat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Rivers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. James Viccaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph V. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1578      FACILITY SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1578,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides one-half the funding necessary to develop             
              instrumentation that is needed to focus hard X-rays at the Advanced            
              Photon Source (APS). The remaining necessary funds are to be                   
              committed by the University of Chicago on behalf of the Consortium             
              for Advanced Radiation Sources (CARS). The capabilities of existing            
              X-ray focusing monochromators and mirrors are inadequate to take               
              full advantage of the extraordinarily brilliant radiation at APS.              
              They use either large focusing lengths, thus limiting their source             
              demagnification, or focus only a small fraction of the transmitted             
              radiation into the required small cross-section. Furthermore, they             
              cannot withstand the high heat load imposed by the APS X-ray beam.             
                   The purpose of this instrumentation development is to enable              
              new classes of experiments by providing significant improvement in             
              the linear spatial resolution and stability of X-ray optical                   
              instrumentation to be used at the APS. Techniques which are                    
              affected include: X-ray absorption spectroscopy from small or                  
              dilute samples ranging from geological samples to metallo-proteins;            
              microtomography and X-ray fluorescence microprobe analysis of                  
              samples as diverse as plant roots and meteorites; micro-crystal                
              diffraction from zeolites and metal cluster compounds; in-plane                
              surface diffraction from liquid samples at grazing incidence;                  
              reflectivity measurements from liquid surfaces; small angle                    
              scattering from polymers and macromolecular assemblies including               
              muscle; and time-resolved energy-dispersive spectroscopy from                  
              catalysts. All of these techniques require focusing of the incident            
              X-rays to a very small cross-section and can tolerate only a minor             
              increase in angular convergence of the beam. The improvements in               
              spatial resolution and brilliance allows use of smaller volumes of             
              materials, will permit time-resolved studies, and in general                   
              improve the sensitivity of all techniques. The resulting                       
              instrumentation will be used by scientists and research groups that            
              are members of CARS, including  workers in the areas of earth                  
              sciences, chemistry, materials research and the biosciences. All               
              instrument design developments will be made available to the entire            
              science community with science applications at APS.
