Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Momentum Distributions in Quantum Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9214242

Award Number: 9214242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16738              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Sokol pes4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5946,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in               
              condensed matter physics between Paul A. Sokol of Pennsylvania                 
              State University and William G. Stirling of the University of                  
              Keele in Staffordshire, United Kingdom.  The investigators                     
              propose to conduct a series of neutron scattering investigations of            
              quantum liquids.  The collaboration will take advantage of                     
              unique neutron scattering instrumentation at ISIS (Rutherford                  
              Appleton Laboratory) and the IPNS pulsed neutron sources                       
              (Argonne National Laboratory).  They will study systems where                  
              quantum effects dominate the microscopic properties, as well as                
              the final state effects in liquid helium, the properties of liquid             
              helium mixtures and the effects of restricted geometries on the                
              momentum distribution of liquid helium.  Both the U.S. and                     
              British investigators bring to this collaboration their experimental           
              expertise and will jointly conduct with their students the                     
              measurements and the data analysis. The British instrument has                 
              the capabilities for measuring momentum distributions in                       
              quantum liquids.  This will be complemented by temperature,                    
              pressure and concentration measurements on the Argonne                         
              spectrometer.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Liquid helium is an important element in superconductivity.                    
              Quantum effects dominate the behavior in helium's condensed                    
              phases and are responsible for its unique properties such as                   
              superfluidity.  Through studies of momentum distribution, the                  
              investigators will gain a unique view and significant insight into             
              the microscopic dynamics of these systems.  The proposed joint                 
              studies represent detailed investigations of momentum                          
              distribution in liquids and will add substantially to our                      
              knowledge.
