Title       : NSF/Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular
               Evolution for FY 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9803949

Award Number: 9803949
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie C. McCaig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1159      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN MOL EVO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1033,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  DBI-9803949  Bonnie C. McCaig    This action funds an NSF/Alfred P.
              Sloan Postdoctoral  Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution for 1998.  These
               fellowships support studies involving the theoretical,  comparative,
              computational, and/or experimental analyses of  biological patterns and
              processes at the molecular level  within the framework of organismic
              evolutionary change and  adaptation. These studies also include the use of
              molecular  data to address broader evolutionary questions.    Each fellowship
              supports a research and training plan to be  carried out in a sponsoring
              laboratory.  The research and  training plan for this fellowship is entitled
              evolution of  structural components of plants. The lignin in conifers  arises
              from the polymerization of one precursor, whereas  that in flowering plants
              arises from two. The question being  addressed is did a second laccase gene
              family coincide with  the origin of syringyl lignin in angiosperms? The two 
              classes of lignin-polymerizing laccases have different  substrate preferences,
              and these classes may be expressed  differentially during plant development.
              This project  examines the molecular evolution of genes encoding laccases,  the
              enzymes catalyzing lignin polymerization, to determine  whether a separate
              biosynthetic pathway evolved to supply  the syringyl component of angiosperm
              lignin. Gene  phylogenies and expression studies are used to determine  whether
              the classes diverged in parallel with changes in  lignin and cell composition
              during plant evolution.
