Title       : Stability of Travelling Waves with Applications in NonlinearOptics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9803408

Award Number: 9803408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. Kapitula kapitula@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The cubic nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equation is a partial differential
              
equation that describes pulse train generation in solid state
or fiber
              lasers, or pulse propagation in long distance communication 
systems under
              ideal conditions.  In order to describe the situation under 
more realistic
              physical scenarios, i.e., with losses, spectral filtering, 
etc., one must
              consider extended model equations which are perturbations 
of the NLS and
              which depend on the physical situation that is being modelled.  
Examples
              include models for phase-matched third-harmonic generation, 
materials with
              higher-order nonlinearities, and passively mode-locked fiber 
lasers. 
              Numerous recent research efforts have indicated that these extended 
models
              are very robust.  The central mathematical question of the planned 
research
              is the stability of propagating pulses, incorporating for example 
effects of
              small gains and losses in the optical fiber, and the correct 
balance of these
              effects which will guarantee stable pulses.  A mathematically 
rigorous
              analytical study of the existence and stability of solitons for the 
governing
              equations has been lacking and will be developed.  The work  
will exploit a
              recently discovered mathematical structure for the extended 
model equations. 
              It makes use of the fact that these equations are very close
to integrable
              equations that have been studied extensively.

Fiberoptic cables are of
              growing importance in long distance communications.
The pulses which carry
              information in such cables can be described by
mathematical equations that
              depend on the medium, among other things.  The exact
form of the equations is
              usually not known.  In order for information to arrive 
undistorted at its
              destination, it is essential that these pulses remain stable 
as they travel
              along the fiber.  In this work, rigorous mathematical methods to 
study this
              stability will be developed.  The methods will also be robust under
changes of
              the medium and will therefore have wide potential.
   
 






