Title       : Mathematical Aspects of Classical Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9803121

Award Number: 9803121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jalal Shatah shatah@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the study analytical and dynamical aspects   of
              generalized wave maps and the Yang-Mills equations. From the analytical  
              standpoint we plan to address fundamental questions such as existence,  
              uniqueness, and formation of singularities for these models.  Specifically   we
              will consider wave maps with torsion and will study how the addition of   the
              torsion tensor affects propagation of regularity and development of  
              singularities for these equations. From the dynamical standpoint we will  
              start by considering the integrable versions of wave maps with torsion, as  
              well as other integrable equations, and will study how homoclinic   solutions
              behave under perturbation.  Specifically we will study how the   persistence of
              homoclinic orbits leads to chaotic systems. We will also   attempt to quantify
              the difference between temporal chaos and spatial   chaos, which is observed
              numerically in perturbations of the above models.   We will test for spatial
              chaos by actually computing the probability   distributions at two spatially
              distinct points and show that the mutual   information function decays to zero
              at an exponential rate.    Many physical phenomena are described by equations
              which have a geometric   interpretation.  The best known examples are Maxwell's
              equations and   Einstein's equations for gravity. These physical models pose
              challenging   mathematical questions whose answer will add significantly to our
                understanding to the nature of things.  For instance, blackholes are  
              interpreted as a certain type of singularity that occur in the equations   of
              general relativity.  However in addition to blackholes, these equations   also
              exhibit another type of singularity called naked singularity, which   are
              purely mathematical and do not exist in nature.  In this project we   will
              consider models and study the existence and nature of singularities,   and how
              the geometry of the problems influence these issues.  This study   will help in
              the understanding of how , and of what type, singularities may   develop in the
              given systems.  We will also study the onset of chaos in   deterministic
              partial differential equations, which can exhibit spatial   chaos as well as
              temporal chaos.  In such systems the precise physical   information is usually
              lost and replaced by statistical quantities.  In   addition to this, the
              equations themselves become less useful and should   be replaced by effective
              probablistic equations to capture the stochastic   nature of deterministic
              spatial-temporal chaos.  In this project we will   develop tests for the
              occurrence of spatial chaos based on mutual   information, which measures the
              amount of information transmitted   spatially by the equation.  We will also
              attempt to develop a   mathematically rigorous procedure to derive from the
              original systems the   relevant effective probabilistic models.
