Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9803592

Award Number: 9803592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon E. Newhouse newhouse@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For a broad class of families of 2-dimensional dissipative diffeomorphisms,
              sufficient conditions for the existence of attractors carrying
              Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures will be investigated.  The study of ergodic
              properties of these measures and of geometric structure of the respective
              attractors is also proposed.  The project is based on joint research with M.
              Jakobson.  One of the main tools is the new technique of distortion estimates
              for two-dimensional maps with unbounded derivatives.  The basic example is a
              family of piecewise smooth transformations defined on a finite number of
              rectangles which are all mapped hyperbolically except for one, which is mapped
              parabolically. This project differs from earlier work in that there is no
              assumption that perturbations of one-dimensional maps are used.  The technique
              is based on a system of initial conditions which can be numerically checked,
              such as expansion, contraction, initial distortions, and dependence of these
              quantities on the parameters and can be applied to a variety of models.
              


This project involves the phenomenon of random oscillations in
              deterministic systems.  It has been recently discovered that this type of
              oscillation arises in a variety of mathematical models in  physics, chemistry,
              and biology.  For many applications to science, it is important to understand
              the mechanisms leading to such oscillations and to be able to describe them in
              simple mathematical terms.  Usually a given system will depend on external
              parameters such as temperature, pressure, or various electromagnetic
              quantities. Typical examples are airflow in the atmosphere, the motion of
              fluids under changes in external temperature, or the motion of the blood in
              one's heart under various physiological stresses. For some parameters, systems
              may exhibit stationary or periodic solutions, but, as the parameters change,
              the motion can start to behave randomly with increasing probability.  This is
              seen in the boiling of water which initially shows simple motion and becomes
              turbulent with increasing temperature.  It also occurs in arrhythmia of the
              heart, where a system which is normally periodic starts to oscillate wildly
              under certain forces.  In some cases, one wants to have systems show random
              motion.  In others, one wants to avoid such motion.  In any case, it is
              important to understand the nature of such motion.  The goal of this work is to
              give strict mathematical conditions which imply random behavior.  These
              conditions can be checked numerically, which provides straightforward
              applications to many real systems of interest.

