Title       : Random Combinatorial Structures and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9803410

Award Number: 9803410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris G. Pittel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803410  Pittel   The investigator will study a series of interrelated problems
              in asymptotic   enumeration and combinatorial probability. The goal is to
              analyze likely and unlikely   behavior of large combinatorial structures such
              as random graphs, trees, permutations, and   partitions of sets and integers.
              This research will develop new approaches based on   combinatorial-algebraic
              principles and ideas and analytical methods of probability and   random
              processes.   The connection between combinatorics and probability is well
              known. It played a   major role in the early stages of development of
              probability theory, and some classical   problems of a combinatorial nature are
              traditionally used to illustrate how the general   theorems work in application
              to combinatorics. Among them are random walks and   allocations of particles
              among cells (boxes), the latter being quite popular in various   models of
              statistical mechanics. During the last 30-35 years, there has been a tremendous
                outpouring of research in combinatorial probability motivated by new problems
              in   statistical mechanics (percolation theory, for instance), polymerization
              theory, computer   science (probabilistic analysis of combinatorial
              algorithms), population genetics, etc. The   terms random permutations,
              mappings, graphs, partitions, etc. have become household   names for many
              researchers who have discovered the importance of analysis of random  
              combinatorial structures. The related theory of random graphs, inaugurated by
              Erdos and   Renyi in the early sixties, has been found indispensable in many
              important applications.   Characteristically, the deepest results have come via
              a combination of fine combinatorial   techniques and powerful probabilistic
              methods. Besides the problems directly related to   random graphs, the
              investigator will study an optimal assignment problem with random   costs, a
              possible connection between the evolving random graph and the Diaconis-  
              Shahshahani algorithm ("card shuffling") for generating a r andom permutation,
              and   various problems on random partitions of sets and integers. The accent
              will be made on   searching for probabilistic and analytic methods which can be
              used for other combinatorial   structures important in applications.
