Title       : Numerical Methods for Large-Scale Modeling of Ocean Circulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1998     
File        : a9803331

Award Number: 9803331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Higdon higdon@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1339,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Higdon  9803331       The investigator develops improved algorithms for
              computing  numerical simulations of ocean circulation.  One motivation for 
              this work is to improve the numerical methods used in the Miami  Isopycnic
              Coordinate Ocean Model (MICOM), but this work also has  broader application. 
              MICOM is an operational ocean model that is  currently being tested at Los
              Alamos National Laboratory and  elsewhere for use in coupled, ocean-atmosphere
              models of the  global climate system.  This model presently uses a three-level 
              timestepping scheme that, in practice, requires a restriction on  the time step
              that is more severe than would be expected from  standard theory.  In addition,
              the model is affected by a  computational mode consisting of nonphysical
              grid-scale  oscillations, which are particularly stimulated by the behavior  of
              MICOM's representation of the oceanic mixed layer.  As an  alternative, the
              present project investigates methods involving  two time levels.  Such methods
              have the potential of allowing a  substantially longer time step, require less
              storage, and do not  admit a computational mode.  These methods are analyzed
              and  implemented in conjunction with a barotropic-baroclinic time  splitting,
              which is used to split the fast and slow motions into  separate subsystems that
              are solved by different techniques.       One application of computer models of
              ocean circulation is  to aid in the study of the earth's climate system.  For
              example,  a major point of interest in climate modeling is the poleward 
              transport of heat.  If the atmosphere and ocean were held  stationary, the
              tropical regions would be hotter than they  actually are, and the polar regions
              would be colder.  However,  the movement of the atmosphere and ocean serves to
              moderate these  extremes.  Roughly half of the poleward transport of heat is
              due  to the atmosphere, and half is due to the ocean.  In the ocean, 
              substantial transport is due to bulk movement by currents such as  the Gulf
              Stream; another transport  mechanism is the mixing caused  by eddies that are
              shed from ocean currents due to hydrodynamic  instability.  A proper modeling
              of these phenomena requires high  spatial resolution and computations over long
              time intervals, and  climate-scale simulations of ocean circulation pose great 
              computational challenges that strain the capabilities of the most  powerful
              computers.  The aim of the present project is to improve  the efficiency and
              reliability of the algorithms that are used in  such computations.  A
              full-scale climate model would require both  a model of the atmosphere and a
              model of the ocean, and these  components must communicate in a way that
              simulates the  interaction of the real atmosphere and ocean.  The present 
              project focuses on an existing ocean model that is being prepared  at several
              sites for large-scale, coupled ocean-atmosphere  simulations.
