Title       : Geometric Group Theory and 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9803316

Award Number: 9803316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58500              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Stallings stall@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803316
Stallings
     Stallings is working on matters connected with
              Grushko's Theorem, with  
certain delicate questions about surfaces involved. 
              One recent version of
this concerns a map of a compact connected surface T
              into a wedge of spaces
A and B, which is surjective on fundamental groups; if
              the boundary curves
all map to one side or the other, except possibly for one
              which maps with
length two, the map is homotopic to one that splits the
              surface into two
parts along a connected piece.  He is also interested in
              matters concerning
hyperbolic groups and cut vertices of graphs and Heegaard
              splittings of
3-manifolds.  These naturally influence his graduate students;
              and their
ideas and plans influence him too.  One student, Kim Whittlesey, has
              solved
an interesting problem concerning the existence of a subgroup of the
              
mapping class group that consists only of the trivial element together 
with
              pseudo-Anosov maps.  Another student is working on algorithmic
              matters
concerning free groups and is getting deeply into the theory of
              equations
in free groups.  Another student is interested in using the computer
              to
discover things about geometric objects, and another has started
              getting
into the theory of automatic and hyperbolic groups in some detail. 
              The
major portion of the grant is for the partial support of students.
    
              Group theory started out as the study of symmetries of geometric or
algebraic
              objects.  The geometry can be softened into topology, and this
produces some
              interesting new ideas; M. Gromov was one of the originators 
of this (1980's),
              and it has expanded considerably since his first work.  
In hindsight, one can
              see that geometric ideas about groups have occurred 
in work by Gauss (circa
              1800), Poincare (circa 1900), Whitehead (1930's). 
The nature of 3-dimensional
              manifolds is especially influenced by the
fundamental group, and conversely
              many results simply about groups have 
been stimulated by these topological
              ideas.  Several logical and
combinatorial aspects of other areas of
              mathematics have been understood
or even discovered by this approach.  There
              are many good researchers in
this area and many problems that are now
              approachable.
***

