Title       : RUI: Outer Models and Forcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9803643

Award Number: 9803643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85659              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice C. Stanley stanley@mathcs.sjsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stanley proposes to continue his work in set theory in two areas, namely,
              infinitary combinatorics and class forcing. One group of combinatorial problems
              concerns characterizing which stationary sets can contain closed unbounded
              subsets in cardinal and GCH preserving outer models. Every stationary subset of
              aleph-one has this property. Previous work has shown that in general there is
              no such first-order characterization for subsets of aleph-two.  On the other
              hand, for a restricted class of subsets of the successor of aleph-omega, such a
              characterization is possible. Some interesting cases remain open. Similar
              characterization questions can be asked regarding partitions and trees. Another
              area for continued work is the study of outer models and class forcing.
              Notwithstanding some technical qualifications, essentially only one method is
              known for constructing outer models, namely, Cohen's forcing method. Work to
              this point has shown that this is not an accident:  Granted a technical
              assumption, every outer model is a class forcing extension, in one sense of the
              notion. An open problem is to characterize outer models that are class forcing
              extensions in a certain stronger sense. One point of this work is reducing
              certain set theoretical questions to more concrete combinatorial questions.   
              All mathematical statements can be translated into statements about sets.  If a
              given statement is mathematically provable, then the corresponding statement
              about sets is derivable from the axioms of set theory.  Thus statements whose
              translations are neither provable nor refutable from the axioms of set theory
              are themselves neither provable nor refutable mathematically.  Such statements
              are said to be "independent".  In some cases, a given mathematical object may
              have a certain property for provable reasons; in others, for independent
              reasons.  One subject of this research is, for a certain class of objects, to
              determine whether it is possible to characterize those objects which have
              certain properties for pr ovable reasons.  Surprisingly, it can be shown that
              in some cases this is not possible---which objects have the specified property
              depends on global features of the entire universe of sets.  Another subject of
              this research is class forcing.  Essentially, only one method is known for
              proving that statements are independent, namely, Cohen's forcing method. 
              Recent work has shown that there is a good reason for this.  In many cases, any
              independence result that can be obtained can be obtained by class forcing, in
              one sense of the term.  However, this sort of class forcing is combinatorially
              far removed from the sort that is typically used to establish independence
              results.  It is a goal to close this gap (or to explore why it is not possible
              to close it). A hope is that this will provide a means of reducing certain
              problems to tractable questions regarding forcing.
