Title       : Study of Grain Boundaries in Superconducting YBCO Thin Films: Correlation
               Between Critical Current Densities and Boundary Geometry/Structure/Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9803212

Award Number: 9803212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Siu-Wai Chan sc174@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803212  Chan    This project will perform a comprehensive study of the grain 
              boundaries in the high-temperature superconductor YBa2Cu307-  x (YBCO).  The PI
              will study  001  tilt boundaries that  often occur in textured films grown on
              textured Ni/Cu tapes  as well as certain special boundaries in YBCO films on 
              single crystal substrates.  Some YBCO tilt boundaries will  be prepared by
              using highly specific bicrystals,  tricrystals, n-crystals as templates for
              film growth.  Low  indices planes as boundary planes will be engineered in 
              these template substrates to avoid faceting in the YBCO  films.  Critical
              current densities on individual boundaries  will be measured by imaging the
              boundary Josephson vortices  (the widths of these vortices are directly related
              to the  local critical current density).  The magnetic flux quantum  imaging is
              performed by scanning superconducting quantum  interference device microscopy
              (SSM).  The same boundaries  will be studied by scanning electron microscopy
              (SEM) with  back-scattering channeling Kikuchi patterns to identify the  5
              geometric parameters of each boundary.  Critical current  densities of
              boundaries will be plotted as a function of the  geometric parameters.  Any out
              of plane component of  misorientation or with a misorientation axis other than 
               100  will be noted and recorded.  Individual boundaries  observed in SSM and
              SEM will be matched by fiducial points  on the samples.  Special areas of
              important boundaries will  be prepared into planar view samples for observation
              in  transmission electron microscopes employing diffraction  contrast
              microscopy, electron diffraction, high resolution  electron microscopy,
              boundary composition mapping with  energy dispersive x-ray analysis, and
              chemical mapping with  electron energy-loss spectroscopy.  Boundary segregation
              and  intergranular films will be detected.  In addition to  perfectly
              stoichiometric targets, slightly  off-stoichiometric targets will be used to
              make YBCO films.  These off stoichiometric  films can be used to assess the 
              degree of susceptibility to segregation of different  boundaries.  The
              geometric specifications of these  001   tilt boundaries from microscopy will
              be related to their  structure, their composition mapping, their local
              Josephson  penetration lengths, their critical current densities, and  the
              overall film compositions.  %%%  Grain boundaries in materials often control
              the properties  of that material.  This is especially true in high- 
              temperature superconductors, and limits the usefulness of  devices made from
              these materials in commercial and military  applications.  An understanding of
              the grain boundary effect  on the superconducting properties will enable device
               engineers to develop better devices from these materials.  ***
