Title       : Studies of High-Tc and Buckminsterfullerene Superconductors under High
               Hydrostatic Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9803820

Award Number: 9803820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Schilling schill@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9803820 
              Schilling    This experimental research project is concerned with the role  of 
              defects  in setting the transition temperature of two interesting  types  of
              superconductor, the cuprates and fullerides. The PI  in  previous   work  has 
              shown  that  in  Tl-2201   and   YBCO   the  redistribution of oxygen defects
              can alter Tc by as much as  40K.  The present project will make use of unique
              apparatus including a  pressure cell incorporating a SQUID detector, to measure
              the time  dependence  of  relaxational changes  in  transition  temperature 
              following application of hydrostatic pressure. The goals  of  the  project  
              are:  (a)  establish  in  which  oxides  and  at   what  stoichiometries
              important relaxation effects occur, and in  these  cases to measure the T and P
              dependences of the relaxation times;  (b) to determine through diffraction
              studies and NMR measurements  the nature of the defects involved; (c) through
              correction of the  measured   pressure  dependence  of  Tc  for   these  
              relaxation  processes,  to  determine at varying doping levels the  intrinsic 
              dependence of Tc on lattice parameter. This project also includes  high  
              pressure   magnetization  studies  on  several   fullerene  superconductors.
              The goal here is to clarify anomalous properties  which     include    
              pressure-induced     monomeric-to-polymeric  transitions,   orientational 
              ordering  effects,  and   covalency  effects    in    the   bonding.   This  
              research   program    is  interdisciplinary  in nature and involves one  or 
              more  graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training  in  preparation 
              for  careers in industry, government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This
              experimental research project is concerned with the role  of  crystalline
              defects in setting the transition temperature of  two  interesting types of
              superconductor, the cuprates and fullerides.  The    cuprates   are   the  
              highest   transition    temperature  s uperconductors known, in some cases
              superconducting up to  160K.  The fullerides, also known as
              Buckminsterfullerenes, are recently  discovered  superconductors up to about 
              30K,  formed  by  adding  alkali metals such as Na or Rb to carbon-sixty
              molecules. The  PI  in  previous  work  has shown that in certain cuprate 
              cases  the  redistribution of oxygen defects can alter Tc by as much as  40K. 
              The present project will make use of unique apparatus including a  pressure
              cell incorporating a SQUID detector, to measure the time  dependence   of 
              changes  in  transition  temperature   following  application  of  hydrostatic
              pressure.  The  time  dependence  is  observed  in  some  cases  even at very
              low  temperatures,  which  strongly  indicates that crystalline defects  are 
              involved.  For  example, the oxygen in the cuprate can transfer from one
              location  to  another, following the application of a change in hydrostatic 
              pressure.  Two goals of the project are: (a) establish  in  which  oxides  and 
              at  what  compositions important relaxation  effects  occur, and in these cases
              to measure the temperature and pressure  dependences  of  the  relaxation
              times;  and,  (b)  to  determine  through  diffraction studies and NMR
              measurements the  nature  of  the   defects   involved.  These  studies   are  
              important   for  applications   of  cuprate  superconductors,  because   in  
              most  applications it is desirable to select compositions for which the 
              transition  temperature will be stable over  time.  This  project  also 
              includes  high  pressure magnetization studies  on  several  fullerene 
              superconductors. The goal here is to clarify anomalous  properties  which
              include pressure-induced monomeric-to-polymeric  transitions,   orientational 
              ordering  effects,  and   covalency  effects    in    the   bonding.   This  
              research   program    is  interdisciplinary  in nature and involves one  or 
              more  graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training  in  preparation 
              for  careers in industry,  government laboratories or academia.  ***
