Title       : Development of a Pico-joule Calorimeter Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9803019

Award Number: 9803019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie H. Allen l-allen9@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Cahill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Ober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Stephen Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803019
Allen
Advances in techniques of micro-machining small microheater
              elements and the availability of high precision electronics have generated a
              new class of heat sensing instruments.  These advances will have major impact
              in developing a new ultra-sensitive calorimetry instrument for measuring energy
              beyond nanojoule to picojoule sensitivities.  This award provides support to
              develop a calorimeter which will have picojoule sensitivity by using novel
              micro-machining techniques.  This instrument will be used for fundamental
              energy measurements in material systems ranging from interactions between
              clusters containing only a hundred atoms to the real time measurement of
              nanoliter biological samples.

Calorimetry is the ideal tool for studying the
              fundamental properties of material, e.g. the melting point, heat of fusion, and
              the heat capacity.  However, until recently calorimetry  was limited to studies
              of bulk material.  Now, new advances  have provided us with the first
              opportunity to apply this powerful technique on the nanometer scale of
              material, at dimensions where material properties deviate  tremendously from
              their bulk values.   A recent article in SCIENCE by Bertsch [1] entitled "
              Enhanced Melting in Clusters," highlights the new breakthrough techniques  in
              calorimetry.  He discusses the size-dependent phenomenon of reduced melting
              temperature of free clusters in a beam [2] and on a surface [3].

Using the
              new technology, the proposed instrument will generate a quantum leap in
              sensitivity of factor of 10,000 over any current conventional systems.  This
              increased sensitivity will allow exploration of material characterization at a
              new level of thermodynamic measurement.

The picocalorimeter will be applied
              to a broad range of collaborative materials studies including (i) enhanced
              melting point studies, (ii) direct thermodynamic studies of nucleation,
              coalescence and growth of surface clusters during film growth, (iii) defect
              recovery of ion-implant damage during thermal annealing, (iv) surface
              reconstruction of Liquid Crystal (LC) fluorinated block polymers, and (v)
              studies of cell division in a single-cell embryo.

Faculty and students from
              the University of Illinois, University of Chicago, and Cornell University will
              be involved with the development of this new instrument.
%%%
***

