Title       : Behavior of Large-Scale Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9803753

Award Number: 9803753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124500             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. David Levermore lvrmr@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803753
Levermore

This proposal is comprised of six otherwise disparate
              projects with the 
unifying theme of investigating how collective large-scale
              behavior arises 
in multi-scale dynamical systems. The projects are: Zero
              Dispersion 
Limits of Nonlinear Wave Equations, Macroscopic Lattice Dynamics,
              the 
NLS Limit of the CGL Equation, Moment Closure Hierarchies for Kinetic
              
Equations, Numerical Schemes for Hyperbolic Systems, and Shallow-
Water
              Models.  From a physical perspective this proposed effort could be 
viewed as
              a study of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics.  But it is more 
than that,
              for it strives to discover and study new nonlinear phenomena 
that could
              impact the way physical, geophysical, and biological models are 
developed and
              simulated.

New technologies are entering regimes in which traditional
              mathematical 
models are inadequate.  For example, quantum mechanical effects
              play a 
central role in the emerging nanoscale semiconductor technology. 
              These 
effects are absent from traditional device models. Including them often
              
leads to models with "small dispersion."  Such models exhibit large-scale
              
behaviors that are not understood and are hard to simulate because they
              
result from collective smaller-scale phenomena.  Current mathematics is 
not
              up to the task of describing or simulating such things adequately.  The 
first
              and second projects of this proposal address the development of 
mathematics
              that can do the job.  The other projects of the proposal 
address the need for
              other mathematical developments that would impact 
nanoscale semiconductor
              design, hypersonic flight, epidemiological 
models, ocean circulation models,
              and other technologies.

