Title       : Acquisition of a Nanoindenter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9803045

Award Number: 9803045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique J. Lavernia lavernia@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803045  Lavernia  This award provides support for the acquisition of a 
              nanoindenter to serve the research needs of several ongoing,  as well as future
              research programs dealing with the  synthesis-structure-property studies of
              nanocrystalline  materials at the University of California at Irvine. 
              Nanocrystalline materials provide the material  scientist/engineer with the
              unique opportunity to achieve  combinations of properties that are otherwise
              unachievable  with equilibrium materials.  For example, nanophase ceramics  are
              reported to exhibit unusually high ductilities, whereas  nanophase metals are
              noted to exhibit ultra-high hardness  values.  To that effect, the objective of
              the research  program proposed herein is to investigate the various  aspects of
              mechanical properties of nanocrystalline  materials, including powders,
              coatings and bulk samples  produced at the University of California at Irvine. 
              More  specifically, the research program will investigate: 1) the  evolution of
              microhardness of various metals, ceramics and  cermets as a function of grain
              size during ball milling, 2)  experimental study of the microhardness depth
              distribution  in thermal sprayed nanocrystalline coatings as a function of 
              grain size, porosity and second phase dispersoids (dependent  on cooling rate
              and the coating thickness), 3) Young's  modulus behavior (depending on grain
              size and porosity of  various nanocrystalline materials), in particular those 
              present in small dimensions, 4) wear resistance of  nanocrystalline coatings
              with low porosity, 5) time  dependent properties (strain rate sensitivity,
              creep and  stress relaxation) of nanocrystalline coatings, and 6) yield 
              strength of nanocrystalline coatings.  To accomplish these  objectives the
              following approach is proposed.  First,  mechanical alloying will be used to
              synthesize  nanocrystalline powders of Al based alloys, Inconel 718, Ni  and
              WC/Co, emphasizing the control of contamination,  particle size distribution
              and particle morphology.  Second ,  the mechanically alloyed nanocrystalline
              powders will be  consolidated using two different approaches: hot pressing, 
              hot isostatic pressing or hot extrusion and high velocity  oxygen-fuel (HVOF)
              thermal spraying to prepare  nanocrystalline bulk samples or coatings.  Third,
              the  physical and mechanical properties of the as-milled,  consolidated and
              HVOF thermal sprayed nanocrystalline  powders will be studied in detail, paying
              particular  attention to various nanocrystalline coatings prepared by  high
              velocity oxygen-fuel spraying.  Moreover, Hall-Petch  strengthening mechanisms
              in the consolidated nanocrystalline  materials will be studied.  %%%  This
              instrument will be shared by students and faculty  across the campus at the
              University of California at Irvine.  It is hoped that this research will impact
              the growth of  nanocrytalline materials to create bulk 3-D samples having 
              grain sizes less than 100 nanometers, which would  dramatically increase the
              performance of all materials that  display this behavior.  This would impact
              strength of  materials, corrosion resistance, and improve mechanical 
              performance.  ***
