Title       : Workshops on Nonlinear and Nonstationary Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9803794

Award Number: 9803794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Smith rs@stat.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richard L Smith
DMS-9803794

The classical theory of signal processing is
              based on models which are stationary, linear and in many cases also Gaussian. 
              Recent advances in time series and the theory of signal processing have drawn
              attention to many new models and methods.  Among these are nonlinear
              autoregressive and nonlinear state-space models, state-space models with
              time-varying or state-dependent coefficients as models for nonstationary and
              nonlinear series, linear non-Gaussian processes which pose some specific
              problems not encountered with Gaussian processes, methods derived from the
              theory of dynamical systems, and many others.  There has been a parallel growth
              in the applications of signal processing in many areas such as engineering,
              finance, the environment, etc.  The current project aims to develop new
              research in both the theory and applications of this diverse range of
              topics.

The project will provide funds for US-based researchers to attend a
              series of workshops taking place within a six-month program on "Nonlinear and
              Nonstationary Signal Processing" at the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical
              Sciences, Cambridge, England.  The overall theme of the program is to bring
              together researchers in different areas of statistics and signal processing,
              with the intention of fostering research links between the two groups.  Within
              this overall structure, a number of workshops on specific themes will be
              organised.  The themes include Bayesian approaches to signal processing,
              financial applications, environmental applications, dynamical systems and the
              analysis of large data sets in industry.  Participants from the USA will
              receive travel and subsistence support from the grant; some of the money is
              reserved for women, minorities and new researchers.

