Title       : Mathematical Analysis of Taxis in Angiogenesis with Application to the Study of
               Tumor Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9803992

Award Number: 9803992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Levine halevine@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Levine  9803992       The investigator and his collaborators develop models of 
              angiogenesis.  Angiogenesis is a process whereby capillary sprouts  from a
              pre-existing vasculature are formed in response to  externally supplied
              chemical stimuli.  The sprouts, driven by  endothelial cell migration and
              mitosis, develop and organize  themselves into a dendritic structure. 
              Angiogenesis has been  observed for example during embryogenesis, wound
              healing,  arthritic development and during the growth of solid tumors.  This 
              process is thought to occur in three steps: the degradation of  the vascular
              membrane and interstitial matrix by endothelial  cells, the migration and
              proliferation of the latter, and finally  tubulogenesis.  This project is
              specifically directed at  constructing and analyzing mathematical models of
              tumor  angiogenesis.  These models are based on the idea of reinforced  random
              walks combined with nonstandard reaction-diffusion  mechanisms to describe how
              capillary sprouts are formed and how  endothelial cells migrate into the
              interstitial cellular matrix.  In particular, the modeling includes
              chemo-attraction via certain  tumor angiogenesis factors emitted from the
              tumors and haptotaxis  via secretion of fibronectin from the endothelial cells.
               Fundamental objectives of the study are to suggest testable  hypotheses for
              the capillary sprout formation and to understand  the mechanisms for
              anastomosis and the branching of capillaries.  The goal is to use the models to
              suggest strategies whereby  capillary sprout growth can be impeded and
              consequently inhibit  the spread of capillary networks.  By preventing the
              capillary  dendritic structure from reaching the tumor, the tumor will be 
              starved of a blood supply.  Consequently tumor cells will be  prevented from
              metastasizing to other parts of the body.       Several years ago, Dr.  Judah
              Folkman of Children's Hospital,  Boston, proposed a model for malignant tumor
              growth.  It is known  that an avascular tumor (a tumor without a blood sup ply)
              can only  grow to a certain size before it begins to die because of oxygen 
              insufficiency.  Folkman suggested that as it dies, it sends out a  chemical
              signal that induces the body to produce a second  chemical (called a tumor
              angiogenic factor, TAF).  TAF, in turn,  diffuses through the surrounding body
              tissue to nearby capillary  vessels where it creates openings in the capillary
              walls.  The  (endothelial) cells that line all capillary walls are then able 
              to leak through these openings and follow the chemical trail left  by the TAF
              back to the tumor, forming new capillaries as they go.  These secondary
              capillaries then deliver oxygen directly to the  tumor, enabling it to grow
              more rapidly than it could in the  avascular state.  In order to inhibit the
              tumor growth, it has  been suggested that it might be possible to use certain 
              anti-angiogenic factors (antigens) to inhibit the action of the  TAF and thus
              not only starve the tumor by preventing the growth  of these secondary
              capillaries but also prevent the spread of  tumor cells to other parts of the
              body through the circulatory  system.  The investigator and his collaborators
              aim to put  Folkman's mechanism on a quantitative footing by developing a 
              mathematical model that is both descriptive and predictive.  That  is, the
              model will not only aid in the understanding of Folkman's  ideas at a
              fundamental scientific level but can also be used to  suggest strategies
              whereby capillary growth can be impeded and  consequently inhibit the spread of
              capillary networks.  The model  should ultimately suggest optimal dosages of
              antigens needed to  prevent capillaries from reaching the tumor, thus
              minimizing risk  to the patient as the tumor is deprived of a blood supply.  On
              a  more positive note, the same models could perhaps also be used to 
              effectively model a mechanism by which capillary sprout growth  can be
              encouraged, such as in embryo development or wound  healing, by isolating those
              factors that encourage such growth.
