Title       : Computed Tomography and Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9803352

Award Number: 9803352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84893              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adel Faridani faridani@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project involves research in computed tomography, generalized Shannon
              sampling theory, and applications of sampling theory in tomography. Computed
              tomography is an imaging technique which  reconstructs a density function from
              a large number of its line integrals. Ordinary tomography is not local:
              reconstruction at a point requires integrals over lines far from that point.
              For a number of applications it is highly desirable if only integrals over
              lines intersecting some  region of interest need to be used
              ("region-of-interest tomography"). A special case is local tomography where the
              region of interest may be arbitrarily small. Local tomographic reconstructions
              recover some but not all properties of the original density function. Sampling
              theorems provide exact interpolation formulas for bandlimited functions and
              play a fundamental role in signal processing. In tomography sampling theorems
              are used to identify efficient data collection schemes allowing for maximum
              resolution in the reconstructed image, as well as for error analysis of
              reconstruction algorithms. If, as is the case in tomography and other
              applications, sampling theorems are applied to non-bandlimited functions,
              interpolation is no longer exact and a so-called aliasing error occurs. The
              usefulness of sampling theorems for such functions depends on the availability
              of good estimates for this error. 

The  goals of this project are
              development and  numerical analysis of high-resolution reconstruction
              algorithms and development of a software package for region-of-interest
              tomography including local tomography; investigation of optimal sampling in
              three-dimensional local tomography; derivation of new error estimates for the
              aliasing error; and exploration of a generalization of the sampling concept in
              the framework of locally compact abelian groups which provides a unified view
              of  diverse applications such as non-equidistant sampling, numerical
              integration, multisensor deconvolution, and filter banks.





