Title       : Computational Electromagnetic Methods in Nonlinear Optics and Microwave Material
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  2001    
File        : a9803568

Award Number: 9803568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan H. Luke joluke@numerics.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl V. Hile  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9803568    Cheryl V. Hile    TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION  --------------------- 
              The research in this project focuses on the development of efficient 
              computational electromagnetic methods that will be utilized to gain a 
              fundamental understanding of (1) ultrashort pulse propagation in nonlinear 
              optical fibers and devices and (2) microwave material processing systems.  The 
              first project focuses on understanding the behavior of ultrashort pulse 
              propagation in nonlinear optics fibers and devices by (1) developing 
              computational solutions of Maxwell's equations and (2) determining the extent
              to  which asymptotic envelope approximations can be used to describe these
              pulses.  Specifically, we develop computational solutions of Maxwell's
              equations to  understand the behavior of one-dimensional pulse propagation near
              the zero  dispersion wavelength in dispersion-shifted optical fibers and to
              understand the  behavior of two-dimensional pulse propagation of ultrashort
              spatial solitons.  In parallel with this, we derive corresponding envelope
              equations and determine  the extent to which these more simplified equations
              can be used to model  ultrashort pulse propagation near the zero dispersion
              wavelength and  two-dimensional pulse propagation of ultrashort spatial
              solitons.  The second  project focuses on the development of efficient hybrid
              numerical methods to  model microwave material processing in single- and
              multi-mode cavity heating  systems.  We will begin by developing an efficient
              hybrid numerical method to  model the electromagnetic interaction of a low-loss
              ceramic in a high-Q  single-mode waveguide applicator.  Finally, we will extend
              these ideas to create  a hybrid numerical method for modeling high-Q multi-mode
              cavity heating systems.    NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION  -------------------------
               The research in this project focuses on the development of efficient 
              computational electromagnetic methods that will be utilized to gain a 
              fundamental understanding of (1) ultrashort pulse propagation in  nonlinear 
              optical fibers and devices and (2) microwave material processing systems. 
              Understanding these complex phenomena and processes is essential for the 
              development of new optical technologies and the industrial production of high 
              quality materials and products.  The first aspect of this project focuses on 
              understanding the behavior of ultrashort pulse propagation in nonlinear optics 
              fibers and devices by (1) developing computational solutions of Maxwell's 
              equations and (2) determining the extent to which asymptotic envelope 
              approximations can be used to describe these pulses.  The second aspect of this
               project focuses on the development of efficient hybrid numerical methods to 
              model microwave material processing in single- and multi-mode cavity heating 
              systems.  These numerical methods will provide detailed knowledge of the 
              interaction between the waveguide applicator, the electromagnetics fields and 
              the ceramic in these microwave heating systems.  Detailed knowledge of this 
              interaction will lead to a more complete characterization of the heating
              process  and thereby help to prevent nonuniform heating and lead to future
              optimizations  of the heating process.
