Title       : Dynamical Systems and Smooth Ergodic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9803150

Award Number: 9803150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lai-Sang Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research on the mathematical theory of chaotic dynamical systems is proposed.
              More specifically, this project focuses on the geometric and statistical
              theories of dynamical systems with predominantly hyperbolic behavior.  A
              systematic study of the rates of mixing and related statistical properties
              (such as the Central Limit Theorem) for chaotic systems continues work of an
              earlier NSF-supported project. Three other areas of investigation are proposed:
              stability under small random perturbations; strange attractors of a certain
              solenoidal type and possible applications; and the use of dynamical systems
              techniques in two problems from mathematical physics, the one-dimensional
              Schroedinger operator and the fast dynamo problem in magneto-hydrodynamics. 
              Physical phenomena, such as weather and atmospheric disturbances, evolve with
              time. Dynamical Systems is the branch of mathematics that studies the theories
              that lie behind the time evolutions of these and other processes. Researchers
              in this field analyze models proposed by physical scientists, form theoretical
              bases for explaining observed phenomena, and aim ultimately to predict future
              occurrences. One of the advances in the nonlinear sciences in this century is
              the recognition that relatively simple physical laws can and do have extremely
              complicated manifestations. Behaviors that appear to follow no logical patterns
              are often grouped under the term "chaos."  Chaotic systems are the objects of
              this research. In this project, various avenues will be pursued to relate the
              outward chaotic manifestations of a dynamical system to its underlying order,
              taking into account random fluctuations that occur as a result of chance.
