Title       : Statistical Modeling and Analysis of Circadian Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9803600

Award Number: 9803600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sreenivasa R. Jammalamadaka rao@pstat.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803600
S. Rao Jammalamadaka

This research is concerned with statistical
              models and methods for circular data, including inference for wrapped stable
              family of circular distributions, tests for multimodality, predictive inference
              for directional data and application of Bayesian methods when appropriate prior
              information is available.  When a circular variable depends on other linear or
              circular covariates, multifactor designs as well as regression approaches are
              used to assess such dependence.Correlation and regression for circular
              variables and related optimal-design issues involve novel statistical problems
              and form an essential part of this investigation.

One primary motivation for
              this research comes from the study of biorhythms which control our biological
              clock and include such important things as the sleep-wake cycle, hormonal
              pulsatility, reproductive cycles etc.  Proper statistical analysis of such
              rhythms should take account of the fact that cyclical phenomena should be
              represented as data on a circle of suitable circumference rather than as more
              traditional "linear" data.  Appropriate modeling of such rhythmicity and its
              proper statistical analysis is an intended outcome of this research.  The
              regression models tell us how this rhythmicity might be affected by other
              covariates such as age, sex, time at which certain treatment is administered,
              dosage etc.  Using these models, one can hope to determine optimal timing for
              medications or surgery to achieve greatest impact as well as help quantify the
              benefits of newly emerging approaches such as "Chronotherapeutics".  Although
              the presence of circadian-time keeping mechanisms at both the neurophysiologic
              and molecular genetic levels have been known to scientists, the present
              research will provide methods for comprehensive statistical validation of such
              findings and especially in any future efforts to relate the biological clock to
              covariates like age etc.

This research on circular statistics is also
              closely related to some current investigations on the Environment and Global
              Change that utilize the directional spectra of wind and sea currents.


