Title       : Geometry and Measure in Complex Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9803541

Award Number: 9803541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46306              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek Graczyk graczyk@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9803541

The focus of this project is the geometric structure and
              abundance of certain invariant sets which arise in non-hyperbolic dynamics.  Of
              primary concern are the regularity of Fatou components, the Hausdorff dimension
              of Julia sets, holomorphic removability of Julia sets, ergodic properties of
              invariant measures, convergence of the Poincare series, and abundance of
              prototype systems.  The Collet-Eckmann condition yields Holder regularity of
              Fatou components and HD<2 for Julia sets of rational maps.  This project aims
              to generalize results about Collet-Eckmann maps to the more flexible setting
              given by the so called `summability condition,' which requires only a
              polynomial growth (with possible tame oscillations) along critical orbits. 
              External addresses of the boundary of the Mandelbrot set give a natural
              parameterization of the locus of chaotic dynamics of complex quadratic
              polynomials.  The main objective here is to study a  distribution of harmonic
              measure on the boundary of the Mandelbrot set, which will determine the
              1outside view' of the Mandelbrot set.  The last part of the project concerns
              elliptic dynamics.  The regularity of Siegel disks and Herman rings is
              considered.  More generally, given a  non-smooth Jordan curve on the plane, one
              can investigate constraints imposed on the analytic dynamics on this
              curve.

Among non-linear smooth dynamical systems, the theory of
              one-dimensional real and complex maps occupies a special place.  Computational
              accessibility makes one-dimensional maps especially useful to model and study
              rigorously properties of non-hyperbolic systems which may be difficult to
              approach in higher dimensions.  Computer simulations help to predict the long
              time behavior and stability of such systems.  Particular examples come from
              physics, biology, and economics.  Perhaps the most famous one-dimensional
              model, in which the evolution of an isolated population with limited food
              resources is described, is studied in this project (after complexification). 
              Many other important phenomena like transition to chaos, attractors, and
              bifurcation loci can be described through `fractal' geometry.  Fractal sets
              with their complicated structure are often crucial in understanding the
              underlying dynamics.  One of the main objectives of this project is to explore
              chaotic regions and estimate their fractal parameters.


