Title       : RUI: Depth-Resolved Photoluminescence Imaging for Optical Characterization of
               Semiconductor Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9803189

Award Number: 9803189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest Behringer phy_behringe@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9803189  Behringer    This RUI project aims to develop an apparatus to perform
               depthresolved and laterally spatially-resolved  photoluminescence(PL) on
              semiconductors at liquid He  temperature, and to involve undergraduates in
              experimental  research. This is to be achieved by constructing an insert  for a
              helium bath cryostat that eliminates difficulties of  immersed beam paths and
              optics while providing a lateral  resolution of approximately one micrometer by
              using  mechanically simple and thermally robust translation  mechanisms. The
              depth resolution will be achieved by using  different excitation wavelengths.
              After spectral dispersion,  the photoluminescence signal will be detected with
              a liquid  nitrogen cooled germanium photodiode. The completion and  utilization
              of this system provides opportunities for  students to gain experience in
              mechanical, thermal, and  optical design and construction, computer
              interfacing,  experimental design, and collection and interpretation of  basic
              research data.  %%%  The project primarily addresses the introduction and 
              training of undergraduate students in basic research issues  in a topical area
              of materials science having high  technological relevance.  The research will
              contribute basic  materials science knowledge and primary educational benefits 
              to undergraduates in fundamental aspects of  electronic/photonic materials
              properties.  An important  feature of the program is the integration of
              research and  education through the training of  undergraduate students in  a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.  ***
