Title       : Development of Transient Infrared Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9803006

Award Number: 9803006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Neckers neckers@photo.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Rodgers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803006
Neckers
This award provides partial support for the development of a
              transient infrared spectrometer.  Radiation-induced macromolecular synthesis
              and modification is critical to many technologies, ranging from combinatorial
              processes that involve site specific, chromophore-induced polymer
              photodegradation as the activating step to imaging, lithography,
              stereolithography, and a variety of rapidly drying printing/coating systems. 
              Understanding the mechanisms of energy and electron transfer occurring in
              macromolecular assemblies is an important component of this work, as virtually
              every type of photoinduced reaction involves either energy transfer or electron
              transfer as an elementary step.  The ability to monitor the kinetics of such
              processes is necessary to understand, and control, chemical events in materials
              ranging from polypeptide assemblies to photoactivated synthetic drugs.  This
              project includes ongoing collaborations involving two senior faculty who,
              respectively, carry on broad programs in polymer photochemistry,
              stereolithography and three dimensional imaging, and on photoprocess dynamics,
              as well as a program focussing on studying electron transfer processes in
              rationally synthesized polypeptide assemblies.  The instrumentation will be
              used to study photoinduced processes by monitoring the appearance and /or
              disappearance of infrared absoptions within the sub-microsecond time domain. 
              In general, the instrument will employ laser flash photolysis to produce
              reactive intermediates in small molecules and films of macromolecules, and will
              use  infrared absorption spectroscopy for their kinetic analysis.  When
              constructed, the instrument will allow mechanistic studies to be conducted of
              the initiation steps of polymer photodegradation processes in real time, and
              provide direct assessment of the chemical reactions leading to changes in
              polymer properties.  The instrument will also be used to analyze photoinitiator
              systems, to develop new reactive functionalities for the modification of
              polymer thin films, and to develop new imaging methodology.  Other uses include
              the study of proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions which play an
              important role in biological energy conversion, but whose mechnisms remain
              poorly understood.  These studies will examine the role of a hyrogen-bonded
              peptide interface in controlling the rates of photoinduced electron-transfer in
              synthetic proteins by monitoring the kinetic response of the IR signals
              occurring within the amide I (1630 - 1700 cm-1) and amide II (1510 - 1560 cm-1)
              regions of the spectrum.  Finally, the instrument will be used to study the
              photoinduced dissociation of NO from Fe(II) and Co(II) porphyrins.  In these
              experiments, the amount of M-NO bond breaking leading to free NO production can
              be monitored by the loss of intensity of the M-NO absorption in the 5.87-6.55
              um (1525-1690 cm-1) region (metal-dependent) and the growth of intensity at the
              NO bond stretching frequency 5.37um (1860 cm-1).

In summary, the instrument
              will, as appropriate, be used to instantaneously evaluate the properties of
              formed chemical species, improve strategies to site isolate reactive entities
              as they are formed, understand polymer photodegration, and examine the kinetics
              of a variety of photoinitiated events.  The constructed instrument will be
              tested using newly  synthesized polymer systems such as styrenes,  polyesters
              and other polymers containing chromophores for which the photochemistry has
              been studied in detail in solution.
%%%
***    
      

