Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffraction Facility for Materials Development and
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9803098

Award Number: 9803098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel A. Clark noel.clark@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Walba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen M. Hermann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher N. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803098  Clark  This award provides support to create a regional x-ray 
              diffration facility on the Boulder campus of the University  of Colorado.  This
              facility will fill a critical need on the  Colorado Front Range for high
              resolution, high intensity  laboratory-based x-ray diffraction.  This facility
              will be  set up, operated, and maintained by the Condensed Matter  Laboratory
              of the Department of Physics, and will be made  available to materials research
              groups on the University of  Colorado campus and the Colorado Front Range.   
              The instrument will be versatile, allowing both high and low  resolution
              diffraction, will accomodate large sample  chambers, including cryostats,
              ovens, and magnetic fields,  enabling experimentation over a wide range of
              sample  temperatures, and will include an area detector, for static  as well as
              time-resolved diffraction.  The x-ray generator  is a rotating anode system
              which provides two equivalent,  point source x-ray beams.  One beam will be
              directed to a 4  cycle diffractometer and scintillation detector for 
              performing theta - two theta or h-k-l scanned diffraction.  The other beam will
              be used in conjuction with an area  detector for single crystallography, small
              angle x-ray  scattering, and time-resolved experiments.  Each beam  path/sample
              holder/detector assembly will be mounted on its  own optical table and will be
              independently controlled by  its own computer, a configuration that will enable
              two  experiments to be performed simultaneously.    This acquisition has broad
              support among the regional  materials science community, with users from
              several  University of Colorado Departments, including Physics,  Chemistry,
              Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and  Geology, as well as from
              industry and the major Front Range  research institutions, including NIST, the
              National  Renewable Energy Laboratory, Colorado School of Mines,  Colorado
              State University, and University of Wyoming.    Ongoing and new Research
              projects proposed by the PIs and  ini tial roster of users represent a broad
              spectrum of field  defining condensed phase research.  Experiments are proposed
               in the following areas:  structural analysis of liquid  crystals, high Tc
              superconductors, laser-deposited metal  oxide thin films, new liquid crystal
              materials development,  structure of ion-selective membranes, development of
              atomic  layer controlled film growth techniques, characterization of  ribozyme
              - cationic lipid complexes for transfection of  cells with RNA-based enzymes,
              structure of phospholipid  phases and tubules, reflectivity studies of
              polymeric  interfaces, characterization of polymer/monomer -liquid  crystal
              composites, characterization of ceramic coatings and  films.    The
              diffractometer system will be clustered with several  other materials
              characterization instruments and operated as  a self-supporting user facility
              maintained by a trained  staff member under the direction of the Physics CML 
              Facilities Committee.  %%%  ***
