Title       : Relative Roles of Intergranular Friction & Fines on Undrained Behavior of Silty
               Sands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9803830

Award Number: 9803830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189603             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Thevanayagam theva@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The appropriate choice of shear strength of liquefied sands is an important
              component in seismic slope stability evaluation. At present, shear strength is
              mostly determined by three methods: steady-state strength, residual field
              strength, or normalized strength ratio. Fundamental major differences between
              these methods pose significant challenges in the appropriate selection of shear
              strength for design analyses. In addition, many failures have occurred in silty
              sands rather than sands. Recent exploratory work suggests that the role of
              inter-granular contacts due to the fines in the silty sands contributed to
              several observed failures. A better understanding of the relative roles of
              fines and inter-granular contacts at different densities of a silty sand will
              help formulate a consistent method for strength characterization of sandy
              soils.

The aim of this research study is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of the relative roles of fines and inter-granular frictional
              contacts at different soil density levels on the stress-strain-strength
              characteristics of sandy soils, and to delineate the effects of these different
              roles at different density levels. Laboratory studies include the monotonic and
              cyclic stress-strain-strength behavior of loose to medium dense non-plastic
              silty sands with different gradation at different fines contents, density, and
              confining stress levels. Based on the findings of this study, recommendations
              will be developed for stress-strain-strength characterization of silty soils
              for liquefaction and post-liquefaction strength evaluation purposes.

The
              results from this study will advance the understanding of the soil matrix
              behavior in natural soils, and contribute to the development of methodologies
              to characterize soil behavior under earthquake loading conditions.  Thus, it
              will help to develop rational guidelines for liquefaction potential evaluation,
              post-liquefaction deformation, and flow-slide potential analyses of natural
              soils containing non-plastic fines.

