Title       : Triggers and Queries in Distributed Software Systems for Moving Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9803974

Award Number: 9803974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Prasad Sistla sistla@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clement T. Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ouri Wolfson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project proposes research on distributed systems that  monitor the positions
              of various moving objects and process  queries and triggers referring to their
              positions.  Applications of such systems, called Moving Object  Information
              (MOI) applications, typically occur in  transportation systems in the civilian
              sector and in the  digital battlefield management in the military.  This 
              proposal considers two different architecture models for the  MOI systems; in
              the first one a single central server (CS)  monitors the position of the
              objects and answers queries;  the second architecture is fully distributed in
              which the  moving objects communicate with each other to answer the  queries
              and to monitor trigger conditions.  The project  proposes various location
              update policies for maintenance of  the position information of the objects in
              the CS model. All  these policies maintain the position of an object as a 
              dynamic attribute that changes with time. The project plans  to investigate the
              cost effectiveness of these policies  through analytical and experimental
              studies.  A query  language based on Future Temporal Logic (FTL) is proposed 
              for specifying spatial and temporal queries and trigger  conditions on the
              moving objects. The language  permits  specification of the desired levels of
              uncertainties in the  answer. Research towards the development of efficient 
              query/trigger processing mechanisms in the two architectures  are proposed. The
              proposed mechanisms will be evaluated in  an experimental testbed.
