Title       : Topology, Geometry, and Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9803374

Award Number: 9803374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Davis mdavis@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth M. Charney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803374  Davis       About 50 years ago, Aleksandrov, Busemann and Wald
              introduced the  idea of defining upper and lower bounds for the ``curvature''
              of more  general metric spaces than Riemannian manifolds.  Aleksandrov was 
              interested primarily in the case of nonnegative curvature and its  applications
              to convex polyhedral surfaces in Euclidean 3-space.  Interest  in this subject
              was renewed about ten years ago when Gromov pointed out  that for topological
              and group theoretic reasons the nonpositively curved  case was much more
              interesting than the positively curved case, the main  reason being that the
              universal cover of a nonpositively curved space is  contractible.  Gromov also
              pointed out that there were many polyhedral  examples of such spaces.  In
              particular, Tits buildings are such examples.  For the past several years,
              Professors Charney and Davis have collaborated  in investigating nonpositively
              curved polyhedra and applications to group  theory.  The groups in which they
              are primarily interested are Coxeter  groups and Artin groups.  Both types of
              groups are associated to groups  generated by reflections.  Both Charney and
              Davis have also accomplished  separate research in these areas.  They  will
              continue their research on  these areas as well as on closely related topics
              such as the properties  of Tits buildings and their automorphism groups.      
              Groups generated by reflections occur in many places in mathematics  and in
              nature (for example, in crystallogrophy).  The symmetry groups of  regular
              tilings of the Euclidean plane are such groups.  Escher's drawings  show
              examples of regular tilings in non-Euclidean plane geometry.  These  are also
              associated with reflection groups.  Professors Charney and Davis  are
              interested in such examples in a more abstract setting.  It turns out  that
              abstract reflection groups (Coxeter groups) can always be realized as  the
              symmetry groups of a space that is nonpositively curved, much as in the  case
              of the Euclidean and non-Euclidean planes.   ***
