Title       : Direct Current Excimer Laser
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9803997

Award Number: 9803997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Schoenbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803997
Schoenbach

Weakly ionized plasmas, generated in high pressure glow
              discharges, are able to reflect or absorb electromagnetic radiation and
              consequently act as temporally controllable barriers for this radiation.  It is
              proposed to study the physics of do glow discharges in atmospheric air,
              particularly the cathode fall of these discharges.  Instabilities which evolve
              from the cathode fall, have so far been the major obstacle for do operation of
              high pressure glow discharges.  We propose to explore the use of microhollow
              electrode discharges as stabilizing elements for the cathode fall. In addition
              to the stabilizing effect, microhollow electrode arrays serve as highly
              emissive cathodes for the main discharge. Temporal control of the main
              discharge should be possible by pulsing the microhollow cathode discharge affay
              at voltages low compared to the sustaining voltage of the main discharge.
              Electrical and optical diagnostic methods, such as open shutter and streak
              photography and spectroscopy, will be used to obtain information on the
              microhollow electrode discharges The electron emission of microhollow plasma
              cathodes will be measured by means of a differentially pumped retarding field
              analyzer.  The use of thin film technologies for the development of
              microelectrode panels will be explored. Efforts to reduce the power losses in
              the main discharge through reduction of electron attachment as a result of
              combustion chemistry are under way at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken,
              NJ. supported by AFOSR.  Cooperation with this research group is intended and
              will be facilitated through a consulting agreement with the P.L, E. Kunhardt. 
              The proposed reach has relevance for other applications besides plasma
              barriers.  Examples are controllable plasma cathodes for agile mirrors, and the
              use of plasma sheaths, generated by hollow eletrode discharge arrays for drag
              reduction of air flow along surfaces.
***

