Title       : Imputation and Variance Estimation for Survey Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1998     
File        : a9803112

Award Number: 9803112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59673              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Shao shao@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803112 
Jun Shao

This research involves development of imputation
              techniques and variance estimation methods for survey data with nonrespondents.
               The investigator focues on (1) validating and comparing (both theoretically
              and empirically) the existing imputation techniques and developing better
              procedures if necessary; and (2) developing correct variance estimators for a
              given imputation method that produces correct survey estimates.  Special
              attention will be paid on random hot deck imputation using models, nearest
              neighbor imputation, cold deck imputation, multivariate imputation,
              longitudinal imputation, imputation for quantiles, and imputation for
              non-ignorable response.  Many variance estimation techniques (such as the
              linearization/Taylor expansion, jackknife, balanced half sample or balanced
              repeated replication, random groups, and bootstrap) will be studied. 
              Particular issues that will be addressed in variance estimation include
              non-negligible sampling fractions, approximation in applying replication
              methods (such as grouping and collapsing), complex and composite imputation
              methods (in the sense that a number of different imputation methods are used
              and/or imputed data are used to impute nonrespondents for other variables),
              variance estimation for nearest neighbor imputation, variance estimation for
              sample quantiles, and problems with imputed values that cannot be identified
              from the data set.

Most surveys have nonrespondents.  Item nonresponse
              occurs when some sampled units cooperate in the survey but fail to provide
              answers to some questions. Commonly used compensation procedures for handling
              item nonresponse are imputation techniques which insert values for
              nonrespondents.  It is a common practice to treat the imputed values as if they
              had been observed, and compute survey estimates and assess their varibility
              using standard formulas designed for the case of no nonresponse.  This,
              however, could lead to some problems and biases in statistical analysis.  For
              example, the use of standard formulas to assess varibility in analysis may
              seriously underestimate the true varibility, because standard formulas do not
              account for the changes in varibility due to nonresponse and/or imputation. 
              This research involves development of correct and simple to implement
              statistical procedures to analyze survey data with nonrespondents and
              imputation; and will solve some real statistical problems in survey agencies
              such as the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Westat.


