Title       : Qualitative Behavior of Nonlinear Hyperbolic Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9803296

Award Number: 9803296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Rauch rauch@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research under this award is devoted to the study of solutions of
              nonlinear
partial differential equations which model the propagation of waves
              such as 
light waves and sound waves.  These phenomena do not have viscous
              effects 
which means that the differential equations are of hyperbolic type. 
              The mathematical
analysis provides new rigorous error estimates for exact
              solutions and 
approximate solutions that are valid in the limit of short
              wavelengths.  Particular 
emphasis is placed on problems of nonlinear optics. 
              Four main problem areas are 
addressed.  The first is the investigation of
              qualitative properties of three nonlinear
models.  The basic question is
              whether these models predict singularity formation or not.
In the second area,
              reliable approximate solutions for nonlinear optics problems
will be
              constructed that are valid for larger amplitudes than previously possible.
To
              do so requires hypotheses for the nonlinear interaction terms which are
              verified
in many practical models.  The third problem is to investigate the
              effects of strong
nonlinearity at focal points.  The fourth problem area is to
              construct approximate 
solutions with error estimates for equations that
              describe ultra short laser propagation.

The research that is supported by
              this award focuses on mathematical models for wave 
propagation phenomena,
              specifically on high frequency phenomena such as light waves and
acoustic
              waves.  The results from this research can be used to validate current models
              
for such phenomena, predict new effects, and help in the design of new
              equipment.  
Much of this work is motivated by problems for ultra intense
              lasers and optical 
parametric oscillators where difficulties with modeling
              and design have been encountered.
The mathematical investigations will allow
              to predict situations in which optical devices
become unstable or are
              damaged.


