Title       : Geometric Group Theory: Group Boundaries and the Torus Theorem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9803461

Award Number: 9803461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Swenson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803461  Swenson       First, Swenson will continue his collaboration with
              Martin Dunwoody  on the algebraic torus theorem.  Much of the work done in the
              field of  geometric group theory has been generalizing results from 3-manifold 
              theory to the setting of finitely generated groups.  The first result  to
              generalize was the sphere theorem, which was generalized by Stallings  to the
              Ends Theorem.  When the most general versions of the annulus and  torus theorem
              for three-manifolds were proven by Scott in 1980, he  conjectured that there
              should be a purely algebraic analog to these  theorems.  The first step in that
              direction was a proof of the algebraic  annulus theorem for word hyperbolic
              groups by Scott and Swarup in 1995.  The algebraic annulus theorem for finitely
              generated groups was proven by  Dunwoody and Swenson in 1996.  These two will
              extend this result to an  n-dimensional algebraic torus theorem for finitely
              generated groups.  In  addition, Swenson will continue his investigations into
              the boundaries of  groups.  The study of group boundaries was begun in the
              theory of Kleinian  and Fuchsian groups.  The first person to apply these ideas
              to abstract  groups was Gromov.  He defined the visual boundary both of a
              word-hyperbolic  group, and of a CAT(0) group.  It was shown by Bestvina and
              Mess that these  boundaries carry considerable cohomological information about
              the group.  Swenson has two different projects in this area.  First, he wishes
              to  determine the relationship between the local and global homology in the 
              visual boundary of a word-hyperbolic group.  Bestvina began the work in  this
              area, after which Swenson made a contribution.  There are, however,  certain
              important questions that remain open.  The second project concerns  the
              existence (or non-existence) of cut points in these boundaries.  It  has been
              shown by Bowditch and Swarup that the visual boundary of a  word-hyperbolic
              group cannot contain a cut-point.  Swenson will try to  "extend" this result to
              the nonpositive ly curved or CAT(0) setting.  He  will also look for
              consequences of boundaries' not having cut-points  (semistability at infinity,
              for example).       Years ago it was said that infinite group theory consisted
              entirely  of counter-examples.  Geometric group theory has done much to remedy
              this  situation.  Thurston's work towards the classification of all
              3-manifolds,  spaces which look locally like 3-space, was the origin of
              geometric group  theory.  Z. He, Cannon, and others noticed the amazing
              correlation between  the group theoretic properties of the fundamental group of
              a geometric  3-manifold and the geometric properties of its universal cover. 
              Much of  the work done in geometric group theory has been to translate
              techniques  and sometimes even theorems from the setting of 3-manifolds to the 
              seemingly much more general setting of simply connected 2-complexes,  spaces
              formed by gluing triangles along their edges (often with more than  two
              triangles sharing a common edge).  The torus theorem for 3-manifolds  says that
              any time there is an essential map of a 2-torus (an inner tube)  into a
              3-manifold M, either M is very simple and well understood, or there  is an
              embedded 2-torus along which M can be cut to yield simpler pieces.  Swenson is
              working with Martin Dunwoody to extend this result to apply  to any essential
              map of a torus of any dimension into a simply connected  2-complex.  In the
              second part of the project, Swenson will investigate  non-positively curved
              2-complexes, using techniques transferred over from  differential geometry by
              Gromov and others.  ***
