Title       : Balanced Realizations in System Theory, Approximation and Stabilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9803186

Award Number: 9803186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raimund J. Ober ober@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The first two objectives of the proposal are to investigate the asymptotic
              
stabilization and the approximation of infinite dimensional linear systems.
              
When infinite dimensional systems are being stabilized it is usually
              
attempted to find a state feedback such that the closed loop system is
              
exponentially stable. The PI has shown recently that there is a class of
              
systems for which no feedback can be found such that the closed-loop 
system
              is exponentially stable. But a state feedback can be found such that 
the
              closed loop system is asymptotically stable. It is proposed to continue 
this
              investigation to obtain a clear understanding of the systems that can be
              
asymptotically stabilized. The second objective of the proposed work 
deals
              with the approximation of infinite dimensional systems using 
balanced
              realizations. Progress on both objectives depends on improving 
the
              understanding of infinite dimensional par-balanced systems. In 
particular it
              is  expected that significant progress will be made in the 
investigation of
              so-called definitizable par-balanced systems. These 
systems are symmetric in
              an indefinite inner product space and the main 
operator is definitizable. The
              third objective is to implement system 
identification algorithms in various
              areas of applications. 

These algorithms will make use of balanced
              parameterizations, which 
were developed by the PI because of their potential
              superiority over 
conventional parameterizations.  Fundamental engineering
              problems are 
the stabilization of unstable processes and the approximate
              description of 
complex dynamics by less complex mathematical models which
              
nevertheless capture the important aspects of the full process. Such
              
approximate models are often needed since they are amenable to 
computations
              and current engineering design methods. A significant part 
of the proposal is
              devoted to solving problems that have been identified in 
the course of a
              collaboration with molecular biologists who are working 
on biotechnological
              problems such as the investigation of protein-protein 
interactions.
              Experimentation by surface plasmon resonance biosensors 
and NMR spectroscopy
              lead to complex modeling and data analysis 
problems. Earlier theoretical
              results by the PI will be used to develop 
computational tools to improve on
              currently employed methodologies. An 
interesting aspect of this proposal is
              that the three topics can be 
investigated using mathematical tools which are
              known as balanced 
realizations.

