Title       : Data-Analytic Modeling for High-Dimensional Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9803200

Award Number: 9803200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85574              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianqing Fan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803200
Jianqing Fan

This research involves a variety of new data-analytic
              techniques for processing and modeling high dimensional data that arise from
              many scientific disciplines.  These range from varying-coefficient models from
              epidemiology and environmental statistics, time-inhomogeneous diffusion models
              from finance, curves and images data from ophthalmology, marketing and
              biostatistics, to wavelet applications in statistics and engineering.  The
              research enhances significantly the availability of tools and software for
              analyzing these complicated high-dimensional data.

The research covers a
              wide array of methodological developments and foundational research.  In
              particular, four inter-related topics are focussed.  Firstly, a two-step
              strategy is proposed for efficient estimation in varying-coefficient models. 
              This is particularly useful when coefficient functions admit different degrees
              of smoothness.  The proposed methods will be justified by carefully formulated
              asymptotic theory and simulations.  The proposed methods extends to
              longitudinal studies and likelihood-based models such as generalized linear
              models.  Secondly, time-inhomogeneous diffusion models are proposed to model
              term-structure dynamics and asset pricing.  These nonparametric models aim at
              addressing inadequacy of over simplified parametric models.   Various
              data-analytic modeling techniques are proposed and justified by both
              theoretical studies and empirical research.  Thirdly, wavelet applications to a
              variety of statistical problems are discussed.  The proposed approaches derive
              from statistical modeling prospective and are based on penalized likelihood
              idea.  Our aim is to expand the applicability of wavelets in statistics and to
              improve efficiency of some existing techniques.  In particular, likelihood
              based models, robustness, denoising correlated data and additive modeling are
              proposed for investigation.  Finally, some statistical inference problems
              arising from processing curves and images data are investigated.

