Title       : Inner Model Theory and Descriptive Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9803611

Award Number: 9803611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236382             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Steel steel@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Steel will work in set theory, and in particular on the theory of canonical
              inner models for large cardinal hypotheses. His focus will be on extending the
              basics of this theory to stronger large cardinal hypotheses.  The central open
              problem here is whether every countable elementary submodel of V is
              appropriately iterable. Steel will work on this question, its fragments, and
              related issues. This effort is closely connected to pure descriptive set
              theory, the general study of definability for sets of real numbers. Steel plans
              to work in this area too, and in particular on questions related to the
              determinacy of infinite games. One very nice question here is whether all
              closed (in the countable-initial-segment topology) games of length aleph-one
              with projectively definable payoff are determined.    Many questions of
              mathematical interest are left undecided by ZFC, the commonly accepted system
              of axioms for mathematics. The most natural and successful way to extend ZFC so
              as to decide such questions is to add "large cardinal hypotheses" to ZFC. Such
              hypotheses play a central role in the foundations of mathematics, and because
              of this have been studied intensively over the last 30 to 40 years. One way to
              understand and use large cardinal hypotheses is by constructing canonical
              minimal universes, or "inner models", in which these hypotheses hold true.
              Inner model theory began with work of Kurt Godel in the 1930's, and from the
              late 1960's to the present the theory has undergone more or less continuous
              development. Set theorists have constructed and analyzed in detail canonical
              inner models for many large cardinal hypotheses, and these models have proved
              quite useful. Nevertheless, there are important large cardinal hypotheses which
              are beyond the reach of current inner model theory.  Steel will attempt to
              extend the theory so that it applies to these hypotheses.
