Title       : Ceramic Thin Films From Aqueous Solutions: Studies of the Deposition Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9803851

Award Number: 9803851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. De Guire mrd2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Readey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803851  DeGuire    In the last several years, several techniques have been
              described  in the literature for depositing ceramic thin films from aqueous 
              solutions at low temperatures (<100 C) on various solid  substrates.  Work by
              the PI has focused on the bioinspired use of  organic self assembled monolayers
              (SAMs), on substrates such as  single-crystal silicon and glass, as a means of
              inducing and  controlling the formation of oxide films on the substrate.  The 
              objective of this GOALI project is to obtain a detailed  understanding of the
              mechanism by which films form from aqueous  solutions, on substrates with and
              without SAMs.  In particular,  the relative importance of heterogeneous
              nucleation of solid on  the substrate, versus assembly of colloidal particles
              on the  substrate, will be assessed in a variety of film-forming systems  of
              technological interest.  The project is subdivided into  several areas:  1)
              Studies of the thermodynamics and kinetics of  the formation of ceramic
              particles from the aqueous source  solutions.  The research tools to be applied
              include  thermodynamic calculations of the degree of supersaturation of  the
              solutions, in combination with small-angle x-ray scattering  measurements of
              the deposition media to monitor the formation and  growth of particles as a
              function of time;  2) Studies of the  interactions between ceramic particles
              and the substrate  surfaces, and the influences of those interactions on the
              films'  microstructures.  DLVO theory will be used to estimate the forces 
              between ceramic particles and the substrates.  The calculations  will be
              compared to direct measurement of these forces using the  atomic force
              microscope (AFM).  The AFM will also be used to  observe film growth, from its
              earliest stages in situ, to ex-situ  observations of the films' surface
              topographies;  3)  Experiments  combining this fundamental understanding with
              some of the unique  capabilities of SAMs to optimize growth rates and/or film 
              microstructures for specific applicatio ns.  %%%  Thin film deposition from
              aqueous solution are potential  alternatives to vapor-phase and
              chemical-precursor techniques.  The low processing temperature minimize
              problems related to  substrate-film interdiffusion and thermal expansion
              mismatch.  However, the degree of control of the microstructure and thus the 
              properties of the materials processed from aqueous solutions is  not as great
              as from vapor-phase techniques.  This project  addresses that issue by the use
              of SAMS.  The industrial  collaborator in this GOALI project is Caterpillar
              Technical  Center.  The collaboration includes personnel exchange (CWRU  people
              working at Caterpillar, the industrial scientist working  at CWRU), tests being
              performed on equipment at Caterpillar, as  well as the industrial scientist
              serving as a co-advisor to the  graduate students.  In addition to Caterpillar,
              the  Max-Planck-Institut fur Metallforschung in Stuttgart, Germany and  Oak
              Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee are  participating in this
              project.  Each collaboration brings  facilities and expertise that are integral
              to the proposed  research, and offers a variety of working environments that
              will  expand the educational value of the research experience for the  student
              researchers involved with the project.  This project is  co-funded by the
              Ceramics Program of the Division of Materials  Research and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the  Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.  ***
