Title       : Geometry of Hamiltonian Group Actions and of Hamiltonian Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9803051

Award Number: 9803051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene M. Lerman lerman@.math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Tolman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tadashi Tokieda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS-9803051  Principal Investigators: Eugene Lerman and
              Susan Tolman    The issues being investigated in this study of Hamiltonian
              systems  include: classifying symplectic manifolds with Hamiltonian group 
              action, determining when such manifolds admit Kaehler structures,  computing
              their cohomology rings, the capacities of symplectic  quotients, intersection
              cohomology of singular quotients, and the  two-body problem on the sphere.  The
              special case of symplectic  manifolds with large torus actions is particularly
              amenable to study.  Working with Y. Karshon, S. Tolman has reduced the
              classification  question to combinatorics and homotopy information in the case
              where  the torus is of dimension which is one less than half the dimension of 
              the manifold.  The principal investigators plan to use these methods  to find
              necessary and sufficient conditions for such a space to admit  an invariant
              Kaehler structure.  S. Tolman also hopes to use these  techniques and recent
              results in symplectic topology to extend the  results to tori of dimension two
              less than half the dimension of the  manifold.  The investigators also plan to
              address the question of  invariants of reduced spaces, and together with T.
              Tokieda they will  investigate the capacity of symplectic quotients.  They will
              also  study the cohomology of reduced spaces, both at regular values (joint 
              work by S. Tolman and J.  Weitsman), and at singular values (joint  with J.
              Ho.)  Finally, E. Lerman (jointly with T. Tokieda) will study  the two body
              problem on the two sphere -- a limiting case of two  coupled rigid bodies.  The
              techniques include classifying relative  equilibria, the energy-momentum
              method, and numerical simulation.    On the scale of everyday life, essentially
              all objects follow paths  determined by the laws of classical mechanics.  In
              many cases -- for  example, a spinning top, two coupled rigid bodies, a
              satellite with  flexible attachments, or the solar system itself -- the
              mechanical  system possesses a  great deal of symmetry.  In these cases, for
              each  degree of symmetry there is a conserved quantity, called ``momentum''. 
              Linear and angular momentum are the most common examples of this  phenomena.  A
              great deal can be learned about such systems both by  studying the momentum,
              and by ``dividing out'' by the set of  symmetries to study a simpler system. 
              We study systems which, while  not necessarily examples of concrete physical
              systems, abstract out  many of the common features of such systems.  We intend
              to study,  among other questions, what happens when systems have very large 
              amounts of symmetry, how to deal with singularities which sometimes  arise in
              ``dividing out'' by symmetries, and how to use the momentum  to answer
              important questions about the system.  Our work,including  both the results and
              some of the methods we plan to develop, should be  useful to scientists and
              engineers studying concrete physical systems.
