Title       : Research and Scientific Training in Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9803791

Award Number: 9803791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $778008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene Fonseca fonseca@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Halil M. Soner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Morton E. Gurtin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Shreve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roy A. Nicolaides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shlomo Ta'asan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Kinderlehrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the continuation and expansion of 
the research and
              scientific training in applied mathematics at the Center 
for Nonlinear
              Analysis in the Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie 
Mellon
              University. Research will focus on the mathematical description and
              
prediction of a range of phenomena that occur in material science
              
applications. The study of mathematical models for novel man-made materials
              
such as shape memory alloys, ferroelectric, magnetic and magnetostrictive
              
materials, composites, liquid crystals, and thin films, will play a central
              
role in the program. Phase transitions, defectiveness and defect
              
propagation, grain boundaries and their evolution, the prediction of
              
macroscopic behavior and its interplay with microstructural features,
              
superconductivity, elasto-plastic systems, hyperbolic conservation laws,
              
stability, metastability, and other topics will be addressed. The study of
              
these questions will advance the frontiers of nonlinear analysis and
              
scientific computation.

The goal of this work is to identify and develop
              new applications of the 
mathematical sciences. The main focus will be on
              nonlinear behavior of 
materials and concomitant issues in analysis and
              computation. Large scale 
computing will play a central role in all of our
              work. The Center will 
promote close collaboration between mathematicians and
              scientists from other 
fields. Main activities will be centered around
              intense, short workshops on 
selected topics at the forefront of
              interdisciplinary research, a 
postdoctoral training program where emphasis
              will be placed on research 
opportunities available at the interface between
              the mathematical and 
physical sciences, and a visitors program. The visitors
              program and the 
workshops will be coordinated around research themes selected
              on an annual 
basis. Some of our resources will be devoted to a secondary
              research 
thrust in mathematical finance. 

