Title       : A Dynamical Systems Approach to Partial Differential Equations and Other
               Infinite Dimensional Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9803164

Award Number: 9803164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence E. Wayne cew@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803164
Wayne

This project will involve the study of the long-time behavior
              of solutions 
of partial differential equations and other infinite dimensional
              dynamical 
systems.  Of particular interest are systems defined on unbounded
              domains 
and infinite dimensional Hamiltonian systems.  In such systems it is
              often 
not obvious what the principal modes and mechanisms governing the
              
stability or instability of solutions are.  A main thrust of the research
              
project will be to identify invariant, finite-dimensional objects in the
              phase 
space of these systems which govern the long-time behavior of
              solutions.  
Among the specific examples to be studied are dissipative partial
              
differential equations like the Cahn-Hilliard equation or systems of
              
reaction-diffusion equations, which will be analyzed using invariant
              
manifold theorems, and infinite dimensional Hamiltonian systems to 
which
              will be attempted to extend the Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser 
Theorem.  Finally,
              the project will include attempts to give rigorous 
estimates of the validity
              of some of the modulation equations used to 
approximate traveling waves in
              fluid mechanics.

The sorts of equations that will be studied arise in many
              applications such 
as the formation of patterns in biological and physical
              systems, 
crystallization, and the motion of waves in the ocean.  They are all
              
characterized by the fact that even though it is impossible to solve the
              
equations which govern their motion explicitly, applications require at
              
least a qualitative understanding of the behavior of their solutions.  This
              
research is aimed both at providing such a qualitative understanding, and
              
also at explaining the limits of such approximate solutions.  A prime
              
example of this situation is the study of tsunamis.  It is experimentally
              
observed that disturbances of the ocean surface generate large, solitary
              
waves which travel enormous distances over the sea surface without 
change
              of form.  It is impossible to solve the equations which describe 
such waves
              exactly, and while a number of model equations which 
describe such traveling
              waves exist, the mathematical justification of such 
models is lacking.  One
              of the goals of the research in this proposal is to 
give a rigorous
              derivation of the approximate equations that govern wave 
motion of fluid
              surfaces. This will both help to clarify which of the various 
physical models
              gives the best description of the actual waves, and should 
also shed light on
              how better models can be developed.

