Title       : Rational Interpolation for Real-Time System Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9803727

Award Number: 9803727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weibo Gong gong@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C.Mani Krishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Real-time systems in embedded application have proliferated over the past few
              years.  Many such systems are being used in life-critical and other important
              applications, where the failure of the computer to meet some deadlines can have
              disastrous consequences.  The need therefore exists to accurately evaluate the
              reliability of such computers.  Failure in a real-time system can occur due to
              timing as well as to traditional causes such as hardware failure.  Timing
              overruns are often the consequence of a complicated series of interactions
              between various elements of the computer, such as individual application tasks,
              the operating system, the scheduling algorithm, the system architecture,
              component transient and permanent failure characteristics among other things. 
              It is hard to take account of such interactions in analytical models without
              resorting to simplifying assumptions which raise questions about the models'
              accuracy and validity.  Furthermore, traditional simulation to validate
              analytical models is very difficult because the failure rates that are being
              validated tend to be very low:  system failure rates as low as .000000001 are
              involved.  An earlier NSF-funded project developed the Rational Interpolation
              technique, and showed its usefulness in may compute applications.  It created a
              framework in which various difficult modeling, control, and optimization issues
              can be attacked.  The results indicate that Rational Interpolation is a
              powerful tool that can be used to complement other mechanisms of reliability
              and performance evaluation, especially in predicting very low failure rates. 
              This project will involve the development of techniques and tools based on
              Rational Interpolation for real-time systems.  While the focus will be on
              real-time systems, the results are expected to be useful in evaluating
              computers in other applications as well, such as random algorithms.
