Title       : Statistical Modelling and Dimension Reduction for Functional Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9803627

Award Number: 9803627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane-Ling Wang wang@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803627
Jane-Ling Wang

Curve or functional data are of increasing importance
              due to enhenced high performance computing facilities and increased awareness
              that such data require special methods of analysis.  Such data arise for
              example in longitudinal studies and in aging research.  This research involves
              the development of new nonparametric methods to analyze such data. The focus is
              on procedures which involve both multivariate techniques and smoothing methods.
               Of particular interest are ANOVA and regression models for curve data. 
              Emphasis is given on methods viewing the curve data as generalizations of one
              or several stochastic processes.  Given a Karhunen-Loeve representation of the
              underlying processes, ANOVA for curve data can be based on the estimated
              principal components or on the whole curve.  In this context, curve
              registration is of interest.  New regression methods for curve data is also
              proposed.  One of the regression methods extends the karhunen-Loeve
              representation to allow covariates to act on either the mean function or the
              covariance functions of the representation.  Another regression method extends
              the sliced inverse regression (SIR) method for multivariate data to curve data.
               Such an approach for curve data has the advantage of model flexibility and
              accomplishes the goal of dimension reduction before the nonparametric model
              fitting stage.  It is computationally simple and suitable as an exploratory
              tool for functional data analysis.

This research is motivated by
              collaborative research of the investigator on biological lifespan and aging. 
              Recently, there is an accelerated interest in aging research partly due to its
              financial and policy impact and partly due to its intrinsic aspects.  The
              elderly population (age 65 or above) will swell as the babyboomers begin
              turning 65 in the year 2011 so its impact is self-evident.  The investigator
              has been active in this research area through the analysis of large data sets
              on the aging of mediterranean fruit flies (medflies).  One of these data sets
              contains the complete reproduction history, in terms of the number of eggs laid
              daily, for each of the 1,000 female medflies in the experiment.  The scientific
              question is how to relate reproductive traits to survival and mortality of the
              medflies.  Another data set on the nutrition effects to mortality of male and
              female medflies is studied.  Here the scientific question of interest is to
              relate nutrition and gender effects to aging.  The procedures developed in this
              study are applied to these and other medfly data to judge the practicality and
              scientific merits of the methods.  They also help to address the underlying
              biological issues about the aging process.

