Title       : Calixarenes and Calixarene-derived Molecular Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9803367

Award Number: 9803367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. David Gutsche d.gutsche@tcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Christian Univ
	      University Boulevard
	      Fort Worth, TX  76129    817/921-7000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on developing calixarene synthetic methodology, and
              examining functionalized calixarenes as enzyme mimics and fullerene hosts.  
              The scope and limitations of the acid-catalyzed preparation of calixarenes will
              be explored, as well as different methodologies developed to introduce
              functionalities onto the molecular framework.  Functionalized calixarenes will
              be synthesized as examined as fullerene hosts and enzyme mimics.  
              Undergraduates and postdoctoral students involved in the research will be
              trained in organic synthesis and its applications to calixarene
              synthesis.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the research and educational activities of Dr. David Gutsche of the
              Department of Chemistry at Texas Christian University.  Dr. Gutsche will focus
              his research efforts on developing new synthetic routes to vase-shaped
              molecules, referred to as calixarenes, and the methodology needed to
              functionalize these molecular frameworks.   Modified calixarenes will be
              examined as "molecular baskets" in which other molecules can be placed and
              their reactivity tuned.   Dr. Gutsche's educational activities involve training
              undergraduate and postdoctoral students in organic synthesis, and its
              application to the preparation and modification of this class of molecules.   
              

