Title       : Effects of Initial Conditions on Debris-Flow Mobilization: Flume and Ring-Shear
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9803991

Award Number: 9803991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Iverson niverson@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Iverson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803991
Iverson

Concepts of critical-state soil mechanics provide a
              foundation for understanding the mechanisms by which static masses of soil and
              rock mobilize into rapidly deforming debris flows.  Critical-state principles
              indicate that soil initial bulk density, effective stress, and hydraulic
              diffusivity determine changes in bulk density and pore pressure that occur
              during failure.  These changes can cause a transition from slow, creeping
              failure to widespread, rapid failure and flow (NRC, 1985).  However, virtually
              all attempts to assess critical-state soil behavior have been limited to
              standard engineering methodologies, primarily laboratory triaxial tests under
              undrained (sealed) conditions.  Such tests emphasize the small strains that can
              damage structures, but can replicate neither the drainage conditions nor the
              very large shear strains (> 1) and strain rates (> s-1) that characterize rapid
              landslides and debris flows.  Thus, while critical-state concepts are widely
              accepted in principle, little or no data exist to test their applicability to
              large, rapid deformations characteristic of debris flows (Stark et al.,
              1997).

We propose to collect the experimental data necessary to extend and
              apply the principles of critical-state soil behavior to debris-flow
              mobilization.  Using two unique facilities, two sets of complementary
              experiments will be conducted: large-scale debris-flow initiation experiments
              at the U.S. Geological Survey debris-flow flume and high-strain laboratory
              tests using a ring-shear device at Iowa State University.  Previous debris-flow
              initiation experiments used the USGS flume to measure changes in pore pressure
              preceding and during slope failure and trigger debris-flow mobilization.  We
              will explore the causes of these pore-pressure increases and the range of
              initial conditions under which they occur by conducting similar tests at the
              USGS flume in which the initial bulk density is varied systematically and
              subsurface soil deformation is measured continuously.  Ancillary tests will
              provide a second means of studying the coupled changes in bulk density and pore
              pressure that accompany failure and that may either instigate or suppress the
              mobilization of debris flows.

