Title       : DYNAMIC HETEROGENEITY: Bifurcations, Patterns and a New Mechano-Chemical
               Instability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9803752

Award Number: 9803752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Holmes pholmes@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yannis G. Kevrekidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,9216,9263,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9803752

The investigators model and analyze a mechano-chemical instability
              recently discovered in the study of catalytic chemical reactions on very thin
              crystals: spatiotemporal variation in the reaction rate coupled with heat
              release causes spatially varying thermal expansion and buckling of the catalyst
              surface.  This changes the catalytic properties, closing the loop between
              reaction, heat release and deformation; it has been observed to lead to
              sustained mechano-chemical oscillations.  The project builds on experience in
              studying pattern formation and instability independently in mechanical and in
              chemically reacting systems.  Theoretical and computational studies of
              nonlinear buckling of beams under constraints are extended to account for
              static as well as dynamic variations of the beam properties, including
              thermally-induced strains.  Earlier computer-assisted studies of pattern
              formation on catalytic surfaces are used to drive, through the temperature
              fields thereby generated, mechanical deformations of the catalyst.  Finally,
              the loop is closed by allowing the deformation to change the surface catalytic
              properties, thus attempting to reproduce the oscillations observed in
              experiments.  The modeling, stability analysis and computer-assisted work are
              performed in constant dialogue with experimental groups in Princeton (on
              inhomogeneous beams) and in Berlin (on deforming catalytic
              crystals).

Heterogeneous catalytic reactions constitute the backbone of
              chemical processes of industrial and environmental relevance:  the CO oxidation
              reaction the project addresses occurs, for example, in every automotive
              catalytic converter.  The development of techniques for analyzing in fine
              spatial and temporal detail what occurs on the catalyst in situ under reaction
              conditions is revolutionizing the way modeling of these processes is done and
              enabling the discovery of new phenomena.  This will in turn improve the design
              of catalytic processes.  Specifically, this project aims at understanding a
              phenomenon only recently observed in CO oxidation:  oscillations involving
              mechanical deformations of the catalyst coupled to temperature and chemical
              concentrations.  Computer-aided analyses of the process lead to better,
              predictive models, which can be exploited in optimizing both the material
              properties and the operating conditions of the process.  Funding for the
              project is provided by the program of Computational Mathematics and the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the Chemical Reaction Processes
              program in ENG.

