Title       : Research in Geometric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9803399

Award Number: 9803399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Qing qing@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal: DMS 9803399
Principal Investigator: Jie Qing

The
              proposed project consists of two related research topics.  The
first is
              focused in the investigations in developing and using
nonlinear analysis of
              partial differential equations to study
formations of singularities in various
              problems, arising from
theoretical physics mostly in differential geometrical
              settings,
including harmonic maps, Yang-Mills-Higgs theory, harmonic map
              flows,
and curvature driven flows.  The main approach is based on
              scaling
methods.  One problem that I am working on now is to understand
              some
finer structure of the compactified spaces of solutions (harmonic
maps).
               This is an essential problem for one to understand the
formation and nature
              of singularities.  The second part is the
investigation of the interplay of
              geometry and analysis.  The central
problems are to understand the best
              constants in sharp Sobolev type
inequalities in terms of the isoperimetric
              constants, and to
understand how the local analytic quantities are related to
              the global
geometry even the topology.  One of the approach is to study
              the
spectral theory of various natural differential operators associated
with
              the geometry, especially the conformally covariant geometric
differential
              operators.

The formation and nature of singularities in nature are of
              enormous 
interests to human beings.  The kind of singularities that will be
              
studied in the proposed project are particularly of great interests to 
the
              material sciences and meteorology.  For instance, the formation 
and nature of
              singularities in Ginzburg-Landau problems as a 
particular case of the
              Yang-Mills-Higgs theory was proposed to study 
super-conductivity and other
              super-fluids phenomena.  The effect of 
the scale that one uses to describe
              the system turns out to be very 
important.  This explains that to understand
              anything that survives 
under changes of scales is very crucial.  Therefore
              our main approach 
is based on the scaling methods.  The second research
              topics in the 
proposed project is basically aiming at developing and
              understanding 
some mathematical tools that are expected to be essential for
              the 
first topics.  The proposed project is also closely tied with the
              
graduate program in the department of Mathematics at UCSC by a plan to
              
generate research activities to the benefit of graduate student 
interested
              in this area.

