Title       : Using Knowledge Discovery in Database & Data Mining to Develop Techniques in
               Medical Informatics Applied to Surgical Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9803782

Award Number: 9803782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia B. Cerrito pcerrito@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The tools used in the field of medical informatics are those of  knowledge
              discovery in databases (KDD) or alternatively, data  mining. KDD spans a
              variety of fields: statistics, pattern  recognition, artificial intelligence,
              and data warehousing.  However, it has become a distinct discipline with its
              own  objectives. The purpose of data mining is to extract previously  unknown
              and potentially useful information. KDD differs from the  more traditional
              statistical tools by focusing on model   identification while minimizing
              misclassification. Statistical  methods tend to focus on estimation and model
              identification. The  hypotheses generated by the KDD process must then be
              validated by  standard statistical techniques.    It has become increasingly
              clear that more traditional techniques  are not adequate because of the size
              and complexity of the  databases. One 450-bed hospital maintained a database
              with six  months of laboratory tests and medications as well as summaries  of
              patient followup for 15 months. The storage capacity of the  computer had to be
              increased by 12 gigabytes. The dependence upon  an investigator examining
              relationships in the data must yield to  an automated process. KDD can generate
              interesting and unexpected  hypotheses which can be examined by statistical
              methods. The  automatic hypothesis formation and testing cycle can continue 
              until important patterns emerge.    This project involves the study and
              development of data mining  techniques applied to several databases primarily
              stored in the  Alliant Health System. This includes a database containing a 
              25-year followup on a cohort of 10,000 women in Kentucky to  examine patterns
              of health and lifestyle.  In addition, the  techniques will be applied to a
              database of student  information to examine relationships between student
              habits,  student success, and student learning. Using the developed  materials
              and databases, a course will be taught to students in  the Department of
              Mathematics on applications of data mining.      This GOALI project is jointly
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
