Title       : Modeling and Estimation for Electronics and Semiconductor Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9803767

Award Number: 9803767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jye-Chyi Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sujit K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Holton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline M. Hughes-Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal supports four students (two by NSF and two by  industrial
              sponsors) to integrate graduate research with  practical contributions to
              industrial problems.  The main  industrial partner is Nortel, but our
              colleagues in the  Semiconductor Research Corporation, Texas Instruments, and
              the  Center for Advanced Electronic Materials Processing at North  Carolina
              State University will also provide expertise and  laboratory access.  Thus,
              this program will build a bridge  between statistics and engineering, both on
              and off campus, for  conducting interdisciplinary research.  The students will
              gain  experience in formulating research problems, in identifying  statistical
              and engineering contributions, in exploring potential  basic statistical
              research areas, and in presenting (oral and  written) to scientists from
              different disciplines.  In this  proposal, the following new research will
              benefit both industrial  applications and academic basic research: (1) a
              flexible modeling  and estimation method for analyzing temporally or spatially 
              correlated non-normal discrete or continuous data, (2) a robust  estimation
              method in bilateral time series model, and (3) a  robust estimation procedure
              in nonlinear random coefficient model  for temporally correlated repeated
              measurements.  The properties  of the proposed statistical procedures will be
              evaluated through  finite sample simulation and asymptotic theory applied to 
              real-life examples from Nortel.  The experience from this program  will serve
              as a model to restructure our relationships with  companies at Research
              Triangle Park and Raleigh.    The students will spend 10 to 20 hours per week
              conducting  research at industrial sites, engineering laboratories and the 
              statistics department.  The trainees and their mentors will  present their work
              at appropriate conferences and publish  research relevant to projects in
              statistical and engineering  journals.      This GOALI project is jointly
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activitie s (OMA) and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
