Title       : Fundamentals of Phase Patterning Polymer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9803738

Award Number: 9803738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Kramer edkramer@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803738  Kramer    An experimental program is proposed to elucidate the
              processing  fundamentals needed to produce films with three dimensionally 
              patterned phase morphologies on micrometer to sub-micrometer  length scales. 
              The transfer of patterns from the confining  interfaces into films of both
              phase separating polymer mixtures  and ordering block copolymers will be
              realized by controlling the  interaction between the polymer components and the
              surfaces of  these patterns.  The interfacial patterns will be produced 
              principally using self assembled monolayers (SAMs) of alkane  thiols on Au
              using a microcontact printing technique.  Control of  interfacial interaction
              will be exerted by using HO-terminated  alkane thiols, HOOC-terminated alkane
              thiols, methyl-terminated  alkane thiols and their mixtures to produce SAMs
              with controlled  surface energy.  These experiments will exploit the
              complementary  depth profiling capabilities of dynamic secondary ion mass 
              spectrometry (SIMS) and forward recoil spectrometry to provide  depth
              information, transmission electron microscopy, low voltage  scanning electron
              microscopy and scanning force microscopy to  provide imaging of lateral and
              cross-sectional film phase  structures and scanning Raman microscopy to provide
              lateral  composition profiling.  Emphasis will be placed on understanding  the
              kinetics of ordering and island (hole) formation of block  copolymer films
              through diffusional and flow processes as well as  the effects of topological
              confinement of such films by solid  interfaces that exert surface fields of
              various strengths on the  two blocks.  Similarly a major goal will be to
              understand how to  control surface directed spinodal decomposition process in
              films  of phase separating polymer mixtures to produce two phase  structures
              with patterned morphologies so that the pattern  extends in both the lateral
              and thickness directions.  Here again  topological confinement of these films
              by solid surfaces raises  important questions that will be  focused on.  %%% 
              These experiments have the potential to impact a range of new  processing
              technologies, such as new lithographic techniques, new  ways to produce
              selective membranes and new ways to form thin-  film optical elements.  ***
