Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Magnetic Semiconductor Thin Films and
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9803218

Award Number: 9803218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek K. Furdyna Jacek.K.Furdyna.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Rhyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803218  Furdyna  This  renewal  proposal by Profs. J. Furdyna (University  of 
              Notre  Dame),  J.J. Rhyne (University of Missouri/Columbia),  with    Prof.
              C.M. Sorensen (Kansas State University)  as  a  sub-contractor  describes
              research using neutron  scattering  experiments   to   study  semiconductor  
              thin   films   and  nanostructures in order to gain an understanding of
              magnetic  ordering  and  magnetic interactions in such  systems.   The 
              proposed  research is composed of three interrelated  areas:  the 
              identification of mechanisms which determine interlayer  coupling  in MnSe- and
              MnTe-based superlattices,  systematic  investigations to enable distinguishing
              between the  effects  of  strain  and  those of dilution on the 
              antiferromagnetic  transitions  in  Mn(1-x)IIxIV alloys, and a new  exploratory
               investigation of spin ordering and exchange interactions  in  magnetic 
              semiconductor nano-particles.  Specific thin  film  systems  are 
              MnTe/Zn(1-x)MnxTe   superlattices  and   Mn(1-  x)MgxTe with varying doping
              values of x.  Also to be studied  are the magnetic properties of Mn
              nanocrystals.  %%%  The   objective  of  this  research  is  to  apply  
              neutron  scattering  techniques to magnetic semiconductor thin  films  and 
              nanostructures  in  order  to  gain  understanding   of  magnetic   ordering 
              and  magnetic  interactions  in   these  systems.   Magnetic semiconductors are
              of great  fundamental  interest  in  magnetism, because their manganese
              sublattices  constitute  frustrated Heisenberg antiferromagnets  governed  by 
              short-range interactions.  Three areas of  investigation  are  proposed. First,
              magnetic/non-magnetic superlattices  ,  such  as 
              manganese-tellurium/zinc-tellurium will be studied  in  order  to elucidate the
              mechanisms responsible  for  the  coupling  between magnetic layers for
              magnetic interactions.  In  the  second  part the investigators will  exploit 
              newly  developed techniques for growing materials composed of group  II  and
              group VI elements (II-VI all oys), specifically  with  the group IIa elements
              magnesium and berillium, in order  to  elucidate  the  effect  of  dilution 
              and  strain   on   the  antiferromagnetic transition in diluted magnetic
              alloys.  In  the  third part an exploratory pilot program will be started  that
                focuses   on   neutron  scattering   in   II-VI-based  nanoparticles 
              containing high concentrations of  manganese.  These  studies will be performed
              in a collaboration  between  the  principal  investigator Prof.  Furdyna 
              (University  of  Notre  Dame), the co-principal investigator Prof. J.J. Rhyne 
              (University  of Missouri - Columbia), and the sub-contractor  Prof.  C.M. 
              Sorensen of the Kansas State  University.   The  researches   promise   to   
              contribute   greatly   to   the  understanding of magnetic interactions and
              thereby assist in  the development of new and improved practical devices.  ***
