Title       : Multi-Scaling Theory and Methods for Random Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9803391

Award Number: 9803391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Waymire waymire@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803391
Waymire

The main focus of this research is on mathematical theory
              and methods which have a direct bearing on problems involving multiscale
              phenomena in multiplicative structures that arise naturally in a wide variety
              of modern applications, such as river basin hydrology, fluid turbulence,
              financial securities markets, spin glasses etc.  The essential mathematical
              ingredients are a space-time random field defined by a multiplicative cascade
              random process and a random network represented by a random tree graph,
              together with a system of equations directing the evolution.  Much of the data
              collected and reported on these structures is in the form of log-log plots of
              some quantity versus a length scale.  This leads to the introduction and
              refinements of new classes of self-similar spatial/temporal models whose
              scaling structure is inferred from empirically observed sample realizations. 
              Thus we seek to calculate certain large-sample (fine scale) limits of
              statistical estimators of exponents and limit laws governing fluctuations.  In
              addition, self-similarities and scaling exponents are sought for the cascade
              and network models.  Then connections between the scaling exponents of the flow
              processes and those of the cascade and network exponents may be investigated. 
              The prospect of a theory which computes structure functions, (i.e.,
              multiscaling exponents) for extreme flows from corresponding structure function
              calculations on the inputs and network defines the frontiers of this
              research.

A fundamental problem from environmental science is to determine
              the structure of river flows (e.g. extremes) from a basin given data on the
              local climate (e.g. rainfall) and topography (river network structure, soil
              moisture).  In most parts of the world the information available for the
              planning of dams, flood insurance, military tactics etc. is in the form of
              remotely sensed local climate and topography.  The mathematical formulation is
              based on a stochastic system of conservation equations (mass, momentum) which
              relate the flows to the multiplicative stochastic rainfall inputs and complex
              network topography via scaling and multiscaling exponents which are estimated
              from remotely sensed data.  One of the practical aspects of results of this
              type is to assist hydrologists and engineers in extrapolating localized
              observations to larger scales, and to regionalize predicted flows.  However,
              the broad mathematical framework contributes to our understanding of diverse
              natural stochastic phenomena such as fluid turbulence, stochastic investment
              yields, renewable natural resource distributions, spin glass magnets etc.,
              which are intrinsically multiplicative in space and/or time.

