Title       : Computability Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9803073

Award Number: 9803073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl G. Jockusch jockusch@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves research in computability theory (recursion theory) and
              its connection with other areas of mathematics, especially combinatorics and
              algebra.  A particular focus will be Ramsey's theorem from combinatorics, which
              asserts the existence of infinite sets which are homogeneous with respect to
              certain partitions. Methods from computability theory will be used to analyze
              the complexity of these homogeneous sets relative to the complexity of the
              partition, both for single partitions and families of partitions.  Also, the
              logical strength of various versions of Ramsey's theorem and related principles
              will be studied, again largely using the methods of computability theory. 
              Other topics of investigation include the conditions under which a Boolean
              algebra has a computable copy and the conditions under which a group has a
              finitely presented expansion.

The purpose of this work is to achieve a
              better understanding of what can in principle be computed and of relationships
              among noncomputable sets of numbers.  Many proofs of mathematical results show
              the existence of certain sets without giving a procedure (or algorithm) for
              determining membership in the sets.  This work involves an attempt to come as
              close as possible to giving an algorithm.  This is closely related to finding
              what axioms are needed to prove the result and finding the consequences of the
              result.  The particular result this work is centered on, Ramsey's theorem,
              states, roughly speaking, that in the midst of patterns which may be very
              complicated, there must be patterns which are very simple.  However, it may be
              impossible to compute where the simple patterns occur, even when the original
              complicated patterns can be computed.  In this work, the possibilities for
              finding optimally simple descriptions of the places where the pattern is simple
              will be investigated, as well as the consequences that can be obtained from
              various versions of Ramsey's theorem in restricted logical systems.


