Title       : Undecidable Theories and Global Properties of Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9803482

Award Number: 9803482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre Nies nies@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nies intends to study a wide range of elementary theories and structures
              stemming from computability theory, complexity theory, algebra, and computable
              analysis.  Ever since the work of Godel and Tarski, the question of whether a
              given elementary theory is decidable has been of central interest to logicians.
               Nies will study this question for the theories of nonabelian free groups and
              for the degree structure of recursively enumerable reals compared under
              Solovay's domination reducibility.  As a main tool, he will use coding with
              first-order formulas.  This method yields not only undecidability of the
              elementary theory of a structure, but also further global properties of the
              structure itself (rather than its theory). Typical results obtained by this
              method are definability results and limitations on automorphisms.  Nies will
              study such properties, in particular for the central structure of recursively
              enumerable Turing degrees.      Nies' work introduces a unifying aspect into
              the vast and diverging area of modern mathematics, by analyzing through common
              methods structures from such different domains as computability theory and
              analysis. These methods are called coding methods. They consist of representing
              an object of one kind in an object of a second kind (the structure under
              investigation) using first order formulas.  First-order languages are central
              to mathematical logic and computer science.  In a sense, they are a
              formalization of a fragment of natural language. The first-order theory of a
              structure is the collection of   all facts about the structure which can be
              expressed in that language.  For instance, the existence of infinitely many
              prime numbers is a first-order fact about the structure of natural numbers
              (with addition and multiplication). In part, Nies investigates the question
              whether first-order theories are decidable. Moreover, he uses coding methods to
              explore global properties of the structures, like the existence of symmetries. 
              In several cases, the structures investigate d are considered central for the
              area in question (like free groups in algebra or the structure of recursively
              enumerable Turing degrees in computability theory).
