Title       : Skein Modules, Representations, and Quantum Invariants of Three-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9803233

Award Number: 9803233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Frohman frohman@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803233  Frohman       Frohman and his students will pursue the study of the
              Kauffman  bracket skein module as a means of relating quantum and classical 
              invariants.  They will continue to develop lattice gauge field theory  based on
              quantum SL(2,C).  This will lead to a general description of  the Kauffman
              bracket skein module of a 3-manifold as invariant  functions of the quantized
              flat SL(2,C) connections on a spine of the  three-manifold.  The goal is an
              intimate understanding of the  relationship between configurations lying in a
              manifold and the  algebraic structure of the Kauffman bracket skein module.  It
              should  also lead to a rigorous derivation of Witten's asymptotic expansion of 
              quantum invariants in terms of the representation theory of the  manifold.  A
              hyperbolic structure on the complement of a knot induces  a similarity
              structure on the peripheral torus.  It is their intention  to carry out an
              analogous construction in the noncommutative  setting.  They will derive a
              noncommutative analog of the A-polynomial,  which will in turn allow the
              relationship between the A-polynomial and  the colored Jones polynomial to be
              explicated.  This work will uncover  that part of the Jones polynomial that is
              related to the hyperbolic  geometry of the knot complement.  Finally they will
              see how the  Kauffman bracket skein module of a knot induces a geometry on the 
              noncommutative torus.       The best way to understand topology is as an
              extension of  elementary geometry.  Recall that two triangles are congruent if
              there  is a rigid motion of the plane that takes one to the other.  Rigid means
               that the motion preserves all distances and angles.  The geometric 
              classification of triangles states that two triangles are congruent if  their
              sides are of the same length.  In topology, a larger collection  of congruence
              transformations is used, specifically any motion of the  plane that sends near
              points to near points (although the  transformation may distort distances). 
              Sometimes topology is refer red  to as rubber sheet geometry, as congruence
              transformations may stretch  the plane arbitrarily.  Under this notion of
              geometry, any two  triangles are congruent, and in fact they are all congruent
              to a  circle.  The topological study of circles embedded in 3-space (knots)  is
              much more subtle.  A major problem is how to make ``topological'' 
              measurements.  That is, associate numbers to a knot that are unchanged  by
              topological congruence transformations.  In the 1980's, work of Jones  and
              Witten heralded a new age of knot theory with the introduction of  quantum
              invariants.  These invariants are derived from techniques in  operator theory
              and quantum mechanics.  Frohman and his students will  study these invariants
              from a viewpoint that allows them to be related  to invariants of knots coming
              from more classical techniques.  These  investigations will enrich topology,
              quantum mechanics, and operator  algebras by adding deeper connections between
              standard constructions  in each field.  ***
