Title       : Cooperative Atomic Dynamics in Crystalline Cages - From Defect Complexes To
               Self-assembled Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9803768

Award Number: 9803768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sokrates T. Pantelides pantelides@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803768  Pantelides  This award supports electronic structure theory 
              investigations of atomic-scale mechanisms that underlie the  nucleation and
              growth of nano-scale structures.  The PI's  previous work has shown that the
              study of defect complexes  can lead to the prediction of potentially
              self-assembled,  novel, ordered structures of point defects or defect 
              complexes. These structures correspond to a subtle balance  between `chemistry'
              that leads to low coordination and  `crystallinity' that generally dictates 
              high coordination.  The proposed research entails the investigation of specific
               systems, selected because of the anticipated effect of  defect complexes on
              the material's electrical and optical  properties; the demonstrated or
              anticipated self-assembly of  ordered structures with potential for nanodevices
              or  nanowires; anticipated novel interplay between `chemistry'  and
              `crystallinity'; or any combination of these criteria.  Examples include the
              possibility of ordered F impurities in  Si that may lead to embedded nanowires
              and the nucleation  and growth of As complexes that may control both the 
              properties of the low-temperature-grown GaAs and the  observed self-assembly of
              ordered spherical As precipitates.  %%%  The PI will perform computational
              research on atomic length  scales to determine how specific defects in
              materials affect  their electronic and optical properties and how desirable 
              defects can be introduced into a material. The purposeful  manipulation of
              defect structures in materials to produce  specific properties holds promise
              for the `engineering' of  electronic devices on the atomic scale.  ***
