Title       : Probability and Combinatorial Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9803780

Award Number: 9803780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204437             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Fill jimfill@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS 9803780  PI:              James Allen Fill  Institution:  
                The Johns Hopkins University    Project:         Probability and
              Combinatorial Structures    Abstract:        The theme of the this research is
              the study of certain   important combinatorial structures using probabilistic 
              methods.  One important class of structures is that of self-organizing  data
              structures, which dynamically maintain a file of records in  easily retrievable
              order while using up little memory space and which  have been investigated by
              probabilists and computer scientists for  more than 25 years.  Such
              self-organizing systems have been applied  to problems in very large-scale
              integration (VLSI) circuit simulation,  data compression, communications
              networks, and genetics.  The research  analyzes more realistically complex
              probability models than have  heretofore been treated, and in doing so provides
              a unifying framework  for previous studies.  Trees form another important class
              of  combinatorial structures.  The investigator analyzes the "shape" of  random
              m-ary search trees, fundamental structures in computer science  that also arise
              naturally in connection with self-organizing data  structures.  The work
              involves generalizing and analyzing the already  large class of recursive
              trees, which have been used to model such  things as the spread of epidemics,
              family trees of ancient  manuscripts, and pyramid schemes.  The researcher also
              develops a   continuous-time model for pyramid schemes and derives for it 
              operational characteristics which have not been obtained under the 
              corresponding discrete-time model.  Another facet of this  work is a
              generalization of the analysis of the height  of an incomplete digital search
              tree, or trie; the generalization has  applications to the election of multiple
              leaders in a computer  network.  This work relates clearly to the Federal 
              Strategic Area of high-performance computing and communi cation.
