Title       : Homotopy Theory and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9803428

Award Number: 9803428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $802000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haynes R. Miller hrm@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lars Hesselholt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803428  Miller       In earlier work, Professors Hopkins and Miller have shown
              how the  purely algebraic theory of elliptic curves can be embedded into 
              homotopy theory.  The result is a construction of a new object, the  spectrum
              TMF of topological modular forms, which is a deep enrichment  of the classical
              ring of modular forms.  Professor Hopkins hopes to  show that this object can
              be used in several ways.  It should receive  a generalized "Witten genus,"
              assigning sophisticated algebraic  invariants to certain geometric manifolds. 
              On the other hand, it  should account for deep arithmetic congruences satisfied
              by certain  theta-functions (conjectured earlier by Professor Hopkins and
              proven  by R. Borcherds).  Hopkins' program is to extend the construction of 
              TMF to a construction of suitably defined "topological  theta-functions." 
              Professor Miller intends to pursue earlier work  with Hopkins on higher
              analogues of real K-theory; there is an  infinite family of these, of which
              only essentially one has been  investigated.  He hopes to use the theory of
              formal groups to give  conceptual and generalizable proofs of recent elaborate
              computations  of certain homotopy groups.  He will also attempt to extend the 
              relationship between K-theory and the spectral theory of a manifold to  an
              elliptic analogue.  Professor Hesselholt intends to continue his  research into
              the relationship between a homotopy-theoretically  defined "linear" invariant
              of rings (topological cyclic homology) and  a deep arithmetic "nonlinear"
              invariant (K-theory), and to extend his  computation of TC to more difficult
              cases.       The work of Professors Hopkins, Miller, and Hesselholt stands at
              the  forefront of the application of homotopy theory to other parts of 
              mathematics, notably, arithmetic and conformal field theory.  Homotopy  theory
              offers a vast enlargement of combinatorics, in which one keeps  track not only
              of equivalence classes but also of the ways in which  various objects are
              equivalent to each other.  The w ork of these  investigators serves as a formal
              background against which one may  organize the search for objects with meaning
              in these other areas, in  addition to possessing great intrinsic complexity and
              beauty.  ***
