Title       : RUI: Advanced Theories of Frames, Pseudoframes, and Optimality Issues with
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9803679

Award Number: 9803679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shidong Li shidong@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a project to study several problems related to the theory and
              
applications of frames and pseudoframes arising in the signal processing
              area.    Frames and pseudoframes are basis-like systems.   The use of frames
              and pseudoframes in signal processing comes naturally in problems such as
              irregular sampling, signal restoration/recovery, Gabor time-frequency
              representations, etc.  The topics in this research program are largely linked
              to their practical 
values in applications.  The first topic relates to the
              construction of affine 
frames with a generalized multiresolution structure
              (GMS) and applications, 
in which the investigator seeks to construct a GMS
              built upon affine pseudoframes for subspaces.  The results of this study are
              expected to have practical values in terms of  numerical efficiency and smooth
              filter design, and will be used in the study of applications in industrial
              problems such as VLSI design;  The second topic is on pseudoframes for
              subspaces (PFFS) and their applications to irregular sampling and subspace
              signal processing problems. The key feature of PFFS is that (pseudoframe)
              elements are allowed to be outside of a concerned subspace, a freedom that
              permits the construction of simpler and 
implementable solutions such as
              sampling functions, which is otherwise 
difficult or impossible when
              restricted to the concerned subspace only;  The 
third topic is on the role of
              various dual frames and their applications.  The 
investigator will study
              optimality issues of frame applications using the dual 
frame formula derived
              by the PI. The results of the study serve as a foundation of applied optimal
              frame representations associated with (infinitely many) dual frames;  The
              fourth topic focuses on refined time-frequency analysis via multi-Gabor
              expansions (MGE), which generalize the metaplectic representations that are
              useful in time-frequency (TF).  The investigation will focus on theoretical and
              computational studies of refined and efficient TF representations of a signal
              using MGEs.



