Title       : Japan STA Program: Turbulence Structure and Sediment- Transport Field near a
               Flow Obstruction at the Bed of a Hydraulically Rough Turbulent Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9803854

Award Number: 9803854
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Schmeeckle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Schmeeckle  9803854    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Mark  Schmeeckle at the
              Civil Engineering Research Institute  (CERI) in Sapporo, Japan.  Dr. Schmeeckle
              will work with Dr.  Hitoshi Baba, General Director, CERI, on a research project
               entitled "Turbulence Structure and Sediment-transport Field  Near a Flow
              Obstruction at the Bed of a Hydraulically Rough  Turbulent Boundary Layer."   
              The scour of sediment from around river structures during  flood is a major
              engineering concern.  Such scour can lead  to the loss of the structure or
              expensive repairs.  Unfortunately, the prediction of scour is often based on 
              empirical methods with little physical understanding, and  even scale models
              are difficult because it is nearly  impossible to accurately scale both the
              flow and sediment  transport fields simultaneously.  Previous physically based 
              sediment transport models only considered mean flow  conditions in simplified
              turbulence fields and performed  poorly in complex flow conditions such as
              around river  structures.  In this study a newly developed model, which 
              directly couples the instantaneous near-bed velocity to the  sediment transport
              field, will be applied to the case of  flow around a cylindrical pier.  To
              accomplish this goal,  high-frequency measurements of near-bed velocities
              around  the pier will be collected.  These velocity measurements  will then be
              used to drive the sediment transport model, and  the sediment transport will in
              turn be used to predict the  evolution of the scour profile around the
              cylinder.  Successful completion of this project will result in a  physically
              based understanding of scour around river  structures.  ***
