Title       : Mathematical Methods for Chaotic Advection in Three-Dimensional Fluid Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a9803555

Award Number: 9803555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine Mavriplis                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Mezic mezic@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9803555

Mathematical Methods for Chaotic Advection in Three-dimensional
              Fluid
Flows

PI: Igor Mezic

The goal of the proposed research is to
              extend the existing theory of
chaotic advection and mixing in two-dimensional,
              time-dependent flows.
In particular, we wish to study three-dimensional
              incompressible steady
and unsteady and two- and  three-dimensional
              compressible flows using
the methods of geometric theory of dynamical systems.
               We will also
study effects of reaction and diffusion on the motion of
              particles in
these flows, properties of chaotic advection in general, and
              particular
models of great relevance in engineering applications: flows
              between
concentric and eccentric rotating  cylinders. These problems will
              be
addressed starting from our recent developments in geometric theory
              of
three-dimensional divergence-free vector fields.  The issues of
cantori,
              resonances and lobe dynamics in volume-preserving  maps and
flows will be
              addressed through theoretical analysis and computer
simulation.  Connection
              with experiments on mixing in three-dimensional
flows will be made.  Effects
              of inertia and viscosity on chaotic mixing
will be studied via asymptotic,
              large Reynolds number analysis in
conjunction with the transport theory of
              dynamical systems. This will
allow for  discussion of the change of mixing
              properties of laminar,
incompressible, viscous flows with the change of the 
              Reynolds number.
Further, we will study the effects of molecular diffusion on
              chaotic
advection based on the perturbative multiple-scales method
              combined
with ergodic theory, and through numerical simulations. We
              will
investigate a  general relationship between the pure advection
              problem
(possibly with chaotic mixing) and the full
              advection-diffusion
problem. We will study reaction-diffusion-advection
              equations through
the combination of tools mentioned before. We shall pursue
              nonlinear
stability analysis in search of effects of chaotic advection
              on
stability. The particular examples we will be studying are flows
between
              concentric rotating cylinders. Compressible flows received
virtually no
              attention in chaotic advection studies. We propose to
remedy this situation by
              pursuing a basic study of this problem.
Simple model flows  will be identified
              starting with  a compressible
vortex flow in a cylindrical container.
              Comparison with the behavior of
incompressible flows will be pursued.

The
              above study is useful in a variety of technological contexts. There
is a
              recent surge of interest in micro- and nano-scale technology that
poses a
              number of mathematical  challenges. For example, flows in
devices such as
              large mixers and combustion chambers are designed to
mix well by moving the
              flow in a turbulent regime and thus causing
enhanced mixing by rapid random
              movements of fluid in the flow. This is
not possible in microscopic devices.
              The process of mixing needs to be
understood much better in order to design
              microscopic mixers,
combustion chambers etc.  necessary as the building block
              of
microscopic processing devices and microengines. The mixing  process
              in
such devices is typically three-dimensional. Thus, the design
              of
microscopic mixing devices will benefit from the fundamental study
              of
three-dimensional mixing processes outlined above. In addition,
              the
performance of macroscopic devices  is challenged by new requirements
on
              the levels of environmental chemical pollution (NO_x) and sound
pollution. 
              The improvement in the design of these devices will be based
on a better
              understanding of the underlying mixing processes. The above
study will provide
              some of the crucial concepts for such design by
unraveling the fundamentals of
              mixing in three-dimensional flows and
using these concepts to study the effect
              of mixing on combustion and
noise production.


