Title       : Dynamics and Control of Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9803181

Award Number: 9803181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Bloch abloch@math.1sa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803181  Bloch    In this project the proposer will continue research into the
              dynamics and   control of nonlinear mechanical systems in finite- and
              infinite-dimensions.   In particular, research is proposed in the following
              areas: integrable   Hamiltonian systems in finite- and infinite-dimensions, the
              stabilization   and control of nonlinear mechanical systems, the analysis and
              control of   nonholonomic systems with constraints, the optimal control of
              systems   with constraints, and the dynamics and control of
              infinite-dimensional   systems and systems with complex dynamics. The proposer
              will analyze   two basic classes of integrable systems -- the Toda lattice in
              finite- and   infinite-dimensions, and the generalized rigid body equations.
              The   proposer's view of these systems is inspired by work in applied analysis
              --   optimization and control problems. The proposer will also investigate the 
               dynamics of nonholonomic systems. Such systems, which are mechanical   systems
              subject to nonintegrable constraints such as rolling, are not   Hamiltonian in
              general but nonetheless conserve energy. This leads to   very rich behavior
              including the possibility of asymptotic stability. With   his collaborators the
              proposer has been developing an energetic approach   to the control of
              nonlinear mechanical systems which leaves the system in   classical Lagrangian
              form despite the presence of feedback. This enables   the classical theory of
              stability, which is normally applied to autonomous   systems, to be applied to
              classes of controlled systems. Several other   problem in the control and
              dynamics of finite- and infinite-dimensional   systems are discussed, such as
              the analysis of the structure and stability of   interconnected systems
              including linked finite- and infinite-dimensional   systems.    In broad terms
              the proposer will study the behavior and control of various   mechanical
              systems that are important in physics and engineering.   Engineering
              applications include aerospace systems and robotics.  He will   study certain
              model systems that can be solved explicitly. Such systems   are important for
              the light they shed on the behavior of more complicated   systems which can
              only be simulated on a computer. He will also consider   the optimization of
              the behavior of various mechanical control systems.   This optimization is
              important not only for obtaining desirable system   behavior but for reducing
              cost. He will study various methods for   controlling the motion of such
              systems as robots and satellites. In the   modeling of satellites he will
              consider the importance of flexible   appendages such as antennae in the
              stability of their motion. He will also   analyze the motion of systems in
              fluids -- for example the motion of   underwater vehicles. In general the hope
              is to obtain a better   understanding of the dynamics and control of a large
              class of engineering   and physical systems.
