Title       : Basic Fourier Series and Their Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9803443

Award Number: 9803443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey Suslov sks@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sergei K. SUSLOV, PROPOSAL ID# DMS-9803443   PROPOSAL
              TITLE: Basic Fourier Series and Their Extensions    ABSTRACT OF THE RESEARCH
              PROJECT    The area of special functions, and q-series in particular, has seen 
               significant advances in the last twenty years. One major event is   the
              discovery of the Askey-Wilson polynomials. There are also a   variety of recent
              problems in analysis, algebra, and combinatorics   related to q-series. In the
              current project we plan to investigate   basic Fourier series and their
              extensions. This is quite a new area   of research in analysis. The Fourier and
              Fourier-Bessel series have   a rich and deep theory. But only recently Ismail,
              Masson and Suslov   have established a continuous orthogonality property for
              the basic   Bessel functions and considered basic extension of the
              Fourier-Bessel   series. Bustoz and Suslov have introduced basic Fourier series
              and   established several facts about convergence of these series.   Askey
              suggested that the "Bessel-type orthogonality" found by Ismail,   Masson, and
              Suslov has a general character and can be extended to a   larger class of basic
              hypergeometric series. Askey's conjecture has   recently been proven by Suslov.
              In this project we propose to develop   a theory of basic Fourier series and
              their higher extensions which   is similar to the classical theory of Fourier
              and Fourier-Bessel   series. This theory will include detailed study of
              properties of   the new q-orthogonal functions, investigation of convergence of
              the   corresponding series and related topics. This naturally includes  
              certain computational problems: eigenvalues of  the corresponding 
              Sturm-Liouville problem can be found only numerically, investigation   of
              convergence of these new series should be done. Explicit examples   of basic
              Fourier series naturally lead to a new class of formulas   never investigated
              before from the analytical and numerical   viewpoint. The method of basic
              Fourier series can be applied to study   solu tions of a q-heat equation and
              for some other basic versions of   the equations of mathematical physics.     
              The study of Fourier series has a long and distiguished history in  
              mathematics. Historically, Fourier series were introduced in order to   solve
              the heat equation, and since then these series have been   frequently used in
              various applied problems. Much of modern real   analysis including Lebesgue's
              fundamental theory of integration had   its origin in some deep convergence
              questions in Fourier series.   There is a great deal of interest these days in
              basic or q-extensions   of Fourier series and their theory. In this project we
              intend to lay   a sound foundation for this study. We introduce basic Fourier
              series,   investigate their main properties, and consider some applications  
              in mathematical physics.
