Title       : Momentum and Scalar Flux Measurements to Study LES Modeling in Turbulent Shear
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9803385

Award Number: 9803385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Meneveau meneveau@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    Proposal Number:  CTS-9803385    Principal Investigator:  Meneveau
                  The focus of this study is on the use of Large Eddy Simulation (LES) in the
              numerical prediction of turbulent scalar transport, combustion, compressible
              flows, etc.. For such applications it becomes crucial to accurately represent
              not only the momentum transport caused by small scales, but also the transport
              of scalar quantities, such as heat or species concentration.  It has recently
              become clear that small scale isotropy and universality is a more questionable
              assumption for a transported scalar field than for the velocity field.
              Large-scale motions maintain a significant effect on the small-scale structure
              of the scalar field over surprisingly large length-scale separations.  One of
              the main objectives of this research is to study the implications of these
              phenomena on SGS fluxes, dissipation of scalar variance, etc. in the context of
              LES and subgrid modeling for scalar transport.  To genuinely capture effects of
              scale separation, high Peclet number flows must be examined.   Experiments will
              be in a high Reynolds and Peclet number turbulent wake behind a heated
              cylinder.  The data will be collected by means of hot and cold-wire arrays
              which will be developed specifically for the purpose of studying variables of
              interest to LES (such as subgrid fluxes, resolved strain rates, etc..). The
              probe arrays will allow us to analyze the data by means of two and
              three-dimensional filtering, as opposed to only one-dimensional filtering that
              is now possible with single probes.   Since the SGS stress and heat flux are
              highly fluctuating stochastic variables, comparison between models and real SGS
              variables (such as SGS stresses, scalar flux, and dissipation of kinetic
              energy) must be statistical in nature.  In the past, comparisons have been
              based on either global averaged quantities, or on point-wise comparisons.  
              More refined analysis techniques based on conditional averaging will be
              developed that will allow a comparis on between real and model stresses in
              significantly more detail than is possible with global averages, but in a
              statistically more meaningful way than by comparing individual realizations. 
              This research is expected to significantly contribute to the foundation of LES
              and associated SGS modeling, based on real data at high Reynolds numbers.     2
                   1
