Title       : Holomorphic Dynamics and Small Divisors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9803090

Award Number: 9803090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79654              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo Perez-Marco ricardo@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of the project is to give a complete analysis of the local
              dynamics of a one-dimensional holomorphic map near an indifferent irrational
              fixed point which is nonlinearizable due to the existence of small divisors. 
              In particular, we want to understand the topological and metric structure of
              the invariant sets of the mapping (Siegel compacta) and its stability
              properties. This will entail sharp geometric estimates for analytic circle
              diffeomorphisms, tools which will be used to study the boundary of Siegel
              disks.  A long range objective of this research is to obtain a geometric theory
              of small divisors applicable to higher dimensional problems and a refinement of
              KAM theory.       The theory of dynamical systems studies the evolution of
              solutions of a system of differential equations describing a physical system. 
              It is of fundamental importance in applications to determine the future
              evolution of the physical system.  Probably the most important problem is the
              question of stability: Will the system have a stable evolution forever or it is
              going to break down at some moment?  This is a common concern for engineers
              building planes or other moving devices, as well as with more complex
              situations.  Mathematicians study the simplest problems to develop the tools to
              treat the more complex. The theory of small divisors is a fundamental tool in
              the study of stability in conservative situations, where some structure (a
              volume, a conformal structure, ...) is preserved.  This work involves the study
              of conformal maps in the plane, that is, maps that preserve angles.  In this
              case, there are classical small divisors theorems which guarantee stability
              properties.  A large part of this research is devoted to the situation where
              the tools of small divisors fail to prove stability and the development of
              weaker forms of stability in that situation.
