Title       : Problems in Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9803286

Award Number: 9803286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145603             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Fornaess Fornaess@Math.LSA.UMICH.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator plans to work on various problems in the theory of
              several complex variables and complex dynamics. With Professor Sibony, the
              principal investigator will work on a systematic development of the theory of
              iterations of holomorphic maps. This depends on the use of pluripotential
              theory to construct invariant measures as well as a broad range of function
              theoretic tools from the theory of several complex variables. One of the main
              problems in the theory of dynamical systems is that the equations are too
              difficult for rigorous study.  Holomorphic maps have enough structure so that
              many results can be proved rigorously thereby giving an idea of phenomena that
              can occur also in more complicated systems. The principal investigator also
              plans to work on several problems in the theory of several complex variables. 
              This includes generalizations of the Bochner-Hartogs extension Theorem to more
              general manifolds and to solutions of the Cauchy-Riemann equations in singular
              spaces. The principal investigator plans to continue work with Professor
              Gavosto on investigation of iterations of holomorphic maps near homoclinic
              tangencies and other bifurcations relying heavily on use of the computer for
              graphics and rigorous proofs. The Principal Investigator plans also to continue
              joint works with Brendan Weickert, Greg Buzzard and Araceli Bonifant on various
              questions in the theory of complex dynamics. 

The goals of this proposal are
              to study problems in complex analysis and in dynamical systems using techniques
              of complex analysis. Complex numbers were introduced to solve algebraic
              expressions that could not be solved with real numbers. With time, complex
              numbers have proved to be necessary to explain fundamental physical phenomena
              like electromagnetisms, vibrations in mechanical systems, etc. Complex analysis
              studies the changes of quantities that depend on complex numbers. Dynamical
              systems is the study of systems that change over time. Examples of dynamical
              systems range from the weather to the study of populations. Dynamical systems
              are in general very hard to model and to understand. The simplest models
              involve using real algebraic expressions to represent the system.  Considering
              the algebraic expressions over the complex numbers allows one to see and study
              the problems in a higher dimensional setting using more powerful tools. In this
              setting, a very intricate and fascinating scenario appears. Computer generated
              pictures show the geometry of this phenomenon: a very complicated fractal
              structure.  Proper understanding of this geometry will lead to a better
              understanding of real dynamical systems.


