Title       : Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen Measures for Non-Hyperbolic Attractors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9803635

Award Number: 9803635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Jakobson mvy@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                For a broad class of families of 2-dimensional dissipative diffeomorphisms,
              sufficient conditions for the existence of attractors carrying
              Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures will be investigated.  The study of ergodic
              properties of these measures and of geometric structure of the respective
              attractors is proposed.  The project is based on joint research with S.
              Newhouse.  One of the main tools is the new technique of distortion estimates
              for two-dimensional maps with unbounded derivatives.  The basic example is a
              family of piecewise smooth transformations defined on a finite number of
              rectangles which are all mapped hyperbolically except for one, which is mapped
              parabolically.  No underlying one-dimensional maps are assumed.  The technique
              is based on a system of initial conditions, which can be numerically checked,
              such as expansion, contraction, initial distortions and dependence of these
              quantities on the parameters and can be applied to a variety of models.    
              This project involves the investigation of the phenomenon of random
              oscillations in deterministic systems.  This type of oscillation arises in a
              variety of mathematical models in  physics, chemistry, and biology.  The
              behavior of such systems depends on exterior parameters.  For some parameters,
              systems exhibit stationary or periodic solutions. However for other parameters,
              the same systems behave randomly.  More precisely, random solutions may appear
              with higher probability than periodic ones.  The goal of this work is to give
              strict mathematical conditions which imply random behavior.  Sufficient
              conditions can be checked numerically, which provides straightforward
              applications to the real systems.
