Title       : Development of an Ultraviolet Femtosecond Radiation Source -for Time-Resolved
               Excited-State Photoemission and - Flourescence Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9803028

Award Number: 9803028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Andreas Schroeder andreas@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Longworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan Carlos Campuzano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803028
Schroeder
This award provides partial support for the development of a
              kilohertz laser system designed to provide the synchronized near infrared
              (~1.5eV) and ultraviolet (~10eV) femtosecond pulses suitable for time-resolved,
              two-photon, excited-state angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). 
              The development of the femtosecond radiation source will follow recent advances
              in chirped pulse amplification and harmonic generation schemes using all
              solid-state Ti:sapphire laser technology.  Together with an available ARPES
              spectrometer, this radiation source will be used initially to determine the
              excited-state electronic structure of high-quality high-Tc superconductor
              single crystals by exploiting the dynamics of carriers photoexcited by the
              infrared pulse into the unoccupied states above the Fermi level.  Determination
              of the excited state electronic structure of high-Tc cuprates should provide
              unique information relevant to our understanding of the superconducting
              mechanism in these materials.  These measurements will be extended to twined
              crystals and thin films in order to study the effect of grain boundaries and
              defects on the electronic structure and density of states of high-Tc
              superconductors.  The intrinsic temporal resolution provided by this ultrafast
              two-pulse measurement technique will be used to determine the effect of defects
              and grain boundaries on electron recombination rates through a comparison with
              the photoexcited carrier dynamics in single crystals.  The further extension of
              this experimental technique to study the electronic properties of
              technologically relevant high-Tc superconducting wire materials is also
              planned.

The femtosecond radiation source will also be used to investigate
              the dynamics of single biological molecules with non-degenerate two-photon
              confocal fluorescence microscopy.  The intent is to determine the feasibility
              of using this technique to study conformational fluctuations of single protein
              molecules and to monitor protein-induced DNA folding dynamics through
              high-resolution molecular tracking.  Knowledge of the biophysics of molecular
              conformational fluctuations are fundamental to our understanding of protein and
              DNA folding dynamics, and hence, also the operation of enzymes.

In addition,
              future research is planned with this source of femtosecond laser pulses in
              several diverse fields; time-resolved THz spectroscopy of high-Tc
              superconductors, determination of the reaction mechanism of protochlorophyllide
              oxidoreductase, ultrafast spectroscopy of novel magnetic multilayer materials,
              coherent control of carrier dynamics in semiconductor heterostructures, and the
              time-resolved photodissociation of molecules.
%%%
***

