Title       : SBIR Phase II: Energy/Delay Efficient Protocols for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9803033

Award Number: 9803033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rusty Brooks rbrooks@bostoncomm.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Redi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston Comm Networks
	      5718 Moss Creek Ct
	      Dallas, TX  75252    972/818-1288

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9803033  Redi  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              from Boston Communications Networks, Inc. will develop and demonstrate a
              complete stack of energy-efficient protocols to foster widespread deployment of
              radio frequency (RF) network devices.  Energy consumption has been identified
              as the limiting factor in the progress toward a new generation of various
              mobile devices (such as radio frequency and infrared identification device
              (RFID) tags, Smart Cards, portable/hand-helds).  Their extremely small size and
              the need for their deployment in the billions of units, lead to extremely rigid
              cost constraints that cannot be met without energy minimization.  Boston
              Communications Networks' protocol stack (consisting of two-way access, location
              management, and error control/transport layers) builds on Phase I results which
              quantitatively demonstrated an order-of-magnitude improvement over existing
              solutions.  Due to the generic nature of the proposed communications
              protocol-stack solutions and the planned cooperation with leading industries
              and standardization bodies, this work has the potential to serve as an enabling
              technology that will allow, through cost reduction, the development of a
              heterogeneous mix of widely-deployable, new generations of light-weight,
              personal identification/communication devices.  Because Boston Communications
              Networks is at the forefront with a working energy-efficient protocol, this
              project proffers an opportunity to set the standards for energy-efficient
              protocols where none currently exist.  It is estimated that the RFID tag market
              alone will total $17 billion by the end of 1997  IEEE Review .  Since virtually
              all hand-held devices need to conserve energy, a software product that
              minimizes energy becomes critical for the entire gamut of portable computing
              and communications devices.  ***
