Title       : Mechanism of Establishment of Cellular Polarity in the Brown Alga Fucus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9803156

Award Number: 9803156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Fowler fowlerj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A crucial element of plant morphogenesis is the control of the three-dimensional
              growth characteristics of cells; that is, the direction(s) in which existing
              cells expand and/or the relative position of new cells, as dictated by the
              placement of division planes.  Thus, plant cells must respond to external
              signals to expand or divide in an oriented fashion. Cell polarity is implicated
              in diverse plant developmental processes, from pollen tube growth to the
              asymmetric cell divisions that generate stomatal complexes and two-celled
              embryos. The establishment of polarity, via specialized domains in the
              cytoplasm, plasma membrane, or cell wall of a cell, is an important means of
              providing three-dimensional information to direct subsequent morphogenesis. 
              Recent data in higher plants and in zygotes of fucoid algae (Fucus and
              Pelvetia) support the hypothesis that the actin cytoskeleton and secretion both
              play important roles in establishing plant cell polarity.  Fucoid zygotes have
              a unique advantage for investigations into cell polarity: they establish
              oriented molecular and developmental asymmetries in culture media in response
              to external gradients (e.g., unilateral light) over the course of their first
              24-hour cell cycle.  Zygotes that are initially apolar orient the localized tip
              growth of the cell, as well as the first plane of division, with respect to the
              external vector, producing an embryo with two distinct cell types. An intact
              actin cytoskeleton and directed secretion are necessary for this process.
              However, the molecular mechanisms that direct secretion and cytoskeletal
              organization in plant cells are poorly understood.  The related,
              highly-conserved Rho and Rab families of small GTPases play important roles in
              the regulation of cytoskeletal organization and secretion, respectively, in
              fungal and animal cells. For example, the Cdc42p protein of S. cerevisiae (in
              the Rho family) is necessary for actin localization and polar growth at the
              yeast bud; the mammalian Rab8 protein is involved in t he polarized transport
              of vesicles to the plasma membrane in epithelial cells. These proteins act as
              molecular switches, cycling between an active, GTP-bound form and an inactive,
              GDP-bound form. Mutations in certain conserved amino acids in the GTPases
              generate either dominant active or inactive forms of the proteins, which have
              been introduced into cells (either by microinjection or transformation of
              expression constructs) to investigate GTPase function in viva. Thus, Rho and
              Rab GTPases are promising targets for investigation of the role of the
              cytoskeleton and secretion in plant cell polarity.
