Title       : Computation of High-Gradient Phenomena in Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9803605

Award Number: 9803605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn A. Lott-Crumpler dalc@dalc.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,9263,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research is the development and implementation
of effective
              numerical methods for the solution of partial differential 
equations which
              model the nonlinear mechanics of solids.  The principal 
investigator will use
              numerical methods to study quasilinear
partial differential equations
              governing large motions of nonlinearly 
elastic, elastoplastic and
              viscoplastic materials.  
The equations governing the motions of such
              materials are generally 
systems of hyperbolic conservation laws which are
              ideally suited for 
numerical study. In particular, the PI will utilize an
              efficient numerical 
scheme based on finite-difference approximations and
              inspired by numerical 
methods from gas dynamics in order to study antiplane
              and radial motions 
of elastoplastic materials, with the goal of
              characterizing the formation of shocks. 
Additional effort will be directed
              toward the study of the formation of 
shear bands in viscoplastic materials. 
              The principal investigator will 
study the effects of strain-gradient
              regularization on the development 
and propagation of shear bands in
              two-dimensional nonlinear viscoplasticity.  
This will include studies of
              problems where the solutions exhibit 
narrow shear bands, across which rapid
              variations in strain occur.  
The PI will develop adaptive pseudo-spectral
              methods to resolve spatial 
regions where rapid variations occur during
              plastic deformation.

The behavior of materials such as rubber, steel, or
              concrete can be
described by complicated systems of partial differential
              equations which are
in general difficult to analyze.  However, there are
              certain special 
situations in which these equations simplify to a point where
              they can be both
analyzed theoretically and computed numerically.  Examples
              include 
the motion of a material block between a fixed and a moving plane
              and
the compression of a solid ball of material.  As a focus of this project,
              
the principal investigator will investigate the nature of shock formation
              
and of permanent plastic deformation on the formation and propagation 
of
              shocks for these types of motions.  A second area of research is the
              
formation of shear bands.  These are localized regions of intense shear
              
that form when ductile solids undergo large deformations.  Shocks 
and shear
              bands correspond to possible regions in which material failure occurs,
and
              their accurate determination is therefore very important.  The
              principal
investigator will take advantage of the special form of the
              equations to
apply high-performance numerical methods that have been developed
              for 
applications in gas dynamics. 


 

