Title       : Function Theory and Minimal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9803144

Award Number: 9803144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76641              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Minicozzi minicozz@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS 9803144  Principal Investigator:  William P.
              Minicozzi    This project has two main directions.  First, we are studying
              function  theory, for functions and sections of bundles, on manifolds with a 
              lower curvature bound.  Typically, we are interested in spaces of  harmonic
              functions or sections which satisfy certain growth conditions  on complete
              noncompact manifolds.  As is evident from our prior  research, this problem is
              closely related to uniform eigenvalue  estimates on compact manifolds for both
              functions and sections of  bundles.  This second problem has an interesting
              connection to the  study of asymptotics for semiclassical limits in
              mathematical physics  and to questions which come from complex differential
              geometry.  Second, we are studying convergence and compactness of minimal 
              surfaces with an emphasis on the case where there is no a priori area  or total
              curvature bound.  If the area of a sequence of minimal  surfaces is unbounded,
              a classical limit cannot exist; however, often  we can extract geometrically
              interesting generalized limits.  There  are examples where, for topological
              reasons, such sequences of  embedded minimal surfaces with controlled topology
              can be constructed.    This project has two main directions both of which
              involve the  interplay between geometry and analysis.  The first direction
              involves  the study of Laplace operators on manifolds.  Our primary interest is
               in how the basic properties of these differential operators depend on  the
              geometry of the space.  This sort of question is fundamental and  has been
              relevant in many different areas of mathematics (including  geometry, topology,
              complex geometry, and mathematical physics).  The  second main direction of
              this project is to study spaces of minimal  surfaces in three manifolds. 
              Minimal surfaces, which are critical  points for area, are interesting
              physical, geometric, and analytic  objects.
