Title       : Proof Theory and Computational Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9803515

Award Number: 9803515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel R. Buss sbuss@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research of Buss deals with the mathematical aspects of computational
              complexity and logic, especially the relationships between computational
              complexity and circuit complexity and formal systems of mathematical logic and
              proof complexity.  The logical systems to be investigated include fragments of
              arithmetic, propositional logics, first-order logics, and second-order logics. 
              The computational classes to be investigated include polynomial time,
              alternating logarithmic time, low-level circuit classes, and cryptographic
              protocols.  The proposed research is aimed at proving new upper and lower
              bounds on the complexity of proofs and the complexity of computations, and the
              development of interactions between these two problems.

Past research has
              developed intimate connections between formal proof systems and formal models
              of computation.  Buss's research on proof theory includes investigations into
              the efficiency of proof systems, both in terms of the size of optimal proofs
              and in terms of the difficulty of proof search.  These problems are closely
              related to some of the most important open problems in computational
              complexity, e.g., to the P versus NP question and to the mathematical
              foundations of cryptography.  These open problems are of fundamental importance
              to computability theory since, until they are resolved, it will be impossible
              to mathematically prove good lower bounds on computational complexity; for
              instance, it will be impossible to mathematically prove the security of
              cryptographic systems without resolving some of these open questions.  Prior
              research of Buss and others has established direct links between proof
              complexity and these problems in the foundations of computability.  The main
              thrust of the research supported by this grant is the investigation of proof
              complexity and proof search, and the relationship between proof complexity and
              computational/circuit complexity.

