Title       : Geometry of Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9803691

Award Number: 9803691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence J. Gaffney gaff@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9803691  Gaffney       Gaffney studies the local geometry of analytic sets and
              mappings.  His  goal is to find numbers computable from the equations defining
              the sets or  components of the mappings that will describe the geometry of the
              object  under study.  A first step is to find numbers of this type whose
              constancy in  a family of objects implies that the geometry of the family is
              constant in  some well-defined way.  One of the most important conditions that
              Gaffney  considers is Whitney equisingularity.  This condition implies that the
               embedded topology of the family is constant.  The theory of the integral 
              closure of modules provides a powerful framework for studying this condition. 
              Working with Kleiman, Gaffney will solve this problem for families of  complete
              intersections with non-isolated singularities.  This will be done by 
              transporting, with suitable modifications, the ideas Gaffney used in the case 
              of hypersurfaces with non-isolated singularities into the framework of 
              complete intersections developed with Kleiman.  Gaffney will also investigate 
              the relation between the geometry of hypersurface singularities and the 
              components appearing in the exceptional divisor associated to these 
              singularities.  One specific case to be considered will be discriminants of 
              finitely determined map germs and topologically stable map germs close to the 
              boundary of the nice dimensions.  This study will be a step toward criteria 
              for families of such maps to be Whitney equisingular.        This project is
              part of a centuries old effort to fathom the geometry  of mappings and singular
              shapes.  (A mapping is a relation between shapes.)  A cone is a simple example
              of a shape with a singularity, and a picture of a  cone is a simple example of
              a mapping.  The picture creates a relation  between the points of the cone and
              the points of a plane, the plane of the  picture in this case.  If we take a
              picture of even a smooth shape, the image  will have edges, and the edges will
              also often have singula r points, so the  study of shapes and mappings are
              related.  Equations describe shapes.  The  goal of this study is to start with
              equations of a shape and extract numbers  from them that give a description of
              the geometry of the shape useful for  determining when one member of a family
              of shapes is different from other  members.  For example, if you lay a piece of
              string across itself, it forms a  loop.  As you pull the loop tight, it forms a
              family of curves, and the loop  disappears at some time t.  Our intuition says
              that the curves in this family  are similar until we get to time t, when the
              loop disappears.  We can write  down equations for the members of this family. 
              It is helpful to study this  situation using two scales.  There is the
              macroscopic level, in which the  individual curves bend to form loops, and
              there is also an infinitesimal  level at which the tangent vectors to the
              curves and to the union of the  curves exist.  As you move around a loop, you
              can follow the tangent vectors  around.  Remarkably, although the loop
              disappears as time goes to t at the  macroscopic level, the loop leaves a trace
              at the infinitesimal level.  This  trace shows up in the invariant, called the
              Milnor number, that we use to  study curves in the plane, and it can be
              calculated from equations of the  curves.  The theory of integral closure of
              modules is a powerful framework  for studying sets at this infinitesimal level
              and for extracting numbers that  detect change at this level in a family of
              sets.  Because there is a good  connection between algebra and geometry for
              shapes defined in complex space  by analytic functions, this is the setting for
              most work to date using this  approach.  d-dimensional subsets of complex
              n-space defined by n-d equations  are called complete intersections.  Gaffney
              and Kleiman will combine their  own and others' earlier approaches to more
              limited situations to treat  families of complete intersections with singular
              sets of arbitrary dimension.  ***
