Title       : Modeling and Design of Diffractive Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9803809

Award Number: 9803809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Bao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focuses on computational methods and  numerical analysis
              for modeling and design of optical  micro-structures in linear and nonlinear
              optical media. The  research will extend our existing collaboration with Cray 
              Research, Inc., and develop a new collaboration with  Lucent Technology, Bell
              Labs. It will provide opportunities for  two graduate assistants to engage in
              University-Industry joint  research programs and make important contributions
              to an exciting  area of applied and industrial mathematics.    The main topics
              of the proposed research are as follows:  Interface least-squares finite
              element methods for diffraction  problems:  computation and numerical analysis.
               Inverse diffraction and optimal design problems. A new  computational
              approach.  Modeling of nonlinear diffractive  optics. Structure enhanced
              nonlinear optical effects.  These problems are motivated by industrial
              applications.    The objectives of the training activities are to (1) prepare
              the  graduate students with skills and experiences that will make them  strong
              competitors in an academic/industrial environment and (2)  produce graduate
              students who have qualifications  that will make  them important contributors
              to science and technology  developments in an academic/industrial environment. 
              Together  with the College, the University will provide 50% of the total 
              support for the first year. Research assistantships or teaching  assistantship
              will be provided in the years after.  Cray Research  will support a summer
              internship for one graduate student of the  PI.  Guangye Li of Cray will devote
              time in supervising the  summer intern and working on the software development.
               Cray will  also provide the PI and his students access to computers,  together
              with necessary technical support.    This GOALI project is jointly supported by
              the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
