Title       : Tame Groups, Universal Graphs, Automorphism Towers, and Cofinalities of Infinite
               Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9803417

Award Number: 9803417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Cherlin cherlin@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cherlin proposes to collaborate with a team of eight researchers on the
              classification of connected simple tame groups of finite Morley rank, using
              methods suggested by experience with finite groups: it is anticipated that all
              such groups are algebraic.  In addition Cherlin, working with Shi, seeks to
              introduce model theoretic methods into the study of universal graphs, and to
              show the role of the model theoretic algebraic closure operator for this class
              of problems. Thomas will study interactions of set theory and group theory in
              connection with automorphism towers and the cofinalities of infinite analogs of
              finite groups, making use of forcing, pcf theory, and large cardinals, as well
              as character theory. An outstanding problem is the relationship of the
              cofinality of the infinite symmetric group to Blass' invariant, the groupwise
              density.  The role of matrix groups in modern mathematics is well established
              and occupies a central place in both pure and applied mathematics.  It has been
              conjectured that these groups also play a predominant role in the detailed
              analysis of many apparently unrelated structures of general type.  One of the
              goals of the present project is to confirm this in the so-called ``tame case'',
              which is more immediately accessible. A separate goal is to demonstrate that
              standard ideas of logic (model theory) can cast new light on existing problems
              in combinatorics (graph theory).  It is hoped that graph theorists will
              themselves adopt these methods in such cases. The work of Thomas uncovers
              previously unsuspected relations between algebraic and set theoretical issues,
              and should lead to new ``forcing'' tools, which are among the most powerful
              foundational tools of modern set theory. The general thrust of the proposal is
              to show how techniques arising naturally in one area can be transported
              fruitfully to other subject areas.
