Title       : Borel Equivalence Relations with Applications to Indecomposable Continua and
               Polish Group Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9803676

Award Number: 9803676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65466              (Estimated)
Investigator: Slawomir Solecki ssolecki@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Solecki proposes several projects on the borderline of descriptive set theory,
              which is a branch of mathematical logic, and topology. He proposes to continue
              his work on applications of definable equivalence relations to indecomposable
              continua and to continuous actions of Polish groups. Specifically, he will
              investigate the structure of the equivalence relation induced on an
              indecomposable continuum by its partition into composants. His earlier work
              leads him to believe that a complete classification up to Borel isomorphism of
              these equivalence relations is within reach. If it can be accomplished, it
              should shed light on an old problem of Kuratowski on determining the size of
              Borel sets that are unions of families of composants. The second area of
              research proposed in the project is the study of the relation between
              topologies on groups and complexity of equivalence relations induced by their
              actions. The proposer will attempt to establish a characterization of subgroups
              of Polish groups which themselves carry Polish group topologies stronger than
              the subgroup topology. This characterization should be in terms of the
              complexity of the equivalence relation induced by the left translation action.
              Also he proposes to find a characterization of local compactness of Polish
              groups in terms of the equivalence relations induced by their continuous
              actions. 

This project has two parts. First, ``indecomposable continua''
              will be studied.  Even though indecomposable continua were initially discovered
              as paradoxical, exceptional examples of curves, their importance for today's
              research comes from the fact that they occur naturally and commonly in certain
              mathematical models. For instance, when studying the evolution of a physical or
              a biological system, one is particularly interested in describing families of
              states of such a system which have some sort of stability and to which other
              states evolve. Surprisingly, even for simple, natural systems, such
              ``attractors'' can have a very intricate geometric structure, in particular,
              they can be indecomposable continua. In this work, a mathematical discipline
              called descriptive set theory, which has no obvious connections with
              indecomposable continua, is being used to uncover certain deeper aspects of
              their structure. These new methods have already helped to solve some old
              problems, and it is expected that they will yield still new and exciting
              results and applications. The motivation for the second part of the project
              comes from the following considerations. An important part of a mathematician's
              or a physicist's work is classifying objects he/she is interested in so that
              objects that differ in an inessential way are not distinguished by the
              classification. In most situations, two object differ ``in an inessential way''
              if one can be transformed into the other by a transformation taken from a
              suitable family of transformations called a group acting on the family of
              objects. There is a well-developed theory of classifying objects up to actions
              of groups that behave as if they were locally finite, the so-called locally
              compact groups. In many important instances, though, this theory is
              insufficient. This work will contribute to a larger, rapidly developing field,
              which investigates actions of non-locally compact groups.


