Title       : Scattering and Reactions of Intermediate Energy Projectiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9803860

Award Number: 9803860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1174000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Glashausser glashaus@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Gilman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Ransome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This grant will support the experimental work of the  Intermediate Energy
              Nuclear Physics Group at Rutgers  University.  This group carries out
              experiments with  electron beams primarily at the new continuous electron beam 
              accelerator, CEBAF, at the Jefferson Laboratory in Newport  News, Virginia. 
              They were leaders in designing and  constructing a large polarimeter for this
              facility; it  determines the direction of the spin of protons knocked out  of
              the nucleus by the highly energetic electrons.  Measurements with this
              polarimeter yield highly accurate  information on the fundamental
              electromagnetic properties of  the free proton, and should reveal possible
              changes in these  properties when the proton is bound inside a nucleus. 
              Related experiments will be carried out at lower energies at  an accelerator in
              Mainz, Germany.  Other such spin  measurements will test simple quark model
              descriptions of  reactions in which protons are emitted from a deuterium 
              target by incident high-energy photons.  The spin  measurements are much more
              sensitive than previous  experiments to possible problems in the quark
              description of  the reaction.  Finally, a third major program addresses 
              directly the contributions of quarks to the spin of the  neutron by examining
              changes in the probability for  scattering electrons when the direction of the
              neutron's  spin in the target is changed.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
