Title       : Turbulence Theory: Approximation of Higher Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9803538

Award Number: 9803538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Kraichnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert H Kraichnan Inc
	      
	      Dublin, NH  03444    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kraichnan

This proposal is for theoretical research on the higher statistics
              of 
Navier-Stokes turbulence. The principal tool to be used is called mapping
              
approximation. It is a systematic mathematical procedure applied to the fluid
              
equations of motion. Nonlinear transformations of fields with Gaussian
              
statistics are exploited. In previous applications to several problems,
              
notably to the advection of passive or chemically active scalar contaminant
              
fields by turbulent flows and to Burgers' one-dimensional model of
              turbulence, 
it has yielded quantitatively accurate predictions of statistics
              that describe 
extreme intermittency of small scales. The proposed work
              involves further 
development of mapping approximation and its application to
              intermittency of 
vorticity in incompressible turbulent flows. Ultimate goals
              include the 
determination of scaling exponents for
              vorticity.


Turbulence, the disordered motion of fluids, is an ubiquitous
              phenomenon in 
geophysics and industry. It has been an outstanding challenge
              to 
mathematicians and physicists for over a century. Examples where
              turbulence 
plays a crucial role are weather systems, airplane flight, the
              dispersal of 
atmospheric pollutants, and industrial chemical reactors. The
              complexity of 
turbulent motion is so extreme that fully detailed computer
              solutions of real 
turbulent flows are not possible; the demands on memory and
              speed are too 
extreme. In order to reduce computation to maneagable size,
              theoretical models 
of the statistics of the smaller scales of turbulent
              motion are essential. The 
research to be carried out under this proposal
              brings recently developed new 
tools to bear on the statistics of small
              scales. These tools have proved to be 
powerful in related problems. Improved
              models of the small scales of 
turbulence that can be used in computer
              simulations are an objective of this 
research.



