Title       : The Macroscopic Response of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9803748

Award Number: 9803748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graeme W. Milton milton@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the macroscopic response of both homogeneous
              
and heterogeneous materials. For homogeneous materials it will obtain 
sharp
              tests as to whether actual measurements of the electrical or viscoelastic
              
response over two different frequency intervals are compatible.  For
              
heterogeneous materials it will bound the dielectric and viscoelastic
              
response of materials both in the frequency domain and in the time domain.
              
In addition the principal investigator will determine what macroscopic
              
stress strain combinations can or cannot occur in both linear and non-linear
              
composites and will identify microstructures which have extremal
              stress-strain 
combinations.  These are expected to be important in
              applications where one 
wants to channel stress from one area to another.  The
              research will shed 
further light on exact microstructure independent
              relations amongst the 
effective moduli of composites.  It will also obtain
              dramatic accelerations of the 
convergence rate of certain iterative numerical
              schemes which have been 
developed to compute the properties of both linear
              and non-linear composites.  

A better understanding of the macroscopic
              response of materials is of central 
technological importance. This importance
              stretches across the board, from 
understanding the macroscopic response of
              engineered materials (of critical 
importance to the defence, automative, and
              aerospace industries), to 
understanding the macroscopic response of
              polycrystalline and porous rocks 
(relevant to earthquake prediction and to
              the oil industry), to understanding 
the macroscopic response of sea ice
              (important to climate modelling), 
to understanding the macroscopic response
              of biological materials 
(such as tissues, bones, shells and tendons).  The
              research funded with this
award will enhance our understanding in ways that
              will facilitate the development 
of new materials, provide procedures for
              testing the reliability of experimental 
measurements, and accelerate
              numerical computations. 


