Title       : Random Discrete Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9803249

Award Number: 9803249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62608              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin A. Pemantle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803249  Pemantle   The PI will study several problems on the interface between
              probability theory and   discrete mathematics.  One of these problems is
              essentially combinatorial, having to do   with enumeration of lattice paths and
              with solving a class of recursions arising in this   problem. The problem arose
              from an application in computer science, but the applications   of this
              combinatorial analysis extend to particle systems, and to many other
              enumeration   problems. The second research area is the theory of random
              processes on countable   groups.  Many basic processes such as percolation,
              random walk, and Markov random   fields are symmetric with respect to the
              action of some group.  When the geometry of the   space is hyperbolic, the
              group is typically non-amenable, and the symmetry of the process   under the
              action of such a large group forces the process to be at least somewhat well  
              behaved.  The PI will attempt to exploit some recently developed mass transport
              methods   to obtain such results. Finally, he will continue research into
              random processes on trees,   and in particular, the examination of the rotor
              model, the contact process, branching   random walk, and invasion percolation. 
               Often quantities of mathematical and physical interest are encoded in a power 
               series, which is a very powerful tool for obtaining expressions for the
              quantities of   interest, provided one can in the end decode the information. 
              It is known how to do this   for power series in one variable, but relatively
              little is known when there is more than one   variable.  Even a reasonable
              approximation is in general unknown.  The results from this   research are
              expected to include a reliable method for approximating the coefficients of  
              power series in more than one variable. This will then allow approximate
              solutions to   problems that range from path enumeration, to queuing problems
              (computing efficiency of   networks of production), to analysis of the speed of
              algorithms (the original motivation for    this project).
