Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: The Role of Mammalian Alcohol
               Dehydrogenases in the Detoxification of Lipid Peroxidation Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9803010

Award Number: 9803010
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis G. Valerio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5952,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803010  Valerio    The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of  unique or complementary facilities, expertise and 
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Luis G. Valerio, Jr. to work with Dr.
              Xavier  Pares of the Universitat Autonoma de  Barcelona in Spain.  This project
              proposes to determine the  role of the alcohol dehydrogenases (ADH) enzyme as a
              defense  mechanism against peroxidative damage to cellular membrane  lipids
              (lipid peroxidation) in a rat liver cell model of  enhanced oxidative stress.
              The objective is to understand  functional requirements of the ADH enzyme to
              metabolize 4-  hydroxynonenal, a major product of lipid peroxidation using 
              site-directed mutagenesis.  The PI will use both chemical  toxicology and
              molecular biology to do this investigation.  The findings of this research will
              provide a  multidisciplinary approach to understanding how this enzyme 
              functions and what its toxicological relationship is to  lipid peroxidation.   
              The host, Dr. Xavier Pares is Professor and Chair in the  Department of
              Biochemistry and Molecular Biology at the  University of Barcelona.  He has a
              close collaboration with  Dr. Hans Jornvall of the Karolinska Institute in
              Stockholm,  Sweden.  They have made significant progress in the  understanding
              of our basic knowledge of the biological  function and evolutionary origins of
              the ADH enzyme.  Dr.  Valerio will become a member of this multi-country 
              collaboration.  Besides doing research with these two 
              internationally-respected colleagues, he will gain new  skills in molecular
              biology, computer-assisted molecular  modeling, and enzyme kinetics.  ***
