Title       : Mathematical Models of Premixed Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9803614

Award Number: 9803614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Bechtold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9803614

Mathematical Models of Premixed Flames,  John K. Bechtold

This
              work proposes to systmatically derive generalized mathematical 
models of
              premixed flame propagation through a variety of flow 
conditions.  Asymptotic
              methods will be employed to extract reduced 
models from a complete set of
              equations governing combustion processes.
Of interest will be to account for
              flow conditions that are characteristic 
of turbulent flows.  Specific models
              will include the following phenomena:
unsteady flame structure, flow fields
              with concentration and thermal 
gradients, and multi-component mixtures. 
              These reduced models possess 
a tremendous advantage over the full set of
              equations in that they 
permit direct analysis of salient features
              characterizing practical 
combustion systems.  Therefore, it is further
              proposed that these new 
models will be used to analyze simplified flame-flow
              configurations that 
retain some of the essential features of turbulent
              reacting flows, including  
unsteadiness and non-uniformities.



Most
              practical combustion systems, including internal combustion engines, 
rocket
              engines and incinerators, operate in a turbulent regime.  The study 
of
              combustion in these environments provides valuable information on such
              
important issues as efficiency and emissions.  These systems are very
              
complicated and are governed by huge sets of equations that are too large
              
to be solved even by the most sophisticated numerical techniques. Scientific
              
progress in these directions relies on the development of simplified
              
mathematical models; that is, reduced systems that retain the most essential
              
features of the combustion process, but that permit direct analysis.  The
              
work proposed here involves the systematic derivation of flame models to
              
study flame propagation in a wide range of flow conditions, including
              
time-dependent and non-uniform flows.  Of particular interest will be 
to
              calculate burning rates and to identify conditions for which flames 
will be
              extinguished.


