Title       : Topology of the Moduli Spaces of Stable Curves and Stable Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9803553

Award Number: 9803553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Kabanov kabanov@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803553  Kabanov       In this project the investigator is studying the moduli
              spaces of  stable curves and their close cousins, the moduli spaces of stable
              maps.  These spaces play an important role in various areas of mathematics, 
              including topology, algebraic geometry, geometric analysis, and quantum  field
              theory.  For example, in algebraic geometry these spaces have been  fruitfully
              explored in solving enumerative problems.  In this project,  the investigator
              is studying intersection numbers on the moduli spaces of  stable curves and
              stable maps.  He intends to use this study in order to  understand natural
              deformations of a certain class of cohomological field  theories.  The
              investigator is also studying the topology of moduli spaces  of stable maps,
              which are important in their own right.  Even a particular  case, the case of
              the moduli spaces of stable curves, has generated a  lot of interesting
              mathematics.       For the past decade, the interaction between mathematics and
              physics  has provided many beautiful, and sometimes unexpected, results and 
              conjectures.  In particular, geometry has incorporated many ideas and  much
              intuition from string theory in physics.  String theory treats  a particle as a
              small loop rather than a point.  When a particle moves  in time it traces out a
              surface.  Therefore understanding geometries on  surfaces, which has always
              been of interest to mathematicians, has also  become important in physics.  In
              this project, the investigator is studying  the spaces that incorporate
              information about all geometries on a given  surface.  He is also studying
              geometries on surfaces living inside a given  space.  For example, one can
              count the number of surfaces satisfying  certain constraints inside the given
              space.  Amazingly, the origin in  physics of this subject is topological
              gravity.    ***
