Title       : Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9803623

Award Number: 9803623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70086              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anatoly S. Libgober libgober@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS 9803623  Principal Investigator:  Anatoly Libgober   
              This project concerns mirror symmetry. It aims to clarify the  mathematical
              meaning and the scope of mirror correspondence and to  find applications of
              mirror symmetry. While from mathematical  viewpoint, the original discovery of
              mirror symmetry predicted a  relation between the enumerative geometry of
              manifolds from the class  of (Calabi-Yau) manifolds (i.e. the numerology of
              lines, quadrics,  twisted cubics etc) and differential equations or more
              precisely the  variation of the Hodge structure on another (Calabi-Yau)
              manifold,  more recent developments, mainly in physics literature, suggest 
              numerous additional properties of mirror correspondence.  Mirror  symmetry in
              the physical sense is a rather imposing condition on  manifolds, defined as a
              certain isomorphism of conformal field  theories associated with the manifolds
              and one would like to  understand its exact mathematical meaning.  The
              investigator is  planning to search for additional topological and geometric
              properties  of manifolds which will allow us to identify mirror partners, such
              as  behavior of their characteristic classes, elliptic genera, or other 
              properties which may facilitate identifying mirror partners in special 
              situations, e.g. for manifolds with automorphisms.  Another aspect of  the
              proposed study is the investigation of algebraic structures  associated with
              objects involved in the mirror symmetry such as  differential equations for the
              periods of the families of Calabi-Yau  manifolds.  As part of the study of
              these differential equations the  investigator plans to relate issues arising
              in mirror symmetry to  previous work on the fundamental groups of the
              complements, the  monodromy groups and the cohomology of local systems on
              certain  quasiprojective varieties.    Overall, the goal of the project is to
              attempt to bridge the gap  between physical and mathematical understanding
              found in the early  1990's of the phenomenon of mirror sym metry. This will
              lead to better  understanding of issues which have been the focus of
              mathematicians  since the middle of 19th century, such as enumeration of
              geometric  objects, using ideas from string theory, and we hope also to bring 
              additional mathematical ideas to the understanding of mirror symmetry  in
              physics.
