Title       : The Formulation of Policies for Electronic Commerce and Their Enforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a9803698

Award Number: 9803698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naftaly H. Minsky minsky@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Current research on electronic commerce focuses on means for  secure and
              efficient mechanisms for payments, largely supported by  cryptographic
              techniques. Such mechanisms are indeed necessary for  e-commerce, but they are
              not sufficient.  Commercial activities  are not limited to simple exchange of
              funds and merchandise  between a client and a vendor. They often consist of
              multi-step  transactions, sometimes involving several participants, that need 
              to be carried out in accordance to a certain policy. Such policies  may be
              concerned with issues that do not lend themselves to purely  cryptographic
              treatment, such as: preventing  certificates from  being duplicated; ensuring
              that credit card are used only for the  specified transactions; guaranteeing
              that a payment for services  is refundable under specified circumstances;
              securing the privacy  and anonymity of clients; providing a degree of fault
              tolerance;  and establishing access control. This project proposes a general 
              mechanism that can be used to formulate and enforce a wide range  of such
              policies for electronic commerce, in a unified, scalable,  and easily
              deployable manner.  The policy is to be stated  explicitly, and be enforced by
              a distributed set of trusted  generic controllers.  This mechanism is based on
              the concept of  ``Law-Governed interaction,'' developed under a current NSF
              grant.
