Title       : Topics in Percolationand Particle Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9803267

Award Number: 9803267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Newman newman@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803267  Newman   This research is in the general area of Probability Theory
              with special emphasis on   a number of stochastic models with interesting
              spatial structure. One specific topic is first-  passage percolation based on
              d-dimensional Poisson point processes, with particular   emphasis on results
              related to the existence and nonexistence of semi-infinite and doubly  
              infinite geodesics. A second major part of the work concerns a class of voter
              models in   random environments which exhibit  the intriguing phenomenon of
              "chaotic time   dependence." This is when the model (which is a Markov process
              in time) has multiple   invariant distributions and the distribution at time t
              (starting from a randomly selected   initial state) does not converge as t
              tends to infinity. A smaller, but significant, part of the   research involves
              continuum scaling limits of minimal spanning trees in the plane.    In the
              general area of probability theory, an increasingly important role has been  
              played in recent years by systems in which random effects are observed in the
              spatial   structure rather than in (or in addition to) the behavior as a
              function of time (as in models   of equity prices). Some of these models, such
              as first-passage percolation, have arisen   separately in multiple contexts,
              such as fluid flow in porous media (which is relevant for   example to modeling
              of pollutant dispersion in aquifers), polymer structure, and other   parts of
              materials science. There are also connections to combinatorial optimization (as
              in   the minimal spanning tree problem, which is a variant of the classical
              traveling salesman   problem of designing optimal routings) and thus to various
              parts of theoretical computer   science. The research under this grant concerns
              the mathematical phenomena that occur in   several representative examples of
              such stochastic systems with interesting spatial   structure. One particular
              issue of study is the connection between randomness in the   spatial
              environment and chaotic depe ndence in time.
