Title       : Determination of Atomic Scale Structure Property Relationships in
               High-Temperature Superconductors for Power Transmission Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9803021

Award Number: 9803021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Browning browning@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803021  Browning    This project will study the structure/property
              relationships in  order to determine the optimum microstructure for the 
              incorporation of high-TC superconductors into viable devices.  The electronic
              conduction of these materials is extremely  sensitive to atomic-scale defects
              that are introduced during the  processing of the oxide material.  The
              relationship between the  atomic-scale defects and the electronic conduction
              can be  determined by atomic resolution Z-contrast imaging and electron  energy
              loss spectroscopy in the scanning transmission electron  microscope (STEM). 
              These techniques can be performed  simultaneously in the STEM, with the image
              being used to  determine the atomic structure and the spectrum being used to 
              determine the electronic structure.  Features of the spectrum can  be
              correlated with the charge carrier concentration, allowing  weak-links to be
              quantified on a scale below the coherence  length.  The atomic resolution
              analysis techniques will be  applied to two systems that are currently being
              developed for  power transmission and high-magnetic field applications.  In 
              collaboration with American Superconductor Corporation, a major  thrust of the
              proposal is to investigate the properties of  defects in Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu308 (2223)
              tapes and relate them to  processing conditions.  Building on an established
              successful  collaborative program, this project will investigate the 
              distribution of defects within the tapes and the relationship  between the
              formation of the 2223 phase and the tape  microstructure.  The second goal of
              this proposal is to  investigate the properties of YBa2Cu307 films produced on 
              textured metal substrates.  Although further from a viable  product, this
              recently developed fabrication procedure offers a  possible alternative to the
              2223 tapes.  Research will focus on a  comparison of properties with the
              results from individual grain  boundaries and single crystals, with the aim of
              determining the  route to large-scale fabrication of t hese materials.  %%% 
              Since the discovery of high-TC superconductivity in the ceramic  oxides, these
              materials have held the promise of efficient,  powerful and sensitive
              electronic devices and power transmission  wires.  The results of this research
              will help determine the  processing route to produce improved tapes suitable
              for  commercial applications. The research will have a significant  impact on
              the applications of high-TC superconductors.  ***
