Title       : Joint U.S. - European Union Theoretical and Practical Course on Molecular
               Approaches for in situ Biodegradation; Rutgers University; Summer 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9803831

Award Number: 9803831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerben J. Zylstra zylstra@aesop.rutgers.edu               X320  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9803831  Zylstra   As part of the four-agency Joint Program on Bioremediation
              (NSF, EPA, DOE, and ONR), officials in ONR encouraged Dr. Gerben Zylstra at
              Rutgers University to collaborate with European colleagues in developing a
              summer short-course that would teach new molecular-biological methods, mostly
              relating to DNA methodologies, for microbial sampling and identification to
              advanced graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Dr. Zylstra has
              assembled an impressive team of U.S. and European Union (EU) scientists to
              conduct a two-week laboratory and field course for approximately 24 students,
              half from the U.S. and half from European institutions. The course is designed
              to give young scientists hands-on experience with modern biotechnological
              methods for the analysis of microbes and their metabolic activities in the
              remediation of pollutants in the environment. Basic principles of taxonomic
              identification and classification, and of ecological assembly and functioning,
              are taught within a bioremediation framework that focuses on restoration of
              healthy ecosystem dynamics of microbial populations. Specific topics include
              molecular-genetic analyses of soil microbes, bioavailability of contaminants
              such as toluene, PCR amplification and identification of taxon-specific or
              activity-specific genes, and enzyme assays for pathways of contaminant
              degradation. Student applications are solicited through targeted mailings to
              university departments and science associations as well as interactive Web
              sites.    The problems of environmental pollution in water and soils have
              intensified the need for basic scientific understanding of microbial
              composition and activity in natural and human-dominated ecosystems. New
              molecular and DNA-based probes have revolutionized scientists' ability to
              identify particular microbes with desirable metabolic functions or to target
              and enhance metabolic pathways present in numerous microbes but usually of
              secondary status. Advances in both basic and applied aspects of microb ial
              ecology and evolution are happening rapidly, and targeted courses like this one
              are an effective means of dissemination of new ideas and methodologies.
