Title       : Acquisition of a Hydrogen Furnace Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9803003

Award Number: 9803003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar S. Es-Said oessaid@lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      One LMU Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803003
Es-Said
This award provides partial support for the purchase of a
              hydrogen annealing furnace assembly that will be used in the intermittent
              annealing of cold worked P/M rhenium samples.  Specifically, the hydrogen
              furnace is a critical piece of equipment in the research project, which, in
              combination with other equipment, will be used to study the effect of varying
              the cold rolling modes on the crystallographic texture and mechanical
              properties of rhenium metal.  It will also be a critical addition for the
              Design/Materials Research Center at Loyola Marymount University.

Loyola
              Marymount University is primarily an undergraduate teaching university that
              actively promotes and encourages collaborative research between faculty and
              students.  Through the guidance and leadership of faculty, several
              undergraduate students have presented the results of research work at regional,
              national, and international professional conferences and have had their work
              published in several renowned journals.  While the mechanical engineering
              curricula of many colleges and universities emphasize mainly the theoretical
              and analytical aspects of eningeering problems, the Loylola program combines
              these approaches and a strong design emphasis.  Armed with this solid
              background, Loyola graduates are well prepared to carry out further research in
              graduate school or to solve problems in industry.
%%%
Approximately 10
              students per year for two years will perform the proposed research under the
              supervision of faculty.  Students will use an existing materials science
              research laboratory (part of the Design/Materials Research Center) that
              includes:  a rolling mill, various other metal cutting equipment, electrical
              resistivity devices, micro hardness machninery, two universal mechanical
              testing machines, furnaces, two light optical microscopes, and an X-ray
              Diffractometer with a Pole Figure Attachment.  The requested equipment will
              introduce students to an even wider variety of equipment typically used in
              refractory metals/materials research.  Support to purchase the proposed
              equipment will yield three primary benefits.  First, the results of the
              research are critical to industry, specifically, to aerospace and electronics
              companies.  Secondly, the equipment will enhance the research and teaching
              capabilities of the University's capacity to conduct research and research
              training and to improve teaching in the field of materials and processing,
              thereby contributing to the multidisciplinary education and preparedness of the
              next generation of materials scientists, engineers, and physicists.  Thirdly,
              the equipment will enable faculty to perform independent research in
              intermittent annealing heat treatments without delay and much more cost
              effectively.  Above all, the acquisition of the requested equipment will put in
              place a critical addition to the Design/Materials Research Center at Loyola
              Marymount University.  Significant steps have been already undertaken in the
              establishment of this center.  The departmental objective in pursuing external
              funding is to enhance the engineering curriculum for approximately 140
              engineering students through the interaction of this University with other
              Universities, private industry, and government agencies in solving engineering
              problems.
***  

