Title       : Template Oligomerization for the Replication of Precisely 
Defined Synthetic
               Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9803196

Award Number: 9803196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tour   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the use of precisely defined templates for   the
              production of organic oligomers of precise molecular weight and   constitution.
               Rigid-rod oligomer templates will be used for the rapid   construction of
              oligomers having the same length as the templates.    Monomers will be attached
              to the templates via covalent bonds, then   oligomerization will be chemically
              induced to afford a supramolecular   parent-daughter duplex.  Cleavage of the
              parent-daughter duplex would   produce a daughter oligomer that retains the
              specific length information   of the parent template.  Methods are proposed to 
              reuse the parent   template and the daughter as a new template, thus making the
              entire   process catalytic in template, and ultimately similar to the
              polymerase   chain reaction (PCR) in its productive capabilities.  The project
              could   significantly simplify the preparation of precisely defined  
              macromolecular architectures which are currently prepared only by   laborious
              step-wise procedures or multiple analytical separations.  With   this award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is   supporting the research
              of Dr. James M. Tour of the Department of   Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
              University of South Carolina.    Professor Tour will focus his work on
              developing new routes for the   facile construction of organic oligomers  of
              precise molecular weight and   constitution.  These precise macromolecular
              systems are becoming   important for electronics, photonics, molecular
              electronics, catalysis,   separation science, nano-engineering, and
              nano-bioengineering                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
