Title       : Fundamental and Applied Problems in Granular Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9803305

Award Number: 9803305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Schaeffer dgs@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Allard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Behringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fundamental and Applied Problems in Granular Flow  David Schaeffer/ Michael
              Shearer    This project focuses on three aspects of the flow of granular 
              materials: an investigation of fluctuations, flows and stresses in  industrial
              silos, and liquefaction of soils.  The various issues will  be addressed using
              an interdisciplinary approach involving analysis,  computation and experiment. 
              The latter two parts will also involve  input from industrial and geotechnical
              experts.  Details of each  subproject follow.  Subproject 1, fluctuations in
              sheared granular  materials: Recent work has shown that fluctuations of forces
              and to  some extent velocities can be very large for moderate scale systems. 
              The experimental part of this project will provide additional  quantitative
              characterizations of these fluctuations for modest scale  slowly sheared
              systems.  In addition, new experiments will be  constructed of a Couette type
              that will probe force fluctuations on  larger length and time scales.  These
              experiments will be integrated  into ongoing work to model force fluctuations
              by lattice type models,  and computations using novel hybrid molecular dynamics
               and finite  element codes. Subproject 2, flow in industrial silos: In
              collaboration  with engineers at the firm Jenike and Johanson, Inc. the co-PI's
              of this  project will analyze flows in a spatial region that corresponds to the
               shape of a typical hopper.  This analysis will be based both on Coulomb 
              materials and on  critical state soil mechanics (CSSM).  Some of the aspects 
              under study will  include an investigation  of the relationship between  CSSM
              and  Coulomb  models, shock and rarefaction wave solutions, boundary  value
              problems for  hopper flow, and stability of such solutions.  An  important
              application  is the design of flow corrective devices.  Subproject 3,
              liquefaction of soils: This phenomenon corresponds to the  abrupt  loss of
              load-bearing capacity of a loose, water-saturated soil,  possibly leading to a
              massive landslide. Real world s oil  failure/liquefaction will be investigated
              in collaboration with  G. Gudehus and his associates.    This project will
              combine experiments, mathematical analysis, computer  simulation and
              industrial/geotechnical expertise to better understand  the flow of granular
              materials.  The area of study is of considerable  importance to technical
              processes involving all types of granular  materials, including but by no means
              limited to chemical process  industries, and to the handling of coal, ores,
              food grains, and  pharmaceuticals.  Many aspects of the above processes are not
              fully  understood, leading in some cases to enormous financial losses. Also 
              under consideration are geotechnical issues such as the stability of 
              embankments,  as well as the stability of soils under earthquake conditions. 
              The project will involve the application of existing theories for granular 
              materials to such fundamental  problems as flows in hoppers and stability  of
              soils in landfills.  New models will be developed in order to take into 
              account some important aspects  of granular flows such as fluctuations of 
              forces. Recent experiments in this lab have shown that fluctuations,  which are
              not accounted for in existing models,  can be very strong and  may well be
              necessary to provide safe and reliable design criteria for  industrial devices
              involving granular flows. The models will be tightly  linked to the
              experimental data, on the one hand, and, on the other hand,  will be the basis
              of computer solutions for relevant technical problems.
