Title       : Topology and Dynamics of Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9803518

Award Number: 9803518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Goldman wmg@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803518  Goldman        A locally homogeneous geometric structure on a manifold
              M is a  system of local coordinates on open subsets of M with values in a 
              homogeneous space G/H.  On overlapping patches of M, the coordinates  are
              related by transformations in the Lie group G.  Following Cartan  and
              Ehresmann, the coordinate charts globalize to a "development" of  the universal
              covering space U of M into G/H, defining a homomorphism  of the fundamental
              group F of M (realized as the group of deck  transformations of U).  One forms
              a moduli space Def(M,G/H) of  geometric structures on M modelled on G/H which
              classifies structures  up to equivalence.  Def(M,G/H) is itself locally
              homeomorphic to a  moduli space of equivalence classes of homomorphisms
              Hom(F,G)/G.  The  prototype of these moduli spaces is the Teichmuller space,
              classifying  hyperbolic structures (here G/H is the real hyperbolic plane and G
              =  PSL(2,R)).  Moreover the mapping class group of M acts on both  Def(M,G/H)
              and Hom(F,G)/G, and the holonomy map from Def(M,G/H) ->  Hom(F,G)/G is
              equivariant with respect to these actions.  This  investigation mainly
              concentrates on the case when F is the fundamental  group of a compact surface.
               When M is a closed surface, these moduli  spaces carry invariant symplectic
              structures, and when G is compact the  investigator conjectures that the
              symplectic measure is ergodic under  the action of the mapping class group. 
              When G is SL(2,R), this moduli  space is related to Teichmuller space of
              (possibly singular) hyperbolic  structures, and the investigator has used
              geometric structures to study  the dynamics on the moduli space.  This
              dynamical study relates the  action of the discrete mapping class group to
              certain Hamiltonian flows  on the moduli space.  When G/H is Minkowski
              2+1-space, the investigator  (in collaboration with Drumm) is studying the
              deformation spaces of  complete flat manifolds, using "crooked planes"
              developed in Drumm's  thesis and ideas of Margulis.  When G/H is complex
              hyperbo lic 2-space,  Xia has classified the connected components of Hom(F,G)/G
              and the  investigator (in collaboration with Leeb and Kapovich) has found
              discrete  embeddings in each component.  When G/H is the real projective plane,
               the work of the investigator combined with that of Choi gives a complete 
              description of the deformation space Def(M,G/H).       Such geometric
              structures represent a way of relating topology and  geometry.  According to
              Felix Klein's Erlangen program, geometry is  the study of relations between
              objects in a homogeneous space G/H of a  Lie group G that are invariant under
              the transformations in G.  They  include "rigid" geometric properties such as
              distance, angle,  parallelism and collinearity.  On the other hand, topology
              studies the  loose organization of points on a manifold M, where the only
              relations  derive from continuous mapping.  A geometric structure on M more 
              rigidly organizes its points through local coordinate charts from open  sets in
              M to G/H.  Moduli spaces parametrize equivalence classes of  these structures
              and closely relate to spaces of homomorphisms of the  fundamental group of M
              into G.  These moduli spaces themselves enjoy  rich geometric structures of
              their own, and display unusual symmetries  arising from their origin as natural
              geometric objects.  A better  understanding of such basic objects has time and
              again repaid the  effort through insights in related fields, typically in
              theoretical  physics.  ***
