Title       : Investigation and Construction of Statistical Designs for Multifactorial
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9803596

Award Number: 9803596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88688              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Hedayat hedayat@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS 9803596  PI:              Samad Hedayat  Institution:    
              University of Illinois at Chicago  Project:         Investigation and
              Construction of Statistical Designs                   for Multifactorial
              Experiments    Abstract:    The investigator studies statistical problems in
              the area of design  and analyses of scientific and industrial experiments in
              which the  outcomes are influenced by multiple factors and noise. The goal will
               be to identify the best factor combinations while minimizing and  measuring
              the noise. The research effort is mainly concentrated in  the construction of
              designs capable of investigating location and  dispersion effects, compound
              orthogonal arrays with high strength,  g-designs as core sub-designs ,and
              orthogonal arrays of strength t  plus.    The success of any serious scientific
              study depends on the way it is  designed and the related data being collected
              and analyzed. Noise is  the biggest nuisance while the goal is to relate the
              outcomes to the  levels of the factors influencing the study. This is true in
              almost  all social, engineering, environmental, and medical studies. It is 
              costly and indeed unwise to eliminate noise entirely. Indeed in many  studies
              it will be enough if one knows the source and the intensity  of noise. Under
              the latter condition it is possible to explore how the  surrounding factors are
              impacting the outcomes. The investigator  explores all these interconnected
              topics and identifies new cost- and  time-effective and improved statistical
              designs capable of handling  these highly complicated scientific issues.
