Title       : Crossover Designs and Orthogonal Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9803684

Award Number: 9803684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean L. Isaacson dli@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Stufken  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS 9803684  PI:              John Stufken  Institution:    
              Iowa State University  Project:         Crossover Designs and Orthogonal Arrays
                 Abstract:    This research furthers the understanding of two of the most
              useful  types of statistical designs: crossover designs and orthogonal  arrays.
              In a crossover design each of several subjects receives  multiple treatments,
              one at each of several time periods. The design  problem consists of selecting
              the sequences of treatments to be used,  and of deciding how often to use each
              of these sequences. While  practical considerations play a major role, answers
              based on  statistical considerations differ depending on the assumptions about 
              the statistical model for the measurements. This research involves  finding
              efficient practical designs under various realistic model  assumptions. We use
              these results to identify designs with good  properties for most models.
              Concerning orthogonal arrays, this  research provides new methods for the
              construction of mixed  orthogonal arrays, as well as an extensive library of
              such arrays.  In addition, compound orthogonal arrays are studied for their 
              properties when used in a factorial experiment to detect location   and
              dispersion effects simultaneously.    Designed experiments are an integral part
              of scientific research  and of product development and improvement in industry.
              Crossover  designs and orthogonal arrays play a particularly prominent role. 
              Crossover designs are best known for their role in medical research  and in
              clinical trials, where they are used in studies to compare  two or more
              treatments, possibly including a placebo. Orthogonal  arrays play a crucial
              role in quality improvement and assessment  studies in all of manufacturing.
              They are, among others, used in  studies to determine the possible effect that
              changes in a  manufacturing process have on the quality of the final product. 
              This research helps to  improve the efficiency of such trials  and studies by
              identifying better designs and by making such  designs widely available.
