Title       : Large Cardinals and the Determinacy of Long Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9803292

Award Number: 9803292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55524              (Estimated)
Investigator: Itay Neeman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the determinacy of games of variable countable length,
              with definable payoff.  Recent progress in the area of large cardinals
              indicates that it should be possible to prove the determinacy of such games
              using large cardinals in the region of Woodin cardinals.  The principal
              investigator has already proved results in this direction which introduce a
              basic technique for converting a general long game to an iteration game on a
              given model M, provided that M has enough large cardinals.  (The precise large
              cardinal needed of course depends on the length of the game in question.)  If M
              is an iterable model then the iteration game is determined, implying the
              determinacy of the original long game. The particular result proved is that
              continuously coded games with Pi 1-1 payoff are determined, assuming the
              existence of an iterable inner model with a cardinal which is `strong past a
              Woodin cardinal.' Using the techniques of this proof,  as a main building block
              we propose to study more closely the correlations between large cardinals and
              the determinacy of long games.    Games of infinite length play a major rule in
              current study of Descriptive Set Theory. Typically such games are played as
              follows: Fix a set A contained in the interval of reals between 0 and 1. We
              view those reals as written in binary base, so that a real has the form 0. a0,
              a1, a2, a3, a4, a5 ......  where a0, a1, etc. are "digits" namely either a 0 or
              a 1. Consider now a game played between two players (player I and player II)
              who take turns playing digits. I begins playing the digit a0, II follows
              playing the digit a1, then I plays the digit a2, II plays a3, etc. The two
              players continue playing ad-infinitum eventually producing the real number x =
              0. a0, a1, a2, a3, .....  We call x a "run" of the game G(A), and say that the
              run x is won by player I in the case that x is in the set A. We say that the
              game G(A) is "determined" if one of the players has a winning strategy, or a
              set of instructions telling this play er precisely what to do in each round,
              and as long as these instructions are followed, the player is guaranteed to
              win.  For a general set A, the game G(A) need not be determined. However, it
              turns out that G(A) is determined if the set A is definable in certain ways.
              For example, Martin showed in 1970 that if A is the projection of a closed set
              then G(A) is determined. Recent progress in the study of large cardinals allows
              us to prove determinacy of longer games, and the purpose of this project is to
              study further the relationships between large cardinal axioms and the
              determinacy of several long games.  We expect this to help our understanding of
              large cardinals, since long games occur naturally in the study of large
              cardinals.
