Title       : Isoperimetric Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9803261

Award Number: 9803261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erwin Lutwak lutwak@math.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gaoyong Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research lies in the analytic part of geometric convexity.  More
              specifically, it focuses on the Brunn-Minkowski theory, also known as the
              theory of mixed volumes. The principal investigators plan to generalize the
              theory to objects more general than convex bodies and extend the theory in the
              same way that the theory of Lp spaces extends the theory of L1 and L2 spaces. 
              They will also continue work on the creation of a dual of the Brunn-Minkowski
              theory, where intersections replace projections.  Following on this, they
              intend to study the partial differential equations which arise in this extended
              Brunn-Minkowski theory, specifically generalizations of the classical Minkowski
              problem. A central part of this work is establishing new isoperimetric
              inequalities within the extended Brunn-Minkowski theory and its dual.    The
              theory of mixed volumes has already found a wide variety of applications
              ranging from statistics to geometric tomography. (Geometric tomography is the
              subject which attempts to describe three-dimensional objects from lower
              dimensional information such as X-rays, projections, or sections of the objects
              in question.)  The principal investigators intend to extend and build new
              analogs of this important mathematical theory.  A central part of this work
              will involve the invention (or discovery) of new isoperimetric inequalities. 
              These inequalities, in particular affine isoperimetric inequalities, have
              proven to be of importance in subjects ranging from partial differential
              equations to geometric tomography to image analysis. They are very useful
              because they provide estimates about how large one quantity can be, say the
              volume of a body, when all that is known is some other quantity, say the
              surface area of the body.
