Title       : Generalized Nonlinear Schrodinger Equations and Applications to Superfluid
               Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2001   
File        : a9803480

Award Number: 9803480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Roberts roberts@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Natalia G. Berloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9803480    Paul Roberts, Natalia Berloff    GENERALIZED NONLINEAR
              SCHRODINGER EQUATIONS AND APPLICATIONS       TO SUPERFLUID TURBULENCE    The
              proposed research has three closely related objectives.  The first  is to
              develop and study new variants of the nonlinear Schroedinger  equation (NLS)
              that are more faithful to superfluid helium. In real  helium, even in the low
              temperature range, normal fluid is present  which is coupled to the superfluid
              and which, through its viscosity,  provides a high wavenumber energy sink. So
              the existing models need to  be modified to include the mutual friction with
              the normal fluid. To  evaluate the energy loss of interactions with the normal
              fluid one  needs the kinetic coefficients in the Landau two-fluid model. 
              Calculations of these coefficients are usually performed with a  simplistic
              dispersion relation, i.e., the relation between the  frequency of sound waves
              and their wavenumber. For example, the  dispersion relation is supposed
              anomalous and with no roton minimum. We  shall study models in which the
              interaction potential is nonlocal and  which imply the correct dispersion
              curve.  The second objective is to  analyze such dissipative NLS models from
              the point of view of dynamical  systems. We shall study and classify
              attractors, bifurcation sequences,  and routes to chaos. The third objective is
              to make use of the results  to elucidate superfluid turbulence in the low
              temperature regime where  the density of the normal fluid component is smaller
              than the density  of the superfluid component and where one may expect
              turbulence in the  superfluid largely to determine turbulence in the normal
              fluid.    Our investigations will provide targets for experimental work in the 
              low temperature range. Such experiments are currently in the planning  stage by
              the Donnelly group at the University of Oregon.  There may be  important
              implications well beyond the field of liquid helium research:  similar ideas
              may apply to the newly discovered, high temperature  super conductors, to
              systems of magnetic spins, to the melting  transition of crystals, and to some
              cryogenic engineering applications.  Superfluid Helium is used as a coolant in
              superconducting magnets and  infrared detectors, and superfluid turbulence
              affects the transfer of  heat in such devices. An understanding of superfluid
              turbulence may  make it possible to design more efficient methods of
              refrigeration for  superconducting devices.  Turbulence in ordinary fluids is
              one of the  most formidably difficult subjects in physics and engineering. 
              Superfluid turbulence is similar but in some respects simpler for  theoretical
              study, and it is believed that some of the models we shall  develop will throw
              light onto turbulent behaviors in ordinary fluids.
