Title       : Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9803638

Award Number: 9803638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86019              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Handel handel@comet.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project concerns pseudo-Anosov surface dynamics and the outer automorphism
              group of a free group.  One part of the project is to analyze a certain partial
              order on conjugacy classes in the mapping class group of a four times punctured
              disk.  The goal is to find a description of this partial order, in terms of the
              known combinatorial structure of the mapping class group, that is more
              transparent and more amenable to computation than the standard dynamical one. 
              The second part of the project extends the principal investigator's joint work
              with Mark Feighn on coherence of groups.  The focus is on deciding which
              one-relator groups are coherent.  The third and final part of the project is a
              continuation of work with Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn on the outer
              automorphism group of a free group.  The goal of this part of the proposal is
              to formulate and prove a structure theorem for a class of finitely generated
              subgroups that contains, for example, all abelian subgroups.      The
              pseudo-Anosov homeomorphism is one of the most important concepts in the areas
              of mathematics known as three-dimensional geometry, three-dimensional topology,
              and two-dimensional dynamical systems.  The study of pseudo-Anosov
              homeomorphisms began in the mid-1970's.  During the decade that followed, a
              great deal of progress was made in analyzing their behavior.  Since then
              progress has slowed, in part because only the more difficult problems remain. 
              Chief among these problems is an understanding of the "forcing partial order,"
              which, roughly speaking, describes the way in which simple two dimensional
              systems change into chaotic ones.  The principal investigator will use
              extensive computer calculations and techniques from other areas of mathematics,
              especially that of geometric group theory to investigate this problem.  The
              application of techniques derived from a variety of mathematical subfields
              should prove effective in illuminating this problem.  The other parts of the
              project focus on the algebraic analogs of the p seudo-Anosov homeomorphisms and
              will use techniques that are common to dynamical systems and geometric group
              theory.
