Title       : Coupling Chemical Transformation Kinetics and Subsurface Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9803663

Award Number: 9803663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivek Kapoor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9803663
Kapoor

To quantify chemical transformations in natural hydrologic
              environments the coupling of chemical transformations with flows needs to be
              understood.  The objective of this proposal is to understand bimolecular
              chemical transformations in subsurface flows.  For such chemical
              transformations, the reaction rate is proportional to the product of the
              concentrations of two reactants.  Due to the spatial variability of flow, the
              concentrations of the different reactants undergoing transport can vary
              significantly around their average values.  When the reactants are initially
              not overlapping, their concentrations can be significantly negatively
              correlated.  This small-scale segregation of reactants can strongly influence
              the overall chemical transformation rate, and can cause it to be much smaller
              than that implied by the intrinsic chemical transformation rate constant and
              the average concentrations.  The average chemical transformation rate depends
              on flow variability, small-scale mixing mechanisms, and the chemical
              transformation rate coefficient.  The coupling of chemical transformations and
              transport processes will be examined in this work by conducting detailed
              numerical simulations and by performing laboratory experiments.  In the
              numerical simulations the microstructure of the concentration and the spatially
              varying and tortuous flows will be resolved.  In the laboratory experiments the
              concentrations of reactants undergoing bimolecular chemical transformations and
              transport processes will be monitored by a spectrophotometer.  Addressing as it
              does the coupling of chemical transformations and hydrologic transport models,
              the expected outcome of this research is an improvement in the understanding of
              field-scale contamination.  In addition, the results will also be applicable to
              field-scale geochemical modeling and understanding the composition of natural
              waters.

