Title       : Spatio-Temporal Statistical Signal Processing For Blind Equalization and Source
               Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a9803850

Award Number: 9803850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jitendra K. Tugnait tugnait@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with analysis and processing of  stochastic signals
              received at multiple sensors from  multiple sources with focus on blind
              equalization of digital  communications signals and on blind separation of 
              convolutive mixtures of independent sources (signals).  Multiple-input
              multiple-output (MIMO) models of digital  communication systems arise in a wide
              variety of  communications applications: high-speed digital subscriber  lines,
              multi-track digital magnetic recording,  multiuser/multi-access communications
              systems, digital radio  with diversity, dually polarized radio channels,
              multisensor  sonar/radar systems, etc. MIMO channel modeling allows for a 
              unified and optimal approach to design of MIMO  equalizers/filters/combiners
              for suppression of intersymbol  interference (ISI), cochannel and adjacent
              channel  interferences (CCI and ACI) and multi-access interferences  (MAI).
              State-of-the-art in this area requires complete  knowledge of the MIMO transfer
              function which is unrealistic  for practical communication systems.  In MIMO
              systems the training sequences must also be provided  by the
              interference-generating sources: an utterly  unrealistic assumption. One of the
              goals of this research  program is to provide more practical answers to the
              above  problems of great practical importance by removing the need  for
              training sequences for adaptive multichannel equalizer  design. Both
              second-order statistics-based and higher-order  statistics-based approaches are
              being investigated with  emphasis on the former. Emphasis is on approaches that
               require as few assumptions as possible compared to existing  literature, e.g.
              common zeros among the subchannels are  allowed, the channel matrix impulse
              response can be  infinitely long, etc. The results of the proposed research  on
              blind source separation are expected to be useful to  scientists and engineers
              engaged in processing and analysis  of multisensor data in a broad class of
              applications such as  sonar, radar, acoustic array ap plications and monitoring
              of  power plants and civil works. The work on blind equalization  is expected
              to result in effective and computationally  efficient algorithms for signal
              processing in a broad class  of digital communication systems such as
              high-speed digital  subscriber lines, multi-track digital magnetic recording
              and  multiuser wireless communications.
