Title       : MILL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9803883

Award Number: 9803883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Klein pgiupi@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Unicorn Projects Inc
	      2121 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20007    202/471-5496

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9803883  Klein    ABSTRACT: Unicorn Projects, Inc. is producing a project about
              historic mills in American and the science and technology of their operation. 
              The project will combine a nationally broadcast one-hour PBS special with print
              and interactive educational materials for the home and school markets along
              with family-oriented personal appearance by host-author David Macaulay at
              selected museum and mill sites across the country.  The goal of the project is
              to acquaint viewers and participants with the technological innovations and the
              scientific, social and historical significance of water-powered mills in the
              early part of the industrial revolution.   In addition to the television
              program the project will produce Mill Times newspapers applicable in formal as
              well as informal settings, curriculum-based school videos and teachers guides,
              activity kits including "toys" designed to introduce concepts in applied
              mechanics, and family-activity programs at selected sites.       The PI and
              Producer/Director will be Larry Klein who has produced and directed the
              previous Macaulay programs among many other PBS specials.  David Macaulay,
              author of many best-selling books on architecture and technology, will be the
              host and will work closely with Mark Olshaker, the writer, in developing the
              script for the program.  The Education Director will be Toby Levine.  The
              principal technology and history advisor will be Patrick Malone, Assistant
              Professor of Urban Studies and American Civilization at Brown University and
              past president of the Society for Industrial Archaeology.  The science advisor
              will be Theodore Ansbacher, principal of Science Services, an informal science
              education consulting company.  Other advisors include Robert Dalzell, Gary
              Kulik, Judith McGaw, and Merrit Roe Smith.
