Title       : Hyperbolic 3-Manifold Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9803362

Award Number: 9803362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin C. Adams Colin.Adams@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,9263,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9803362  Adams       Hyperbolic 3-manifold theory has had a tremendous impact
              on the field  of low-dimensional topology.  Outstanding conjectures have
              fallen, one after  the other, with the application of hyperbolic techniques. 
              There has been a  shift in the entire approach to low-dimensional topology, as
              researchers now  use rigid geometric arguments to prove topological theorems. 
              The two  principal investigators intend to continue their research, both
              individually  and jointly, on the theory and computation of hyperbolic
              3-manifolds.  Through a set of projects, many relying heavily on their ability
              to compute  explicit examples on a computer, the researchers plan to further
              the  understanding of the connections between hyperbolic 3-manifolds, the 
              invariants that come out of hyperbolic 3-manifold theory, and the  traditional
              topological invariants in 3-manifold theory.  They will also  consider
              applications of 3-manifold theory to cosmological models of the  spatial
              universe, working in conjunction with cosmologists.  Undergraduates  will be
              involved in original research projects related to this research.       A
              2-dimensional surface may have positive curvature like a sphere, zero 
              curvature like a flat Euclidean plane, or negative curvature like a saddle. 
              Almost all surfaces can be given negative curvature, meaning that locally, 
              they behave like the hyperbolic plane discovered by Lobachevsky, Gauss, and 
              Bolyai in the last century.  An analogous understanding of finite 
              3-dimensional spaces eluded researchers for decades, but in the mid-1970's  W.
              P. Thurston conjectured that 3-manifolds, the analog of 2-dimensional  surfaces
              one dimension up, can be cut into pieces, each of which has one of  eight
              geometries.  He proved the conjecture for vast quantities of  3-manifolds.  By
              far the most commonly occurring geometry for 3-manifolds is  hyperbolic
              geometry.  The resulting "hyperbolic structures" are rich and  have been used
              to solve a great many topological and geometrical questions.  T he present
              project continues this work both theoretically and  computationally.  The
              theoretical advances make the computations possible,  and the explicitly
              computed examples guide the further development of the  theory.  In the past
              year the project has found a new and very exciting  application.  The spatial
              universe within which we live is an example of a  3-manifold.  Data from NASA's
              Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) may, in the  year 2001, reveal the spatial
              universe to be finite in extent.  If so,  algorithms from the present project
              will be used to determine the exact  shape of the universe.  The investigators
              are currently extending their  software to tolerate the high levels of noise
              that will be present in the  MAP data, and to handle the spherical and
              Euclidean cases as well as the  hyperbolic one.  Preliminary data suggests the
              real universe is hyperbolic,  but the other possibilities cannot yet be ruled
              out.  ***
