Title       : Geometry and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9803526

Award Number: 9803526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Schwartz res@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803526  Schwartz       Richard Schwartz will carry out research in geometry and
              dynamics,  along four lines.  First, Schwartz will continue the work that began
               with his proof, in 1993, that nonuniform rank one lattices are 
              quasi-isometric if and only if they are commensurable.  In particular, 
              Schwartz will further develop the theme of action rigidity, introduced  in his
              1996 Acta paper, "Quasi-isometric rigidity and diophantine  approximation." 
              Second, Schwartz will explore the ramifications of his  1997 proof of the
              Goldman-Parker Conjecture, which gives exact discreteness  criteria for complex
              hyperbolic ideal triangle groups.  This result is the  first of its kind, in
              that it gives the complete analysis of a nontrivial  deformation problem in
              complex hyperbolic space.  Third, Schwartz will  continue his work on dynamical
              systems defined by iterative constructions  in projective geometry.   The work
              here is related to birational dynamics,  abelian varieties, the KdV equation,
              and determinants.  Fourth, Schwartz  will develop software that aids in the
              understanding, communication, and  solution of geometric and dynamical
              problems.       The common theme to this research is that it deals with the
              geometric  structure of infinite, symmetric, patterns.  One should think, for
              example,  of tiles on the kitchen floor, or trees arrayed in an orange grove. 
              Informally speaking, the first area of Schwartz' research deals with the 
              question:  Could a fairly blind person mistake one infinite symmetric  pattern
              for another?  The idea is to find very "rough" features of an  infinite pattern
              that could distinguish it from another infinite pattern.    The second area of
              research deals with the following kinds of questions:  Imagine that an apple is
              suspended in space, surrounded by mirrors.  How  can you position the mirrors
              so that the pattern of reflections of the  apple will be nice and orderly?  The
              third area of research deals with  the generation of infinite patterns through
              the repetition of simpl e  constructions, made from pencil and paper drawings. 
              Often a very innocent  construction, such as the Pappus' theorem construction,
              yields a surprising  and beautiful geometric pattern upon infinite repetition. 
              The purpose of  Schwartz fourth area of research is to make all these infinite
              patterns  come alive through interactive computer graphics.  ***
