Title       : Past Global Changes - PAGES A Core Project of the International
               Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, IGBP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9803960

Award Number: 9803960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $957144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Will Steffen will@igbp.kva.se  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris G. Rapley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Neil R. Swanberg  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : International Geosphere
	      Royal Swedish Academy of Science
	      Stockholm, SW      468/166-448

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,4444,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9803960  Rapley, Chris G.  Title: Past Global Changes - PAGES: A
              Core Project of the  International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, IGBP    Past
              Global Changes (PAGES) is the IGBP Project charged with  providing a
              quantitative understanding of the Earth's past  environment and with defining
              the envelope of natural environment  variability against which we can assess
              anthropogenic impact on the  Earth's biosphere, geosphere and atmosphere.  One
              of the central  tasks of PAGES, through the organization of co-ordinated
              national  and international scientific efforts, is to obtain and interpret 
              high quality paleoenvironmental records and thereby provide the  data essential
              for the assessment and validation of predictive  climate models.  PAGES
              provides an essential framework for the  integration and intercomparison of
              ice, ocean and terrestrial  paleo-records and encourages the creation of
              consistent analytical  and data base methodologies in paleoscience.    This
              award is for the partial support for the operation of the  PAGES International
              Project Office (IPO) in Bern, Switzerland.  The  primary function of the
              PAGES/IPO is to provide day-to-day  oversight of the project's scientific
              activities (i.e. meetings,  workshops, directories, newsletters and reports,
              data repositories,  project linkages, and IGBP interactions).  PAGES acts as a 
              coordinator and facilitator for the paleoscience community at the 
              international level.
