Title       : Approximation Issues in Stability & Control of Distributed Parameter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9803494

Award Number: 9803494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56341              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Fabiano fabiano@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project deals generally with the analysis and development of reliable 
and
              suitable approximation schemes for mathematical models of complex 
physical
              phenomena such as damped elastic structures, processes with 
delays, coupled
              structures (including models of smart materials), etc. A 
standard approach to
              analyzing and solving problems for such systems is 
to instead consider an
              approximate system, which ideally is both finite 
dimensional and rich enough
              to retain properties of the original (infinite 
dimensional) system. But it is
              well known that some approximate systems 
do not retain important properties
              of the original system, such as growth 
rate, stability robustness, etc. (In
              fact, it is well known that some models 
of elastic structures with boundary
              damping have an energy decay rate that 
is not preserved by standard "finite
              element" or "finite difference" 
approximate systems). This project focuses on
              how and why certain 
properties are retained or lost under approximation, and
              on developing a 
systematic method for constructing "property-preserving"
              approximation 
schemes. The key is analyzing the geometry (inner product)
              under which 
the original system is projected onto the approximating system,
              and one 
thrust is that changing geometries can improve approximations so that
              
important properties are better preserved. This is a recent idea on which
              
the PI has demonstrated successful implementation for some preliminary
              
examples. This project will extend in significant ways the method and the
              
applications.

There are many practical applications in science and
              engineering that 
involve elastic structures, such as large antennae, fluid
              flow over an 
airfoil, vibrating buildings, etc. In the presence of evolving
              "smart 
materials" and actuator technologies, these lead to complex
              mathematical 
models that cannot be fully resolved on even the most powerful
              
computers. A standard strategy for overcoming this difficulty is to instead
              
consider a simpler model (an "approximation scheme") which is a 
reasonably
              good approximation of the original complex model, and which 
can also be
              solved on a computer. There are typically many approximation 
schemes for any
              given model, and since something is always lost in the 
approximation, some
              important questions are - how good is a 'reasonably 
good approximation'? and
              - which important properties are lost or 
preserved? Further, since these
              computer models are used to better 
understand and control these complex
              systems, high-fidelity 
approximation schemes are essential. This project will
              focus on these 
questions, with the goal of developing a systematic
              methodology for a 
broad range of applications, and of developing software
              based on the 
theory.

