Title       : Singular Geometry and Billiards, Rigidity of Lattice Actions, and Hyperbolic
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9803092

Award Number: 9803092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexey Kononenko alexko@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Kononenko    The main emphasis in our a program of  research is on 
              the   singular geometry and its applications to billiards systems.   The
              research focuses on geometric methods that allow one to   restate various
              problems in the theory of semi-dispersing  billiards in terms of geodesics in
              some Alexandrov spaces   (typically of non-positive curvature).  The problems
              that   can be attacked with our methods have to do with counting the  number of
              collisions in billiards,  counting the number of   periodic orbits, calculating
              entropy and other invariants of  billiards systems. The most important open
              problems that we  plan to work on are the construction of  universal model  
              spaces for billiards in non-positive curvature, and proving   the finiteness of
              the topological entropy for the first-return   map for billiards in
              non-positive curvature.  In addition, hope to   construct examples of billiards
              with areas of positive curvature,   which have infinite entropy.  We also plan
              to continue our  work in the areas of  differentiable and  cohomological
              rigidity   of lattice actions, and partially hyperbolic dynamical systems.   
              The theory of semi-dispersing billiards lies at the  heart of the  foundations
              of the statistical physics. Much of our proposed   research focuses on new
              geometric methods in the theory of   semi-dispersing billiards that we have 
              recently developed. Our   new methods have already allowed us to solve  several
              old problems  that had been open for at least 15 years.  In particular we have 
              established the finiteness of entropy (measure of chaos in the  system) for
              broad classes of billiards. Among other things we plan  to use our approach to
              study various other statistical properties  of hard-ball systems (the main
              model of statistical physics).  In addition to our research on billiards we
              plan to work in the  areas of rigidity and hyperbolic dynamics. In particular,
              we are  interested in various questions related to the notion of stable 
              ergodicity (a property of a s ystem to remain chaotic even after  arbitrary,
              but "small" perturbations).
