Title       : Collaboration on Inverse Problems for Holographic Image Datausing KAM Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9803498

Award Number: 9803498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63582              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioulia Karpechina karpeshi@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803498  Karpeshina    The principal investigator and her colleague Joyce
              McLaughlin will   collaborate to solve inverse problems for holographic image
              data using   Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory.  The goal is to use selected
                level sets of mode shapes of vibrating systems as data for the inverse  
              problem. With these level sets as data, formulas will be established.  The  
              formulas will then be used to determine physical properties of the system,  
              such as density or stiffness.  The results will be based on perturbation  
              results for the natural frequencies and the mode shapes.  The difficulty in  
              establishing these results arises from the fact that a small divisor problem  
              and a sequence of Eikonal equations must be solved simultaneously.  A  
              consequence of the resultant mathematical structure will be that the  
              perturbed quantities can be strongly different from the unperturbed  
              quantities.  McLaughlin's graduate student will concentrate on developing  
              formulas to use the data and on numerical implementation of those   formulas.  
               The goal with this work is to consider membrane like materials, such as a  
              thin slice of biological tissue.  Excite this membrane with an oscillating  
              force and suppose the frequency of oscillation is a natural frequency, that  
              is, a frequency where the membrane gives a large response. Illuminating   the
              vibrating surface with two lasers we see a dark and light line pattern.    Each
              line is a level set of the vibrating surface.  Now assume that the   membrane
              is nonhomogeneous; it could be more stiff or less stiff in some   places.   In
              the biological example, increased stiffness can indicate the   presence of
              rapidly dividing cells.  In a mechanical example, decreased   stiffness can
              indicate deterioration of the material.  The goal is to   determine the
              stiffness variations without altering the membrane, that is, to   find a
              nondestructive test for the stiffness variations.  Our data is the dark   and
              light line pattern. The problem is difficult be cause the stiffness  
              variations can have (but not always) a very large perturbative effect on the  
              pattern.  The mathematics will establish when the perturbation is large,   when
              it is not, and what formulas will yield the stiffness variations from   this
              particular data set.
