Title       : Fine Properties of Levy Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9803240

Award Number: 9803240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renming Song rsong@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803240
Song

Although a lot is known about symmetric stable processes and
              Levy processes, until recently, little was known about the counterparts to some
              of the deep results and fine properties of Brownian motion and diffusion
              processes.  The PI, jointly with Zhen-Qing Chen, has recently obtained sharp
              estimates on the Green function and Poisson kernel of symmetric stable
              processes on bounded smooth domains.  And these estimates have been applied to
              study the intrinsic ultracontractivity and conditional gauge theorem for
              symmetric stable processes on smooth domains.  The PI intends to continue this
              study of the fine properties of symmetric stable processes first and then to
              investigate the fine properties of more general Levy processes or Markov
              processes.  More precisely, he intends to do the following: 1) study the Martin
              boundary and integral representations of positive superharmonic functions of
              symmetric stable processes; 2) establish the intrinsic ultracontractivity and
              conditional gauge theorem for symmetric stable processes on rough domains; 3)
              establish the boundary Harnack principle for symmetric stable processes on
              domains rougher than Lipschitz domains; 4) find some nontrivial estimates on
              the first eigenvalue of the generator of the killed symmetric stable processes;
              and 5) generalize the results proposed above to more general Levy
              processes.

One of the most important classes of Markov processes is the Levy
              processes or processes with independent stationary increments.  And one of the
              most important classes of Levy processes is the symmetric stable processes. 
              Brownian motion is the only symmetric stable process with continuous sample
              paths.  Brownian motion plays a central role in modern probability theory and
              has been intensively studied.  In the last few years there has been an
              explosive growth in the study of physical and economic systems that can be
              successfully modeled with the use of stable processes and other Levy processes.
               Stable processes and Levy processes are now widely used in physics, operations
              research, queueing theory, mathematical finance and  risk estimation.  These
              widespread applications are the motivation for this investigator to study the
              fine properties of Levy processes.  The principal investigator expects that
              this proposed study will make symmetric stable processes and Levy processes
              applicable to a wider range of practical areas and to more difficult
              problems.

