Title       : Mechanics of Systems with Bi-Stable Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9803572

Award Number: 9803572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev Truskinovsky trusk@aem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Technological advances in new electronic and bio-medical systems 
increasingly
              rely on the development of new materials with 
bi-stable  or multi-stable
              response at the microlevel that can actively 
respond to environmental changes
              and provide functions of sensing, 
processing, actuation and feedback. Actual
              design guidelines can be 
obtained from the analysis of lattice models because
              the 
microstructures, which largely control macroscopic behavior of the
              
materials with bi-stable elements, often depend on  the parameters of the
              
crystalline structure. The results of this project will contribute to a
              
deeper understanding of the relation between discrete systems with
              
bi-stable elements and continuum systems with nonconvex energies, an issue
              
which is crucial for the development of efficient numerical methods and
              
control codes for active devices.

The micromachinery that is being
              designed in laboratories today and will become
ubiquitous tomorrow operates on
              sub-micron scales.  Traditional approaches 
for the design of such devices
              often yield unsatisfactory results. 
The complexity of the behavior at this
              scale can only be achieved  if a 
multi-stable "mechanism" is integrated into
              the material at the molecular level.  
The simplest example is a bi-stable
              mechanism, where a device consists of many tiny 
elements that can be in two
              stable states, say bent or straight.  The transition from
one state to the
              other is provided by a phase transition which can be controlled by 
mechanical
              stress, temperature, electric or magnetic fields.  The bi-stability leads 
to
              characteristic microstructures represented by a large number of defects, that
              is 
boundaries between the two possible states within the device.  The large
              strains 
observed in such active materials are produced by the coordinated
              migration of 
these mobile defects in the process of domain "switching".  The
              main goal 
of this research is to study these nonlinear processes and to
              obtain a more complete 
understanding and control of the properties of active
              materials from the 
perspective of a micromodel.

 
 

