Title       : Localization Process, and a New Look at Traditional Theorems in Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9803766

Award Number: 9803766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wojciech Chacholski chachols@mpim-bonn.mpg.de  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803766  Chacholski       The investigator's research has been primarily in the
              area of unstable  localization theory, with emphasis on certain geometric
              relations  between spaces.  These relations are associated with building one 
              space out of another by using basic operations like push-outs and  wedges.  The
              primary goal is to understand the lattice of the  equivalence classes of these
              relations (the so called Bousfield and  cellular classes).  In particular, the
              investigator has been looking  into possibilities of extending the Bousfield
              classification of a  sub-lattice of finite, p-torsion, SUSPENSION complexes to
              certain  non-suspension spaces.  For this purpose he has been studying homotopy
               algebraic structures on spaces that are preserved by Bousfield  localization
              and Dror Farjoun colocalization functors.  Hurewicz  homomorphisms are an
              important source of examples of such structures.  Many traditional theorems in
              homotopy theory are reflections of  properties of the lattice of Bousfield
              classes.  For example,  classically the Blakers-Massey triad theorem was about
              connectivity of  certain fibers, i.e., it was shown that these fibers are built
              from  spheres of some high dimension.  It turns out that allowing other  spaces
              as building blocks, one can give more accurate Bousfield class  estimations. 
              Moreover, in this way statements that previously seemed  not to be related can
              be unified.  This is also a good starting point  for investigating similar
              relations in other settings, especially in  cases where one does do not have
              any natural choice of objects  analogous to spheres in the category of spaces. 
                   Over the years it has become evident that homotopy theory methods are 
              useful in describing many fundamental concepts and capturing their  essential
              properties.  This has happened in a wide variety of settings  from manifold
              theory and algebraic geometry to physics.  Homotopy  theory is particularly
              helpful in studying those properties that are  local, i.e., that can be
              observed and  analyzed by forgetting the  information that is irrelevant to the
              problem.  In this way one can  focus on the most essential information and
              organize data in terms  that are easier to grasp.  Thus in this case the
              homotopy theory works  as a simplifying tool.  As a result, for example, one
              can see new  relations between objects that previously seemed not to be
              related.  Homotopy theory is also fruitfully applied in studying certain 
              algebraic structures (algebraic structures up to homotopy).  Ignoring  fine
              structure and using this coarser classification allows one to  cover more
              ground.  Physics is one of the main sources of examples of  this.  Algebraic
              structures are used in capturing symmetry of objects.  In this way homotopy
              theory can work as a distinguishing tool.  An  object with more symmetry must
              be different from one that is less  symmetric.  Studying the interplay between
              these two tools is also  profitable.  For example, to understand better the
              organization  principles of the localization process, it is helpful to know to
              what  extent it preserves a homotopy algebraic structure, and in order to 
              apply these tools fully, one still needs to understand the way they  behave in
              the test case of topological spaces.  ***
