Title       : Synthesis, Structure and Properties of Magnetic Nanocrystalsand Nanocrystalline
               Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9803700

Award Number: 9803700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. McHenry mm7g@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803700  McHenry    This research explores through synthesis and 
              characterization the unique properties of magnetic  nanocrystals.  It continues
              a previous effort on varying  alloy chemistry, nanocrystal morphology, and
              interfacial  structure to influence the magnetic anisotropy in magnetic 
              nanocrystals and nanocrystalline arrays.  Magnetic  anisotropy in nanocrystals
              and nanocrystalline arrays  depends on magnetic crystalline anisotropy, shape 
              anisotropy, interfacial anisotropy, and/or the anisotropy  provided by
              magnetoelastic coupling.  These issues are  addressed in (1) C-coated
              nanoparticles; (2) filled C-  nanotubes with carbide nanorods; and (3)
              infiltrated,  periodically arranged pores in mesoporous silicates with 
              ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic species.  Nanoparticles  produced by plasma
              synthesis are usually spherical and do  not benefit from shape anisotropy as a
              barrier to the  thermally activated switching of the magnetization.  The 
              research examines the effects of shape anisotropy in detail  in novel
              nanoparticles and nanoparticle arrays in which  large aspect ratios in the
              magnetic particles can be used to  exploit shape anisotropy.  Issues of
              interfacial anisotropy  are addressed by comparing the magnetic properties of 
              nanoparticles having carbon and oxide coatings.  %%%  This research is aimed at
              understanding the magnetic  reversal mechanisms in nanoparticles in order to
              determine  fundamental limitations for a variety of magnetic  applications. 
              Nanosized clusters have demonstrated  properties that differ from those of bulk
              crystalline  solids.  Examples of nanocrystalline forms include  Buckyballs and
              Buckytubes, C-coated nanoparticles and  nanorods, and other self-assembled
              structures.  Understanding properties of these materials enables the 
              development of novel materials with a host of applications.  ***
