Title       : Shock Wave Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9803323

Award Number: 9803323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai-Ping Liu liu@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9803323    Tai-Ping Liu         We propose to study two fundamental
              questions for general   systems of hyperbolic conservation laws: The first is
              the well-posedness   problem. This is done with Tong Yang. For this, we already
              constructed a   nonlinear functional for the two conservation laws and are in
              the process  of doing so for the general systems. The second problem is to
              study   multi-dimensional gas flows. Lien and the author have succeeded in
              showing   that three-dimensional self-similar gas flow past a cone is
              nonlinearly   stable. We are generalizing the new approach of superpositioning
              local   self-similar flows to other problems. We expect this approach to yield 
               new qualitative information on nonlinear stability and instability of  
              multi-dimensional gas flows. Our second project is to study the viscous  
              conservation laws. With Zeng, we are in the process of studying the   stability
              of nonlinear waves for hyperbolic-parabolic systems such as the   compressible
              Navier-Stokes equations. Other problems in combustion and   MHD, and numerical
              analysis of shock calculations are being considered.   Of particular interest
              is the role of dissipative parameters on the   structure and stability of
              nonlinear waves. The pointwise approach the   author introduced is effective
              for these purposes.        The author plans to study basic questions concerning
              the invisicd   and viscous solutions for gas dynamics and mechanics.  One of
              the   fundamental questions concerns the validity of the Euler equations for  
              the gas dynamics. The equations were derived by Euler in the eighteenth  
              century. Only until recently the author and his collaborator are able to   show
              that the equations are mathematically valid in that small errors in   the data
              yield small errors in the solutions. This is of obvious   importance in the
              applications because there is always small error either  in the experimental
              data or numerical computations. Other problems of interest   to the author
              include the sensitive role of di ssipation parameters. In   combustion,
              magneto-hydrodynamics, nonlinear elasticity and other   continuum physics,
              dissipative mechanisms, such as viscosity, heat   conductivity, and species
              diffusions are important. The geometric   properties and stability of the
              nonlinear waves may depend sensitively   on these parameters. The author has
              recently introduced a pointwise approach,   which is effective in studying the
              nonlinear interactions of waves. The   role of dissipation parameters are being
              studied using the basic   conservation laws in physics.
