Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Comparative Ecophysiology of Savanna and
               Forest Trees as a Key to Understanding the Dynamics of the Savanna-Forest
               Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9803013

Award Number: 9803013
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85761              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Hoffmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5913,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803013  Hoffmann      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of  unique or complementary facilities, expertise and 
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twenty-four-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. William A. Hoffmann to work with Dr. 
              Augusto C. Franco at the Universidade de Brasilia in Brazil.  Their work will
              involve the comparison of the ecophysiology  of savanna and forest trees as a
              key to understanding the  dynamics of the savanna-forest boundary.    The
              objectives of this research are: to measure differences  in water relations,
              leaf-level physiology, and distribution  patterns between savanna and forest
              species to show  convergent evolution of traits within each of these two 
              groups of species; to measure the importance of allocation  patterns versus
              ecophysiological adaptations to the  differences in the performance of savanna
              and forest  species; and to determine what environmental factors limit  the
              growth of savanna and forest trees across the savanna-  forest boundary.  They
              will conduct this research within the  cerrado, a savanna vegetation that
              occupies 2 million  kilometers of Brazil.    Dr. Franco's area of expertise is
              in the area of the  physiological basis of woody plant ecology in the cerrado. 
              In addition to working with the facilities of the University  of Brasilia, Dr.
              Hoffmann will have access to a national  park, three ecological reserves and
              two research stations,  all of which are accessible for this type of research. 
                ***
