Title       : Statistical Methods for Process Control and Improvement in Advanced
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9803281

Award Number: 9803281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijayan N. Nair vnn@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: DMS 9803281    PI: Vijayan N. Nair, University of Michigan     
              Mark H. Hansen, Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies    Project:  Statistical Methods
              for Process Control and Improvement            in Advanced Manufacturing   
              Abstract:    This research project deals with methods for modeling, monitoring,
                diagnosis, and improvement of manufacturing processes with spatial   data. 
              The scope of the project goes beyond the traditional Shewhart's  paradigm for
              statistical process control (SPC) which focuses  primarily on process
              monitoring.  A significant part of the research is  the use of in-process and
              product quality data to develop failure   diagnostics and to relate these to
              potential problems for process  improvement. These issues are studied in the
              context of an integrated  framework for process control and improvement. An
              overall strategy is  proposed for using the spatial information in defect
              clustering as the  basis for process improvement.  The methodology consists of
              several   parts. First, process monitoring methods for routinely monitoring the
               spatial data and detecting objects with significant clustering are  developed.
              A Markov random field model with small-scale clustering is  used to
              characterize ``in-control'' data. Statistical methods for  failure diagnosis
              (signatures of spatial patterns) are obtained and  the patterns are then
              related to process information for improvement.  Various approaches for doing
              this including parametric models for   large-scale clustering and formal
              methods based on classification are  studied. Several other related topics,
              including modeling and analysis  of ordinal data from temporal and spatial
              processes and the analysis  of spatial data from designed experiments are also
              studied. These  methods are developed and studied in the specific context of
              wafer  map data in integrated circuit (IC) fabrication.    Semiconductor
              manufacturing is one of the key manufacturing   industries in the US, and hence
              statistical methods for process and    yield improvement are clearly important 
              from a practical viewpoint. However, the research issues and  methods developed
              here are quite generic in nature and are of general   interest to many other
              manufacturing processes with spatial data,   including flat panel displays,
              printed circuit boards, and the   manufacture and assembly of auto-bodies.
              These advanced manufacturing  and high-technology industries all share the
              following features.   Massive amounts of in-process and production data are now
              being   collected routinely, made possible by advances in computing and data 
              capture technologies. Much of these data have complex structures,   in the form
              of spatial objects, images and so on. At the same time,  competitive market
              pressures are placing a lot of emphasis on reducing  product development cycle
              time. Moreover, process/product designers  are operating on the boundaries of
              available subject matter knowledge  of the underlying technology.  Products are
              being manufactured and  marketed before the technology is well-understood.
              These manufacturing  processes are often not ``stable'', as is commonly assumed
              in the  traditional statistical process control (SPC) paradigm. Thus, there is 
              a critical need for statistical methods that exploit the extensive  information
              available from in-process and product quality data not  only for process
              monitoring but also for process improvement. The  results from this research
              project will significantly advance  methodology for the continuous improvement
              of advanced manufacturing  processes.
