Title       : Probing Nuclear Sturcture with Fast Neutrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9803784

Award Number: 9803784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $695450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Yates yates@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse L. Weil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus T. McEllistrem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research of the nuclear structure group at the University of Kentucky is
              focused on related topics in nuclear spectroscopy, neutron-induced reactions,
              and neutron scattering.  Neutron scattering experiments at the University's
              accelerator laboratory are designed to a) explore multiphonon vibrations in
              spherical and deformed nuclei, b) examine the role of fast electromagnetic
              transitions in the decay of collective excitations, c) provide data leading to
              more realistic models of nuclear level densities, d) address the separate roles
              of neutrons and protons in nuclear excitations, and e) expand our understanding
              of nuclear shell structure and the nature of nuclear shape transitions. 
              Recently developed techniques to measure short lifetimes with the Doppler-shift
              attenuation method and to perform gamma-gamma coincidences following inelastic
              neutron scattering are crucial in many of these studies.  A new research
              direction has been initiated to take advantage of the special opportunities
              provided by the development of the GEANIE array of gamma-ray detectors coupled
              with the spallation neutron source at the Los Alamos Neutron Scattering Center
              (LANSCE).  With the high-energy neutrons from this facility, nuclei not readily
              produced by charged-particle reactions will be explored.
