Title       : Math Is Power
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9803967

Award Number: 9803967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1528305            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronni Denes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ntl Actn Cncl Minorit Eng
	      3 West 35th Street
	      New York, NY  10001    212/279-2626

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9803967  Denes    ABSTRACT: The National Action Council for Minorities in
              Engineering (NACME) is implementing a new, 41-month phase and augmentation of a
              national public service advertising campaign that was launched in 1995.  The
              Math is Power campaign was developed by NACME in partnership with The
              Advertising Council toward the goal of creating an increase in the number of
              students who graduate from high school with prerequisite courses to enroll in
              any rigorous, math- or science-based undergraduate program.      The current
              project is designed to reach all students but is especially targeted to groups
              currently underrepresented in math and science and will be anchored by highly
              directed television, radio, print, and outdoor advertising.   The new phase
              will introduce a Math is Power interactive web site.  The website will allow
              NACME to add direct services to the information packets that are sent to
              students and parents who respond to the public service advertising.   It will
              include:  content relevant, age appropriate math challenges, games, problems,
              and contests; a national registry of math opportunities where students,
              parents, and teachers can find mathematics resources; an on-line special events
              chat room; and a best practices bulletin board.   NACME will coordinate their
              outreach efforts with services such as the Community Technology Center Network
              (CTCnet) in order to facilitate web access for youth and parents in
              disadvantaged neighborhoods.  They also will work directly with 25 cities with
              the greatest numbers of citizens who fall in the target population.   Math and
              Science education services in these cities will be able to localize much of the
              material through such means as placing a local tag on the television ads.   In
              addition, the NACME production and distribution capabilities will be
              substantially expanded to meet the tremendous demand for Math Is Power
              materials.
