Title       : Theory and Applications of Finite-Dimensional Nonlinear Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9803411

Award Number: 9803411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector J. Sussmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803411
Sussmann

Research will be carried out on nonlinear control theory,
              continuing the 
principal investigator's previous work in this area on a broad
              class of 
theoretical and applied control theory problems.  The methods used
              will be 
those of differential-geometric control theory, nonsmooth analysis,
              and the 
theory of real analytic maps and their associated stratifications. 
              
Specifically, efforts will be made to solve a number of open problems in
              
the areas of optimal control, controllability, and realization theory, while
              
pursuing the development of the necessary mathematical tools.  In
              
particular, work will continue on a major project that began in 1992, and
              
has evolved since then and has led to a strong, general, unified version of
              
the necessary conditions for optimality usually known as the ``Pontryagin
              
Maximum Principle.'' This new version of the Maximum Principle 
requires the
              use of a new theory of generalized differentials, called
              
``multidifferentials,'' and part of the work will involve the systematic
              
development of this theory and its applications.

Recent developments in
              nonlinear control have led to many applications to 
various issues in robotics
              and nonholonomic motion planning.  The 
general question here is that of
              finding a path for a given system that takes 
it from a given state to another
              desired state, satisfying some constraints or 
optimizing some cost
              functional. (For example, steer a vehicle from a 
given position to another
              desired position while avoiding certain obstacles, 
possibly with the extra
              requirement that this be done in minimum time or 
with minimum expenditure of
              energy.)  Thanks to the extraordinary recent 
advances in computing power, it
              has now become realistic to expect to 
solve many of these problems in real
              time, and we intend to develop 
methods that will contribute to this endeavor,
              by providing an a priori 
understanding of the structure of the solutions, so
              as to reduce the search 
needed to find it.  A special effort will be made to
              improve communication 
between specialists in the field of nonlinear control
              and the general 
mathematical and engineering community, by bringing to the
              attention of 
the community examples of applications that show the advantages
              and the 
power of the techniques of nonlinear control.

