Title       : Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9803341

Award Number: 9803341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Schoen schoen@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal: DMS-9803341  Principal Investigator: Richard M. Schoen   
              This proposal deals with three geometric variational problems.  The  first is
              the problem of minimizing the volume for lagrangian  submanifolds of symplectic
              manifolds.  This theory provides an  approach to constructing special
              lagrangian submanifolds of  Kahler-Einstein manifolds.  The second problem is
              the study of  harmonic maps which are equivariant with respect to general
              isometric  actions of discrete groups on spaces of nonpositive curvature.  This
               theory may be applied to study many general rigidity questions for  both
              finite and infinite dimensional representations of discrete  groups.  The third
              problem concerns the variational problem for  Einstein metrics, where the
              problem is to compute the Yamabe invariant  in more generality, and to show
              that standard metrics achieve this  min-max variational characterization.   
              Minimization problems occur in many branches of mathematics and  science.  For
              example, linear programming concerns the problem of  minimizing a function
              (such as cost) subject to a set of constraint  inequalities, problems of
              navigation involve finding paths of least  length on the earth's surface, and
              in continuum mechanics, the  equilibrium position of an elastic membrane is
              determined among the  infinitely many possible positions by the condition that
              the potential  energy be as small as possible.  This proposal deals with
              certain  geometric variational problems, of which the first is the problem of 
              minimizing a potential energy for mappings subject to the constraint  that the
              mappings preserve the area.  Such problems arise in nonlinear  elasticity where
              the mapping represents the deformation of an elastic  body.  The problems also
              arise in geometry where one can use such  minimizing configurations to
              understand complicated geometric spaces  that arise in string theory (physics).
               The second part of this  proposal deals with maps which minimize a potential
              energy subject to  the conditi on that they are symmetric for a complicated
              symmetry  group.  For example, if you consider the curve of least length which 
              surrounds a given area, you get a circle, while if you choose curves  which
              surround regions whose translates (under a fixed symmetry group)  fill up the
              plane, then the solution is typically a special type of  hexagon (the regular
              hexagon of the honeycomb if the symmetry group is  chosen suitably).  The main
              goal is to use the symmetric minimizing  maps to understand the possible
              symmetry groups and how they can arise  in important geometric situations.  The
              final part of the proposal  deals with equilibrium solutions of the Einstein
              equations of General  Relativity.  The full Einstein equations may be thought
              of as  describing the vibrations of the gravitational field which determines 
              the geometry of spacetime.  The corresponding equilibrium problem is  important
              in geometry, and the third part of the proposal deals with  the question of the
              extent to which equilibrium solutions can be  expected to minimize the
              potential energy.
