Title       : Topology, Geometry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9803241

Award Number: 9803241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford H. Taubes chtaubes@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raoul Bott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Mazur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal:  DMS-9803241
Principal Investigators:  C. Taubes, R.
              Bott, and B. Mazur

Professor Bott's research will center on two topics.  The
              first deals
with imbedding invariants based on integrals on configuration
              spaces
of points which were introduced by Witten, Axelrod-Singer
              and
Kontsevich.  A particular aim is to understand the Casson invariant as
a
              configuration space integral, and to understand how these integrals
behave
              under surgery.  The second topic aims to extend the
Duistermaat-Heckmann
              theorem to variationally complete orbits of
symmetric pairs.  Professor
              Mazur's research centers on four projects.
The first studies the p-adic
              interpolation of modular eigenforms and
their L-functions.  The second studies
              the question of the
representability of elements in the Shararevich-Tate group
              of elliptic
curves.  The third studies the Euler systems of Kolyvagin in a
              general
motivic context.  The fourth project will study certain
              "circle
method-type questions" related to the ABC conjecture. Professor
              Taubes
work centers on two topics.  The first deals with the theory
              of
pseudo-holomorphic curves for the singular symplectic forms on
4-manifolds
              which arise as self-dual harmonic 2-forms.  The regularity
of these curves
              will be analyzed, their use in defining obstructions
to symplectic form
              existence will be considered.  The second project
studies the compactness
              question for various generalizations of the
Seiberg-Witten equations.  The
              goal here is to determine whether these
generalizations can be used to obtain
              manifold invariants.

More colloquially, Professor Bott will study, first, a
              series of new
invariants which deal with the different ways in which a loop
              or
surface can be fitted into a higher dimensional space.  These sorts
              of
questions have arisen recently from physics in some novel quantum
field
              theories.  The second part of Professor Bott's project studies
the ways in
              which the symmetries of a space constrain its global
structure.  Professor
              Mazur will be studying, first, the ABC
conjecture.  This is a finiteness
              assertion that may govern the number
of solutions to a broad collection of
              equations.  (For example, the
equations which occur in Fermat's last theorem.)
               Second, Professor
Mazur plans to study the Fourier coefficients of modular
              forms.  This
is an area with results of use to quite a number of other
              branches of
mathematics (group theory, complex function theory, and,
              surprisingly,
theoretical physics.)  Professor Taubes plans to study the
              behavior of
four dimensional spaces and to develop techniques to distinguish
              such
spaces from each other.  For example, with time included, our
              universe
is 4-dimensional and its large scale topological structure is
              not
known.  In this context, Professor Taubes' research concerns
              the
classification of those structures which are possible.



