Title       : Likelihood Methods in Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9803143

Award Number: 9803143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51024              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Severini severini@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS   PI:              Thomas A.  Severini  Institution:    
              Northwestern University  Project:         Likelihood Methods in Statistics   
              Abstract:    This research considers several problems regarding
              likelihood-based  statistical inference.  These problems naturally fall into
              two areas.  The first area is inference based on the likelihood ratio
              statistic.   The research considers the development of an adjustment to the  
              square-root likelihood ratio statistic that improves the accuracy of  the usual
              normal approximation and is easily calculated in a wide  range of models.  This
              leads to improved methods of inference in  models where the accuracy of
              first-order asymptotic approximations is  questionable. The research also
              studies analogues of the likelihood  ratio statistic that are based on a
              quasi-likelihood function. The  second area of research is statistical
              prediction analysis.   The  specific problems being considered include  the
              development of   general methods of prediction based on predictive pivots and 
              conditional inference, and the analysis and comparison of predictive 
              likelihood methods, including the predictive density based on a  prior
              distribution.      This research is concerned with the development of accurate
              and   useful methods for drawing conclusions and making predictions based  on
              observational data. Many statistical methods are based on  approximations; in
              many cases, the accuracy of these approximations  is questionable.  One aspect
              of this research is the development of  more accurate and reliable
              approximations of this type. Statistical  prediction analysis is concerned with
              the problem of predicting  future events based on currently available data. 
              Predictive methods  have applications in a wide array of fields, including
              medical  diagnosis, environment and global change, manufacturing, and  
              economic forecasting. This research develops general methods of  constructing
              pre dictions and  studies the relationships among the  various methods of
              prediction.
