Title       : Combinatorial Models for Manifolds and Vector Bundles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1998     
File        : a9803615

Award Number: 9803615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81544              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura M. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803615
Anderson
     This project centers on two combinatorial models for
              manifolds and
vector bundles: Gelfand and MacPherson's theory of combinatorial
              differential
manifolds and matroid bundles and Mnev and Mani's theory of
              locally polytopal
manifolds.  The primary focus is on the bundle theory and
              classifying spaces
within each model.  In both of these models, a
              bundle-theoretic perspective
leads to deep and unexpected new relations
              between topology and combinatorics:
the primary objective of this research is
              to expand on these relations.  The
project's goals include both combinatorial
              applications in topology (for
instance, combinatorial formulas for topological
              invariants) and topological
results in combinatorics (particularly on the
              topology of posets of oriented
matroids and polytopes).  The classifying
              spaces for Gelfand and MacPherson's
theory derive from certain partially
              ordered sets of oriented matroids, and
have close ties to the real
              Grassmannian.  Among the objectives of this
research are a closer knowledge of
              the topology of the combinatorial
Grassmannian and applications of this
              knowledge both to real vector bundles 
and to various combinatorial problems. 
              Mnev and Mani's theory also appears
to give rise to a classifying space of
              interest in both topology and
combinatorics, relating PL manifolds and convex
              polytopes.  The author will
also study a new type of ``non-Euclidean''
              pathology in oriented matroids and
its implications for combinatorial
              differential manifolds.
     Much of the power of these combinatorial models
              for topology derives
from the elegance with which topological concepts
              translate into combinatorial 
analogs.  One can, for instance, derive
              combinatorial formulas for topological
invariants by simply translating each
              element of a topological formula into
its combinatorial equivalent. The
              translation from combinatorics to topology
has proven equally useful: these
              models have provided a new framework in which
to view various combinatorial
              topics.  Both models have revealed a
vector-bundle perspective on various
              combinatorial problems that originally
appeared to have no connection to real
              vector bundles, leading to unexpected 
topological proofs.  This project will
              build on recent results in this area
whose depth lies in uniting the
              combinatorial side of mathematics, rooted in
counting things, to the
              topological side, rooted in plasticity and spatial
continuity.
***

