Title       : Carrier Transport Effects on Compressively Strained InAsP Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9803066

Award Number: 9803066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen S. Menoni carmen@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Y. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9803066  Menoni    This project addresses basic materials science issues
              limiting  the performance of near-IR solid state lasers used in high speed 
              fiber optics communications systems. Key areas of study include  the epitaxial
              temperature dependence of misfit dislocation  formation and propagation, the
              influence of strain and strain  compensation effected through materials
              combinations and MBE  parameters on critical thicknesses for pseudomorphic
              growth, band  offsets, and carrier confinement. The approach incorporates 
              iterative feedback between materials growth/characterization and  detailed
              carrier transport measurements in InAsyP1-y/InGaAsP  multiple quantum well
              structures. Mechanisms of carrier transport  in strained InAsP lasers
              structures will be studied and related  to high temperature laser operation.
              Measurements will include  quantum well carrier capture and emission rates, and
              carrier  diffusion through a separate confinement heterostructure to  assess
              how these phenomena vary with injection conditions,  temperature, and geometry
              of the structures.  %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of  materials science having high potential technological
              relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at 
              a fundamental level to new aspects of electronic/photonic  materials and
              devices. The basic knowledge and understanding  gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving  the performance and stability of advanced
              devices by providing a  fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
              producing  improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important 
              feature of the program is the integration of research and  education through
              the training of students in a fundamentally and  technologically significant
              area.  ***
