Title       : Random Processes on Graphs, and Planar Brownian Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9803597

Award Number: 9803597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86689              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuval Peres peres@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803597  Peres   The principal investigator will analyze various random
              processes on graphs. For   instance, a model of  noisy propagation on trees has
              been studied independently in   Statistical Mechanics, in Computer Science and
              in Genetic Reconstruction. This model is   well understood only when the
              propagating variables take two values, when it can be   identified with the
              Ising model. There are two distinct critical temperatures, one for   uniqueness
              of Gibbs states and another for purity of the Markovian state that corresponds 
               to free boundary conditions. The second critical temperature is not known for
              the Potts   model, where the propagating variables can take more than two
              values. To study large   homogeneous graphs that are not trees, the
              investigator will apply a new "mass transport   method" developed recently with
              several collaborators. Problems on the geometry of the   planar Brownian path
              will also be investigated; a key tool will be the intersection   equivalence of
              the paths with random sets constructed via "fractal  percolation".  
              Mathematical biologists studying the spread of genetic mutations in a family
              tree,   and computer scientists studying the propagation of errors in a noisy
              communication   network, were led independently to the same mathematical model
              that was considered   earlier in statistical mechanics. The principal
              investigator will attempt to unify and extend   some of the earlier results on
              these models, by using recent probabilistic techniques; some   of this involves
              collaboration with computer scientists. Recently, new methods have   emerged to
              exploit symmetries in the geometry of the underlying network, to obtain  
              better understanding of random processes on it; the investigator will develop
              and apply   these methods further. Finally, the trace of the erratic random
              motion of a particle has   been studied intensively by probabilists; this
              research will investigate certain new   approaches to these traces to try and
              elucidate their geometric structure.
