Title       : Analysis and Computation for Optimal Control Problems with Pointwise State and
               Control Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9803755

Award Number: 9803755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Dunn joe_dunn@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9803755
Dunn

Physical systems whose states evolve in response to variable
              externally
applied controlling forces, voltages, temperatures, interest rate
              policies,
resource allocation strategies, and the like, are commonly modeled
              by
differential equations or approximating difference equations.
              Related
optimization problems arise naturally when some choice is permitted
              in
the way the control inputs are applied in time or space. These optimal
              control problems have classic precursors in the Calculus of Variations, and may
              also be viewed as specially structured nonlinear programs in function spaces
              or
finite-dimensional sequence spaces. The most difficult optimal
              control
problems enforce strict pointwise bounds or other inequality
              constraints
on the control and state variables. Run-of-the-mill problems in
              this
category can easily entail hundreds or thousands of variables with
              comparably
many constraints, and when cast in the currently accepted
              mathematical format,
are often so badly scaled that the simplest and most
              readily implemented
iterative optimization methods are effectively
              incapacitated. The more
sophisticated Newtonian and quasi-Newtonian algorithms
              do provide
computational countermeasures for bad scaling near almost-singular
              local minimizers; however, Newtonian scaling procedures are costly and do
              not
guarantee good nonlocal convergence properties while the iterates are
              still
far from a local minimizer.

The proposed investigation would address
              these issues with theoretical and
computational evaluations of standard
              optimization schemes implemented in
a new nonstandard mathematical framework
              for optimal control problems
with pointwise state and control constraints. The
              alternative framework replaces local differential or difference forms of the
              state evolution equations by nonlocal integrated forms, and replaces state
              variables in the primal variable set by new artificial variables that coincide
              with the state when all constraints are met. Recent experiments with hybrid
              augmented Lagrangian projection methods outlined in this proposal indicate real
              and important analytical and computational advantages in the new formulation.
              The goal of the proposed study is to gain more experience with algorithm
              implementations in this setting, and to develop sharpened optimality conditions
              and other mathematical tools needed to achieve a deeper understanding of the
              observed behavior and improve the computational methods. Improvements in this
              area must have an immediate and significant practical impact, since large-scale
              computationally challenging optimal control problems arise in many physical
              settings.



