Title       : Blind Channel Equalization for GSM and QAM Wireless Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9803855

Award Number: 9803855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi Ding   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rapid technological advances in recent years have made  wireless communication
              an integral part of modern society in  this information age. Among several
              digital cellular  systems, GSM is a successful and dominant wireless system in 
              today's market. Because of its potential application in  wireless systems,
              blind equalization has become an important  research subject of communication
              signal processing in  recent years. Although a large number of published works 
              propose various blind algorithms, few have dealt with  practical wireless
              cellular systems. Such a lack of  practical consideration of actual wireless
              systems is  alarming and frustrating to practitioners. The main  objective of
              this research is to determine effective means  to apply blind equalization into
              GSM and other similar  wireless systems. Its importance arises from
              considerations  that (a) exploiting blind equalization criteria may improve 
              the reliability of GSM receivers; (b) future wireless  standards can benefit
              from blind equalization algorithms by  reducing training overhead; (c) studies
              of practical  wireless system will help advance the general research on  blind
              equalization. The challenge as well as the application  of blind equalization
              lies in the practical need for  communication receivers to equalize unknown
              channels without  the assistance and expense of training sequences. This 
              research will not only study generic algorithms for QAM  blind equalization,
              but also investigate key issues involved  in the application of linear and
              nonlinear blind  equalization algorithms in wireless communications.
