Title       : Inverse Diffraction Problems in Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9803604

Award Number: 9803604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Bao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9263,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9803604  Bao    This project will support research on the mathematical issues
              and   computational methods for solving the following classes of direct and  
              inverse problems motivated by industrial applications:  inverse problems   in
              diffractive optics, modeling of structure enhanced nonlinear optical   effects,
              and optimal design problems in nonlinear optics. The main topics   of the
              proposed work include:  Uniqueness, stability, and regularity   properties for
              inverse problems in optics. Numerical computation of   inverse and optimal
              design problems in diffractive optics. Modeling of   nonlinear second harmonic
              generation in periodic structures. Structure   enhanced nonlinear optical
              effects. Well-posedness of a partial differential   equation model in nonlinear
              optics. Interface least-squares finite element   methods for solving the model
              problem. Computational methods for   design and optimization in nonlinear
              optics.    These problems arise naturally in modeling and design of micro
              diffractive   optics. Micro diffractive optics is a fundamental, emerging
              technology in   which optical devices are micromachined with very small
              structural   features. Exploiting diffraction effects, diffractive structures
              perform   functions unattainable with conventional optics.  Examples of current
              and   potential application areas include corrective lenses, electronic
              displays,   microsensors, lasers, optical storage systems, optical
              communication   components, and integrated opto-electronic semiconductor
              devices. The   practical applications and scientific developments have driven
              the need for   rigorous mathematical models, mathematical analysis, and
              numerical   algorithms to accurately describe the diffraction of complicated
              diffractive   structures, to compute electromagnetic vector fields and thus to
              predict the   performance of a given diffractive structure in linear and
              nonlinear optical   media, as well as to carry out optimal design of new
              structures. The   research has significant potential for evo lving new science
              and providing   industry with guidance to design and fabricate new optical
              devices.
