Title       : GOALI: Gas Transport and Barrier Properties Aromatic Polyamides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9803225

Award Number: 9803225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benny D. Freeman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Preston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory K. Fleming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9803225  Benny Freeman/N.C. State U.    Proprietary amorphous
              polyamides used commercially in gas separation applications; liquid crystalline
              (LC) aromatic polyamides area among the most impermeable barrier polymers
              available.  However, wholly aromatic polyamides in general and LC ones in
              particular are typically difficult to dissolve and have melting points near or
              above their decomposition temperatures; melt and solution processing of these
              materials can be, therefore, quite difficult.  Moreover, the synthesis of new
              higher performance aromatic polyamides can be impeded by their lack of
              solubility.  The proposed experimental research program is a continuation of an
              earlier two year program to explore the synthesis and gas sorption, transport,
              and permeation properties of a new class of highly soluble wholly aromatic
              polyamides, having either rigid rod, possibly mesogenic, backbones or
              semi-rodlike backbones and structural elements which could be precursors for
              further reactions such as crosslinking or the attachment of pendent rigid or
              flexible groups.  These fundamental studies are directed toward developing an
              expanded and more subtle repertoire of structural modification useful for the
              rational tailoring of super-membranes and super-barriers.  Central to the
              thesis under consideration is the notion that the proposed primary chemical
              structure variations could markedly influence polymer suprastructure (i.e.
              polymer chain packing), polymer-pentrant interactions, and, in turn, strongly
              effect gas sorption, transport, and permeation properties.    An Experimental
              program is proposed involving controlled synthesis of highly soluble wholly
              aromatic polyamides having substituents which could be used to crosslink the
              polymers or attach rigid or flexible side chains.  The chemical structure,
              physical properties, and gas transport properties of these polymers would be
              characterized to determine explicitly the influence of side and main chain
              molecular architecture and side chain stiffne ss, plus the potential for
              crosslinking, on the overall sorption, transport, and permeation behavior.   
              ***
