Title       : Localization and Periodicity in Unstable Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9803601

Award Number: 9803601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aldridge K. Bousfield bous@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803601  Bousfield       The investigator will continue his research in
              algebraic topology, using  localization methods to expose and analyze periodic
              phenomena in the unstable  homotopy theory of spaces.  During the past two
              decades, remarkable progress  has been made toward a global understanding of
              stable homotopy theory, showing  that some major features arise chromatically
              from an interplay of periodic  phenomena arranged in a hierarchy.  This project
              is part of an effort to  develop a similar understanding in unstable homotopy
              theory.  The investigator  has introduced a hierarchy of localizations called
              periodizations, which serve  to resolve a given space into a chromatic tower
              with monochromatic fibers.  He  will work to understand these periodizations as
              well as the closely related  localizations with respect to Morava K-theories. 
              He recently discovered  surprising new functors between the stable and unstable
              monochromatic layers  of homotopy theory.  Using these functors and other
              tools, he will explore the  structure of the monochromatic layers.  At the
              classical K-theoretic level,  this work is leading to solutions of old problems
              concerning periodic homotopy  groups and the K-theory of spaces.      
              Topological or geometric spaces arise, for instance, as sets of solutions  to
              systems of equations, and they play a central role in mathematics.  Beyond 
              their usual measurements, such spaces have deeper properties that persist even 
              after drastic deformations.  These properties begin very simply with the 
              number of separate components and the number of "holes" in a low dimensional 
              space but become tremendously rich and informative in higher dimensions.  The 
              field of homotopy theory is devoted to their study, using powerful algebraic 
              and geometric techniques.  In recent years, an exciting chromatic approach  to
              the subject has emerged, allowing decompositions of complicated homotopical 
              phenomena into much simpler periodic parts.  However, this chromatic approach 
              was originally rest ricted to certain stable phenomena.  In the present 
              project, the investigator is working to extend it to a full range of unstable 
              homotopy theoretic phenomena.  ***
