Title       : A Materials Research Diffractometer for High Resolution X-Ray Characterization
               of Group III Nitride Based Wide Band Gap Simiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9803093

Award Number: 9803093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87455              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jharna Chaudhuri chaudhur@me.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803093
Chaudhuri
This award provides partial support for instrumentation for
              the high resolution x-ray characterization of defects and strain in group III
              nitride based wide band gap semiconductors.  A high resolution triple axis
              materials research diffractometer capable of measuring x-ray rocking curves as
              well as reciprocal space maps will be acquired.  In this unit a triple axis
              adding a triple-bounce channel-cut Ge(220) analyzer crystal turns the double
              axis  diffractometer into a triple axis diffractometer which gives it a high
              resolution.  Using this diffractometer the interplanar spacing variation due to
              the strain can be separated from the tilt caused by defects like dislocations. 
              Thus the diffraction peak of a thin film even with a large number of
              dislocations would be sharp at a certain scanning mode (w - 20 scanning mode)
              and the peak position can be measured accurately.  This will give more precise
              information on lattice parameters, structure and strain of materials than a
              double crystal diffractometer.  In addition one can obtain the reciprocal space
              map of the substrate and film separately which gives information on the strain
              and defects simultaneously.  These findings with a high resolution are
              essential in developing new smaller dimension wide band gap semiconducting
              materials with less defects and strain and improved opto-electronic properties.
               The material systems to be studied are used in optical and electronic devices.
               The structure, strain, composition, defects and polarity in these materials
              will be analyzed using a comprehensive x-ray diffraction technique which
              consists of the x-ray high resolution diffractometry and x-ray topographic
              techniques.  These parameters are important because optoelectronic properties
              and device performance are strongly dependent on them.  The experimental values
              will be compared with the theoretical ones and models will be developed to
              explain the strain and defects.  Specific recommendations will be given to the
              crystal growers based on these models and improved device fabrication will be
              realized.  Thus a significant contribution can be made in the field of nitride
              based wide band gap semiconductor devices.  This research will be done in
              collaboration with Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS and other
              places.

This diffractometer will also be made available to other researchers
              at Wichita State University and at other universities in the state of Kansas. 
              At present there are no high resolution triple axis diffractometers in the
              state of Kansas.  Materials research has been identified as one of the
              strategic techniques in the state of Kansas.  The materials research
              diffractometer requested is versatile and can be used for many other
              applications by other researchers in Wichita State University and other
              universities in Kansas.  The research capabilities of other researchers in
              Kansas will be improved profoundly with this equipment.  In addition, students
              will be trained in the use of x-ray diffraction technique and will be involved
              in research by using this equipment both at the graduate and undergraduate
              levels.
%%%
*** 


