Title       : Symplectic Geometry and Complex Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a9803192

Award Number: 9803192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Schoen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon K. Donaldson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal: DMS-9803192  Principal Investigator:  Simon Donaldson   
              The main topic of this project involves the application of methods  from
              complex geometry to symplectic topology. The investigator  will develop a
              general procedure for translating problems in this  area into combinatorial
              questions involving the monodromy of a  family of codimension 2 submanifolds. 
              It is expected that this  will apply, in principle, both to the classification
              problem for  symplectic manifolds and also to Lagrangian submanifolds and 
              symplectomorphisms. Once the general foundations are in place  applications
              will be considered: the question here will be to see  if the combinatorial
              problems can be cast into a tractable form.  Particular attention will be paid
              to the role of the Floer  homology groups obtained from the monodromy. One
              subsidiary topic  in the project involves research into the geometry of Kahler 
              metrics: the specific goals here are to prove the existence of  certain
              geodesics in the space of Kahler metrics, and apply these  to Calabi's extremal
              metric program. This existence question is  a version of the Dirichlet problem
              for the homogeneous  Monge-Ampere equation, a topic of independent interest.
              The other  subsidiary topic involves research into manifolds with exceptional 
              holonomy groups, and particularly the search for new examples,  obtained using
              complex 3-folds as building blocks.    Complex numbers, made up of real and
              imaginary components, are  fundamental throughout mathematics. In geometry, it
              has been  realised since the middle of the last century that properties of  the
              complex number system are intimately bound up with the  geometry and topology
              of 2-dimensional spaces. The elaboration of  this theme, and its extension to
              higher dimensions, has been one  of the main achievements of twentieth century
              mathematics. The  ideas have many contacts with numerous branches of
              Mathematical  Physics, including the theory of potentials and fields, quantum 
              theory and relativity. Mat hematically, many of the questions come  down to the
              detailed analysis of nonlinear partial differential  equations.  The proposed
              research will contribute to this brood  development, focusing on a number of
              specific and topical  questions, in all of which complex variables play a key
              role.
