Title       : Coupled-Oscillator Problems Motivated by Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9803207

Award Number: 9803207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Carr carr@aeolus.math.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803207
Carr

The investigator proposes an analysis of coupled oscillators
              motivated by 
problems occurring in the study of lasers. Coupled oscillator
              models may 
result from coupling individual laser devices or from a modal
              
decomposition of a multimode laser. For the models under consideration, 
the
              amplitude of the oscillations is an important dynamical variable; this is 
in
              contrast to limit-cycle oscillators where the amplitude is often slave to 
the
              phase, hence reducing the dimension of the dynamical system. Thus, 
even if
              the system maintains a desired phase-locked state, amplitude 
instabilities
              can limit the usefulness of the device in certain parameter 
regimes. Also of
              importance is that the use of lasers as a component of a 
communications
              system requires actively modulating the laser output. 
Dissipation is
              typically very weak, so excitation can lead to long 
undesirable transients or
              to sustained chaos. Thus, the effect of excitations 
ranging from periodic to
              impulsive must be well understood. Finally, the 
laser models are highly
              singular due to time scales ranging from 
milliseconds to nanoseconds; this
              provides both analytical and numerical 
challenges in their study. The
              investigator will apply such tools as 
asymptotic analysis, local and global
              bifurcation theory, and numerical 
simulation and data analysis techniques to
              investigate modulation effects, 
amplitude and phase control, and localization
              dynamics in coupled solid-
state lasers and multimode fiber lasers.

Coupled
              lasers are being used in applications such as space 
communications, optical
              interconnects, fiber-optic communications, and 
optical beam steering. Some
              important design goals of coupled laser 
systems are to obtain higher output
              intensity of the system or achieve 
beam steering. The problems investigated
              in this proposal will further the 
understanding of these often unstable
              systems and lead to the achievement 
of control of the desired laser output.
              Furthermore, wide-ranging system 
configurations and many different coupling
              mechanisms (ranging from 
nearest neighbor, to non-local, to global) allow
              this work to aid not only 
laser technology, but also the study of coupled
              oscillators appearing in 
other applications.

