Title       : Molecular Based Quantum Antiferromagnets: Design, Synthesis, and Experimental
               Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9803813

Award Number: 9803813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher P. Landee clandee@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark M. Turnbull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803813  Landee    This  is  a collaborative project with solid state chemistry 
              and  condensed  matter  physics  components.  New  materials  will  be 
              synthesized which contain arrays of magnetic atoms which interact 
              antiferromagnetically in one-dimension (chains) or two-dimensions  (layers). 
              These magnetic materials are predicted to  have  novel  quantum  mechanical 
              properties. For   example,  measurements  of  their  magnetic  properties  will
               provide  important  tests   of  theoretical  predictions of the effects of
              quantum  fluctuations.  Such  tests  have  not been possible to date because 
              appropriate  materials  have not been available. Both the static  and  dynamic 
              magnetic  properties of the new materials will  be  examined  via 
              magnetization, susceptibility, and specific heat studies, as well  as  NMR, 
              EPR, and neutron scattering experiments. New  materials  are  being designed
              and synthesized to provide appropriate 1- and  2-dimensional S=1/2
              antiferromagnets. The principles of molecular-  based  magnetism  are  employed
              to  link  transition  metal  ions  together in the appropriate lattice using
              organic molecules.  The  study   of  the  magneto-structural  relationships  in
               the   new  materials  will  be  emphasized to aid in  the  creation  of  new 
              generations  of  magnetic  materials.  While  the  focus  is   on  fundamental
              magnetism the results are potentially of interest  in  the  general  are  of 
              nanotechnology or  artificially  structure  materials  where atoms might be
              individually arranged to  provide  lower dimension structures for technical
              applications.  %%%  This  is  a collaborative project with solid state
              chemistry  and  condensed   matter  physics  components.  While   properties  
              of  individual atoms can be analyzed in some detail by the methods of  quantum 
              mechanics, our understanding a large  numbers  of  atoms  linked  together in
              different geometries is a much more difficult  task.  This  fundamental
              research project will study the  quantum  mechan ical  properties of magnetic
              systems where  magnetic  atoms  interact  with  each  other  in one-dimension 
              (chains)  or  two-  dimensions (layers). In such geometries, quantum mechanics 
              makes  novel  predictions  that  have  not  been  tested  experimentally 
              because  of the lack of appropriate materials. This collaboration  has 
              designed  and created new magnetic layers and  chains  using  organic 
              molecules  to link magnetic moments.  The  project  will  provide  excellent
              training of graduate students in the areas  of  materials synthesis and
              characterization. While the focus  is  on  fundamental magnetism the results
              are potentially of interest  in  the  general  area  of  nanotechnology or
              artificially  structure  materials, where atoms might be individually arranged
              to  provide  lower dimension structures for technical applications.  ***
