Title       : Microwave Studies of the Metal-Insulator Transition with a Helical Resonator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a9803969

Award Number: 9803969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore G. Castner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                     3                                                                   
              9803969  Castner    This  is  a  condensed matter physics project that will
              investigate  frequency  dependent  transport properties  of  the  heavily 
              doped  semiconductors Si:P, Si:As, and other systems, close to the  metal- 
              insulator  transition (MIT) using a helical resonator. The  helical  resonator
              allows measurements in the frequency range 100 MHz  to  3  GHz.  Measurements 
              of  both sample-induced  frequency  shifts  and  quality  factor changes will
              yield information about the dielectric  response and conductivity of
              semiconductor samples as a function of  dopant  levels near the MIT. The
              primary objectives of the  project  are  (1)  to  clarify  the nature of
              localization  and  interaction  corrections  the  complex dielectric response 
              of  barely  metallic  samples  in  order  to compare with theory, (2) to 
              search  for  an  unusual  frequency  dependence  of  conductivity  at  the 
              critical  concentration,  as temperature is lowered, and (3)  to  extend  the 
              microwave  measurements  to frequencies  well  above  3  GHz  using 
              conventional  network  analyzers and resonant  microwave  cavities.  Addition 
              research  will  involve a  study  of  the  electron  spin  resonance  (ESR) 
              linewidths of antimony doped  Si.  All  of  these  measurements bear on the
              general problem of conductivity in  highly  correlated  electron systems. The
              results will  be  relevant  to  a  number   of   related  scientific  areas 
              including   the   high-Tc  superconductivity problem. The project exposes
              graduate students to  fundamental  physics  and  provides experience  with  a 
              number  of  electrical  measurement techniques. Students  associated  with  the
               project are prepared for a range of career opportunities.  %%%  Silicon, as
              the most important electronic material today, has  been  extensively  studied 
              for  more than four  decades.  Heavily  doped  silicon exhibits an
              insulator-to-metal transition as the doping  of  donors  or acceptors is
              increased above a critical density. Although  static  transport  and thermal
              properties of this phase  transition  have  been extensively studied there is
              still no generally accepted  understanding  of  this  unusual phase  transition
               which  features  disorder,  electron-electron  interactions,  and  strong  
              electron  correlation.  Although  some infrared data exists  there  has  been 
              insufficient study of the dynamical properties of metallic  samples  as  a 
              function  of  frequency, doping and  temperature.  Microwave  studies  will be
              undertaken with a novel slow wave device  (helical  resonator),   along  with 
              conventional  microwave  cavities.   The  scientific  objectives are to
              understand the dynamical conductivity  and  dielectric  response  functions  of
               both  the  localized  and  itinerant  electrons  present  in barely  metallic 
              samples.  These  microwave  studies  afford an excellent area for  the 
              training  of  graduate  students. This work may also impact our understanding 
              of  high temperature superconductivity.  ***
