Title       : Acquisition of Processing Equipment for Advanced Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9803113

Award Number: 9803113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheena Murphy sheena@mail.nhn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803113
Murphy
The University of Oklahoma (OU) has focused an intense research
              effort on the electronic and optical properties of semiconductors and polymers.
               Over the past few years, researchers from the Physics, Chemistry, Electrical
              Engineering and Chemical Engineering departments have worked together to form
              the Laboratory for Electronic Properties of  Materials (LEPM).  The resulting
              collaborations and the leveraged use of experimental facilities has led to a
              wealth of innovative materials research.  The success of this interdisciplinary
              effort has also created a major demand for semiconductor device fabrication
              equipment.  Access to such equipment will enable the testing of materials under
              realistic operating conditions, the fabrication of prototype transistor and
              laser devices, and the production of specialized devices for studying
              fundamental quantum phenomena.

This award provides support for
              photolithography (a mask-aligner, photoresist spinner and ovens for photoresist
              processing), etching (a plasma etcher), and packaging (a ball bonding station).
               This fabrication equipment will complement the existing growth and
              characterization facilities.  Researchers in four areas will particularly
              benefit from the proposed instruments:  The narrow-gap III-V materials
              developed by LEPM will be fabricated into improved magnetic-field sensors,
              high-speed transistors, and negative luminescence devices;  Researchers
              studying fundamental quantum phenomena will be able to produce their own
              specialized devices;  The novel atomic-beam etching technique invented by LEPM
              will be made compatible with conventional processing techniques;  And the
              mid-infrared laser effort will be extended to include single-mode
              devices.

These instruments will greatly strengthen the materials and device
              research capabilities at OU.  Moreover, the already considerable interaction
              between the different disciplines represented within LEPM will be enhanced.  
              Ongoing and new collaborations with a number of commercial enterprises (both
              within Oklahoma and nationwide) will also benefit.  Finally, access to these
              instruments will greatly improve the curriculum and research opportunities for
              both undergraduate and graduate students majoring in Physics, Engineering
              Physics, and Electrical Engineering.
%%%
***    

