Title       : Regularity and Singularity in Geometric Variational Problems and in Geometric
               Flow Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9803493

Award Number: 9803493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Simon lms@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal DMS-9803493  Principal Investigators: Leon Simon and Brian
              White    Leon Simon proposes to pursue various questions related to the 
              structure of the singular sets of minimal submanifolds and energy  minimizing
              maps, including the extension of his recent work on  smoothness of the singular
              set of area minimizing submanifolds to  higher dimensions and to other classes
              of submanifolds.  Specifically,  he is proposing to consider the question of
              whether the  top-dimensional part of the singular set locally lies in a finite 
              union of smooth submanifolds, which he has recently established for 3  and 4
              dimensional mod-2 minimizing submanifolds in codimension 2.  Simon also
              proposes to continue his efforts to develop methods for  generating examples of
              singular sets, and to pursue several questions  related to asymptotics on
              approach to singularities.  In addition he  proposes to study questions related
              to the structure of the branching  set of energy minimizing maps.  Brian White
              plans to study how  regularity properties and singular structure for minimizing
              chains  with coefficients in a metric group depend on the group and its 
              metric.  This includes study of immiscible fluid interfaces as a  special case.
               He also plans to investigate singularities in the  mean-curvature flow and in
              a related hyperbolic flow that should more  accurately model the dynamics of
              real soap films.  He will also  continue his investigations of branch points in
              2 dimensional minimal  surfaces.    An understanding of singularities, and how
              singularities are formed,  is a fundamental element in the overall
              understanding of many physical  and geometric phenomena.  For example, in
              cosmology singularities of  space-time (e.g.  "black holes") play a fundamental
              role.  Likewise in  the study of the "canonical" objects which arise naturally
              in topology  and geometry, the understanding of singularities is absolutely 
              fundamental.  As with most non-linear phenomena, there is no single  well
              ordered theory which a pplies in a wide range of different  contexts.  Rather,
              each different context has its own collection of  effective techniques, and it
              is the development and application of  such techniques in the context of the
              geometric calculus of variations  which is the focus of the present research
              proposal.  Specifically,  Simon and White propose to continue their efforts
              toward a complete  understanding of singularities, and how they are formed, in
              the  context of area minimizing submanifolds and energy minimizing maps.  Such
              techniques are likely to be applicable to the study of other  objects of
              geometric and physical significance---for example to the  study of immiscible
              fluid interfaces, soap-films, and the equilibrium  free surfaces of fluids.
