Title       : Geometric Analysis on Manifolds of Non-positive Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9803230

Award Number: 9803230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75066              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianguo Cao cao.7@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal Number: DMS-9803230  Principal Investigator: Jianguo Cao   
              The principal investigator studies manifolds of non-positive sectional 
              curvature with particular emphasis on isoperimetric inequalities and  the
              minimal volume problem.  Dr.  Cao intends to continue his work on  Gromov's
              minimal volume gap conjecture jointly with his coauthors.  Using the
              F-structure theory developed by Cheeger and Gromov, he would  like to study the
              minimal volume gap conjecture for complete  aspherical manifolds.  Cao also
              plans to continue his study on  isoperimetric inequalities on simply-connected
              riemannian manifolds of  non-positive sectional curvature.  As an intermediate
              step towards  understanding this isoperimetric problem, he hopes to study the
              total  Gauss-Kronecker curvature for smooth compact convex hypersurfaces in 
              Cartan-Hadamard manifolds.  In addition, Cao plans to continue his  study of
              the sign of the Euler number of compact aspherical manifolds,  especially in
              the complex case.    This project focuses on the study of global geometric
              shape of  non-positively curved spaces.  The examples of non-positively curved 
              spaces include flat tires and surfaces with more than two holes, such  as
              pretzels.  There are also examples of higher dimensional  non-positively curved
              spaces.  Our universe can be viewed a  3-dimensional space of zero curvature. 
              Dr.  Cao is trying to  investigate diameter, volume, spectrum and other
              geometric data of  those spaces.  Cao has also been interested in the study of
              the  shortest closed curves on non-positively curved spaces.  He has  already
              shown that two such surfaces with possible cusps are isometric  if and only if
              the data of lengths of all shortest closed curves on  the two surfaces are
              identical.  The data of lengths of all shortest  closed curves on a closed
              surface M is called the marked length  spectrum of the space M. The study of
              marked length spectrum on spaces  with boundaries has a number of applications
              in modern industry and  geologica l sciences.  In addition, the research of
              spaces of dimension  10 and 26 have played a crucial role in the theoretical
              physics of the  unification of four fundamental forces in our universe.
