Title       : Representations of the Fundamental Group and Connections with Deformation
               Theory, Geometry and Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9803520

Award Number: 9803520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Millson jjm@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803520  Millson       Millson will continue to explore connections among spaces
              of  representations of finitely-generated groups into Lie groups, linkages  in
              model spaces of constant curvature, arrangements of subspaces, and  integrable
              Hamiltonian systems and their quantizations.  Much of this  work will be done
              with Michael Kapovich of the University of Utah.  Millson and Kapovich used the
              above relations to construct Artin  groups that were not the fundamental groups
              of smooth complex  algebraic varieties.  This work has just been accepted by
              the Publ.  Math. IHES.  Millson is also working with Hermann Flaschka of the 
              University of Arizona on constructing integrable systems on symplectic 
              quotients (by the adjoint representation) of products of orbits in  simple Lie
              algebras.  They have recently found such systems for  minimal orbits.  A
              critical role is played by the Aronszajn-Weinstein  formula of perturbation
              theory.  Their end goal is to give new insight  into the work of Lusztig and
              others on decomposing tensor products of  irreducible representations.      
              Millson's work begins with one of the first theorems of  high-school geometry
              -- the theorem that if two triangles have the  same set of side lengths then
              they are congruent.  The analogue for  quadrilaterals is clearly false: one can
              change a square into a  rhombus without changing the side lengths.  So one is
              led to try to  parametrize the set of all planar n-gons with the same side
              lengths.  From there one is led to a favorite theme of nineteenth century 
              mathematics, the study of planar linkages (systems of rods and  hinges).  In
              the nineteenth century such a study was of immense  practical significance --
              the problem was to convert linear motion (of  a piston rod) to circular motion
              (turning of a wheel) by a linkage.  The problem was solved by a French naval
              officer, Peaucellier.  It  turns out that from the modern point of view the
              nineteenth century  work is insufficiently precise.  Millson and Kapovich have
              corrected  the  errors and written up a proof of a result (often attributed to 
              Thurston) that given any smooth manifold M, there is a planar linkage  whose
              configuration space is diffeomorphic to a disjoint union of a  number of copies
              of M.  The above work on planar linkages led to a  study of n-gon linkages in
              space.  This theory is enormously richer,  connecting with symplectic geometry,
              integrable Hamiltonian systems,  and representation theory.  The analogous
              theory in spherical and  hyperbolic three-space appears to connect up with some
              of the newest  objects in geometry and algebra, Poisson Lie groups and quantum 
              groups.  ***
