Title       : Geometry of Riemannian and Finsler Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9803129

Award Number: 9803129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitri Burago burago@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS-9803129  Principal Investigator:  Dmitry Burago   
              The main topics of the proposal (large-scale geometry and billiards   systems)
              belong to both geometry and dynamical systems.  Continuing   his (joint with S.
              Ivanov) research in the large-scale geometry of   periodic metrics, D. Burago
              proposes to study the asymptotic volume   growth for Finsler tori; a related
              problem is to analyze   area-minimizing properties of affine subspaces in
              Banach spaces.  This   may help to understand how the absence of conjugate
              points for a   Lagrangian system on a torus is reflected in the dynamics of its
                geodesic flow.  D. Burago also proposes to continue his analysis of   higher
              dimensional analogs for geometric conclusions of Aubry-Mather   theory.  Trying
              to further understand the relationship between   biLipschitz equivalence and
              quasi-isometries, it is natural to   consider such cases where density
              arguments (developed by the proposer   jointly with B. Kleiner) do not work;
              the most striking of such cases   include Penrose tilings and uniform lattices.
               Continuing his (joint   with S. Ferleger, A. Kononenko) study of
              semi-dispersing billiard   systems, D. Burago plans to investigate if their
              topological entropy   can be infinite.  Another problem which arose from the
              proposer's   method of applying singular geometry to billiard theory is  
              constructing CAT(0) development spaces whose geodesics represent all   billiard
              trajectories.  E. Johnson, the proposer's advisee, works on   applying the
              proposer's method to prove the unboundness for complete   surfaces of finite
              variation of curvature to show stability of the   class of embedded flat
              surfaces.    The main subjects of the proposal have very clear physical
              analogs.    Large-scale geometric properties of periodic metrics can be  
              interpreted as global properties of a periodic medium consisting of   copies of
              the same microscopic pattern repeated in a regular fashion,   as in crystals. 
              In particular, dynamical properties of geo desic flows   for periodic metrics
              reflect how the light or radiation spreads in   such media.  The technique
              developed by the proposer and his   collaborators allows us to solve many of
              the open problems in this   area for the most important case (quadratic
              Lagrangians); in general,   this circle of problems remains wide open.  The
              proposer's research in   the theory of billiard systems started from a problem
              that goes back   to Boltzmann: can one give an upper bound on the maximum
              number of   collisions in a given time interval in a system of several balls  
              colliding elastically (gas model)?  The number of collisions per time   unit
              plays important role in thermodynamics.  Surprisingly, this   problem has been
              solved by establishing a connection with singular   geometry; in its turn, this
              connection led to new intriguing problems   of both geometric and dynamical
              origin.
