Title       : RUI: Electron-electron Interactions and Delocalization in Disordered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9803686

Award Number: 9803686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge R. Talamantes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St Univ-Bakersfld Fdn
	      9001 Stockdale Highway
	      Bakersfield, CA  933111022    661/664-2252

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9803686  Talamantes  This is an award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions
               (RUI).  The project is a theoretical one which uses  extensive numerical
              calculations and addresses issues  related to properties of electrons and their
              interactions  near the so-called metal-insulator transition.    An important
              example of disordered systems with interactions  between particles is that of
              Anderson-localized systems with  Coulomb interactions.  For such systems
              Anderson showed that  a metal-insulator transition (MIT) ensues as the
              magnitude  of disorder increases in relation to the quantum mechanical  overlap
              energies between nearest neighbor particles.  In the  original discussion the
              effects of electron-electron  interactions were neglected.  Numerous studies
              have been  made of Coulomb effects on the metallic side of the MIT.  While
              effort has gone into how interactions affect the  insulating side of the
              transition, this problem has been  more resilient to progress. 
              Electron-electron interactions  energies on the insulating side are often of
              the same order  as other energies of the system and, hence, cannot be 
              neglected.    Many aspects of disordered systems with electron-electron 
              interactions are still poorly understood.  This grant will  focus on the
              question of how long-range electron-electron  interactions affect the degree of
              electron localization on  the insulating side of the MIT.  The method to be
              used is a  theoretical/computational approach which starts with  electronic
              states corresponding to the well-localized limit.  Using these states as a
              basis, one then computes the states  as lattice spacing decreases.  Those
              states and the energy  spectrum are then analyzed by comparing various measures
              of  the degree of delocalization for systems with and without  long-range
              interactions.  The research will investigate such  questions as the effect of
              system size on the results, as  well as that of dimensionality, density of
              sites, strength  of the disorder, and the effect of boundary condit ions.  %%% 
              This is an award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions  (RUI).  The
              project is a theoretical one which uses  extensive numerical calculations and
              addresses issues  related to properties of electrons and their interactions 
              near the so-called metal-insulator transition.    This grant will focus on the
              question of how long-range  electron-electron interactions affect the degree of
              electron  localization on the insulating side of the metal-insulator 
              transition.  The method to be used is a  theoretical/computational approach
              which starts with  electronic states corresponding to the well-localized limit.
               Using these states as a basis, one then computes the states  as lattice
              spacing decreases.  Those states and the energy  spectrum are then analyzed by
              comparing various measures of  the degree of delocalization for systems with
              and without  long-range interactions.  The research will investigate such 
              questions as the effect of system size on the results, as  well as that of
              dimensionality, density of sites, strength  of the disorder, and the effect of
              boundary conditions.  ***
