Title       : AB = 0 Conductor Insulator Transition in Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9803440

Award Number: 9803440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myriam P. Sarachik sarachik@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergey Kravchenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9803440 
              Kravchenko    This  experimental research project focuses on the properties  of
               the  recently discovered metallic, rather than insulating, ground  state of
              the two dimensional electron gas in zero magnetic field.  The unexpected
              discovery of a metallic ground state, contrary  to  a  long-standing 
              prediction  of  an  insulator  by  localization  theory,  was made by the PI in
              resistivity measurements  on  high  mobility  silicon MOSFET's. This project
              will subject  the  newly  discovered  state  to  more  detailied  studies, 
              including   the  magnetic   field,   temperature,  mobility,  and 
              carrier-density  dependences of the conducting ground state. Measurements will 
              be  made on MOSFET's and on GeSi heterostructure devices. Portions of  the 
              measurements  will be made at the NSF-supported  Microkelvin  Facility  at  the
              University of Florida. The work is expected  to  improve  understanding of the
              ground state properties of the  2-D  electron  gas,  in  dilute systems with
              high  mobility  and  weak  disorder.  This  experimental  research project 
              will  involve  a  graduate  student researcher who will receive excellent 
              training  at  both  laboratory locations, beneficial to a future career  in 
              industry, government or academia.  %%%  This experimental research project is
              focuses on the properties  of a two-dimensional electron system, as exists in
              the surface  layer of a standard microelectronics device, the silicon MOSFET 
              (Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor). This device  exhibits
              conduction under the control of the gate electrode,  which, when biased
              positively, draws electrons to the surface  region, where they carry a current
              between the source and drain  electrodes. In high mobility MOSFET structures,
              the electrons,  when the gate is positive, exist in a well defined region,
              which  is planar or two dimensional. The PI's in the project have  recently
              discovered an unexpected property of  such a  "two  dimensional electron gas"
              in zero magnetic field and at  sufficiently low temperature.  The unexpected
              discovery is of a  metallic or conducting state, even at extremely low
              temperature.  It had previously been thought, due to unavoidable fluctuations 
              in the electric potential  in the planar region, and based on a  long-standing
              theoretical prediction of  "localization" of the  electrons, that the lowest
              temperature state would be an  insulator. The recent discovery of the metallic
              "ground state"  was made by the PI in resistivity measurements on high mobility
               silicon MOSFET's. This project will subject the newly discovered  metallic 2-D
              ground state to more detailied studies, including  the magnetic field,
              temperature, mobility, and carrier-density  dependences of the conducting
              ground state. Measurements will be  made on MOSFET's and on GeSi
              heterostructure devices. Portions of  the research, which require measurements
              in the millidegree range  close to absolute zero temperature,  will be made at
              the NSF-  supported Microkelvin Facility at the University of Florida. The 
              work is expected to improve the understanding of the ground state  properties
              of the 2-D electron gas, in dilute systems with high  mobility and weak
              disorder. This experimental  research project  will involve a graduate student
              researcher who will receive  excellent training at both laboratory locations,
              beneficial to a  future career in industry, government or academia.  ***
