Title       : Vortex Systems in Shallow Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2001   
File        : a9803734

Award Number: 9803734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald O. Rockwell dorO@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Abstract      Proposal Number: CTS-9803734   Principal Investigator:  Rockwell
                 The objectives of this investigation are to gain a basic understanding of
              the vortex development, interaction and decay in shallow water.  Large-scale
              vortical motions in jets, wakes, and mixing-layers occur in shallow
              free-surface configurations are diverse such as an open channel with flood
              plains, an embankment along a river, a sudden expansion of a surface waterway,
              a reservoir or lake inlet, the confluence of channels or rivers, a coastal
              shelf zone, a bridge abutment, and an isolated blunt obstacle such as a pier,
              island or cluster of vegetation.  The development of these vortices has
              important consequences for thermal mixing, mixing of scalars, resonant
              oscillations of channels and harbors (seiches), overall performance
              characteristics of channel and river confluences, and the averaged discharge
              capacity of complex channels for flood routing.  Furthermore, in all of these
              configurations, the underlying bed may be subject to scour or erosion due to
              the unsteady and time-averaged bed loading induced by vortex motions.  In
              contrast  to vortex development and interaction in shear layers of large
              spanwise extent, very little is known of the vortex structure in shallow water
              bounded by a free-surface and a bed (solid) surface.  The first global,
              instantaneous representations of the two- and three-dimensional vortex
              structure will be attainable using recently developed techniques of
              high-image-density particle image velocimetry (HID-PIV).  This approach will
              yield the space-time patterns of instantaneous vorticity and related
              topological features central to understanding the vortex development,
              vortex-vortex interactions, and vortex decay.  Such an approach provides a
              physical basis for determining the classical turbulence statistics and mixing
              efficiency.  A better understanding of the connection between vortex structure
              and bed scour and erosion can lead to  new types of control techniques.  In the
              near-field o f vortex development, small perturbations will substantially alter
              the initially-formed vortices and the rapidly developing three-dimensional
              vortex structure.  In the far field, where the large-scale,
              quasi-two-dimensional vortical structures are expected to develop, control will
              take the form of spatial and temporal alterations of the bed friction and
              normal velocity at the bed; and localized generation of secondary
              concentrations of vorticity that may constructively or destructively interfere
              with the incident vortical structures.  2      1
