Title       : Glass Surfaces: Experimental Study and Computer Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9803884

Award Number: 9803884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlo G. Pantano pantano@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9803884  Pantano    The goal of this project is to gain a better understanding
               of the molecular structure of multicomponent silicate glass  surfaces, and
              especially, the effect of modifier-ions upon  the distribution and activity of
              surface adsorption sites.  A coordinated study of multicomponent silicate glass
               surfaces is proposed in which computer simulation and  experimental studies
              will be directed toward  characterization and prediction of adsorption
              isotherms in  terms of the atomic/molecular scale surface structure.  The 
              computer simulation of the atomic structure of the  silicate-based glasses is
              based on a novel approach to the  simulation of the vitreous silica surfaces. 
              It is assumed  that the surface of pure vitreous silica should be  hydrophobic.
               To achieve this in a computer simulation, it  is necessary to bring the
              structural relaxation time within  the time limits of computer simulation. 
              Whereas previous  computer simulations of glass have focused on the ideal 
              surface created by abrupt removal of periodic boundary  conditions with some
              annealing, this study will focus more  specifically on the annealing of
              surfaces in an effort to  simulate lower energy melt surfaces.  A novel
              experimental  approach will be used for determining the isotherms and  energies
              of adsorption on glass powders, glass fibers and  gels.  This approach is an
              extension of the comparison  method in which the gas-adsorption isotherm of an
              adsorbent  (with unknown adsorption characteristics) is plotted against  the
              standard isotherm (of a reference material).  The  isotherms will  be compared
              with computer simulated  isotherms to obtain (i) detailed descriptions of the
              atomic  structure of multicomponent glass surfaces, (ii) the local  electric
              fields associated with modifiers, non-bridging  oxygens or surface silanols,
              (iii) the spatial distributions  of modifying cations on the surface and (iv)
              the mechanism  of water (and other reactive specie) adsorption on these 
              heterogeneous surfaces. Static-SIM S, FTIR and related  spectroscopic
              techniques will be employed to further  validate surface composition effects
              and irreversible  chemisorption reactions.  %%%  The ability to accurately
              simulate the glass surface and  physisorption isotherms using computer methods
              provides a  powerful tool to predict the surface thermodynamic  properties for
              new glass compositions, and/or to interpret  the adsorption behavior of
              existing glasses and glass  products. The surface and surface chemistry of
              silica and  silicate glasses are fundamental to many of their properties 
              including strength, corrosion, polymer adhesion,  bioreactivity, and optical
              response. The project is being  carried-out through the collaboration of
              scientists  simulating and studying the theory of simple gas adsorption  on
              model amorphous surfaces with those whose focus is  characterization and
              processing of more complex glass  surfaces.  ***
