Title       : Messy Data Modeling and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9803273

Award Number: 9803273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Minge Xie mxie@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS 9803273  PI:              Minge Xie  Institution:    
              Rutgers University  Project:         Messy Data Modeling and Related Topics   
              Abstract:    The main objective of this research is to investigate a number of 
               problems arising from dealing with messy data sets that occurred in   many
              disciplines of science. The data studied in this research violate  
              conventional assumptions, such as independence, homogeneity, among   others,
              which are otherwise adopted under more standard settings.   Six specific topics
              are presented; each corresponds to at least one   violation of conventional
              assumptions, and a messy data set may have   one or more of these types of
              violations. According to their origins   from two different motivating data
              sets, two of the six topics address   problems on group testing scheme
              (Dorfman, 1943) and its variants,   including issues on modeling false
              negatives and relaxing the   assumption of independence on individuals. The
              rest of the topics   investigate practical and theoretical issues related to
              modeling   batch correlated regression data and develop new models and methods 
               for heterogeneous observations. These developments will not only   solve the
              specific type of problems, but also stimulate new   researches to develop more
              general methodologies.    This research develops statistical methodologies,
              models, and related   theories to address issues arising from modeling and
              analysis of messy   data, which can be found in many disciplines of the
              sciences, including  life science, environmental science, social science,
              industry and   economics. A common feature of these messy data is that they  
              all violate some conventional model assumptions, which otherwise are   adopted
              under more standard settings. Accurate modeling of messy data   can eliminate
              irrelevant information and provide better understanding   of underlying
              mechanisms; ultimately benefiting prediction and decision   making. Although
              tremendous progress has been made in development of   both sophisticated
              statistical methodologies and elegant mathematical   theories in the past half
              century, many important problems in modeling   and analysis of messy data have
              yet to be tackled, both from practical   and theoretical viewpoints. This
              research investigates several such   problems. Although the models and
              methodologies are tailored to   specific problems in the Pharmaceutical
              industry and environmental   science, these developments will not only solve
              the specific type of   problems, but also stimulate new researches to develop
              more general   methodologies.
