Title       : Bayes and Empirical Bayes Model Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9803756

Award Number: 9803756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. George   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS 9803756  PI:              Edward I. George  Institution:  
                University of Texas   Project:         Bayes and Empirical Bayes Model
              Selection    Abstract:    Bayes and empirical Bayes approaches for model
              selection are studied,   developed and enhanced for a variety of different
              settings.  First of  all, theoretical frequentist risk properties of recently
              discovered  empirical Bayes selection criteria are established for the
              canonical  linear model setting.   For graphical model selection, connections 
              between frequentist and Bayesian methods are investigated and used  to motivate
              new empirical Bayes methods.  For wavelet representations,  robust empirical
              Bayes selection procedures are developed which  accommodate heavy tailed noise
              distributions.  For Bayesian CART  modeling, new families of structured
              hierarchical priors are developed.  To facilitate and enhance model search, new
              MCMC algorithms are  developed which move across sets of models rather than
              single models.  These algorithms use new transition kernel steps, such as 
              transplantation, which can rapidly traverse the kinds of multimodal   model
              posterior distributions that arise in this context.  These  algorithms also
              incorporate stochastic heating and cooling to further  increase movement.   
              This research ultimately concerns the development of statistical  methods for
              discovering  systematic structure in large multi-variable  data sets. This
              general problem is of substantial importance because  of the explosive growth
              in the technology to collect and analyze such  data.  Indeed, such large data
              sets occur naturally in federal  strategic areas of national concern including
              telecommunications,  biotechnology, and climatology.  A standard statistical
              approach in  such settings is to search for "promising" statistical models
              within  some prespecified, large, flexible class of potential models.  Once 
              found, the challenge is to estimate the mod el and draw meaningful  inference. 
              These tasks can be especially difficult when the class of  potential models is
              huge, as is typically the case the number of  variables is large.  The main
              thrust of this work will be to develop  new methods to confront these
              challenges and broaden the scope of the   statistical approach.
