Title       : Control and Stabilization of Elastic Systems: Anisotropic Elasticity and Other
               Coupled Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9803547

Award Number: 9803547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Horn horn@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803547
Horn

Questions addressed in this proposal include, firstly, the
              uniform stability 
of an anisotropic system of elasticity.  Recent results by
              Alabau and 
Komornik have shown that such a system is uniformly stable if the
              domain 
is a sphere.  If the system is isotropic, the PI has obtained uniform
              stability 
for more general domains.  Thus, the goal is to obtain the best of
              both:  
Uniform stability of an anisotropic system on a more general domain.
              
Techniques involved in the proof include sharp traces regularity estimates,
              
obtained through the use of microlocal analysis.  Of particular interest is
              
the need for unique continuation for the anisotropic system.  Secondly,
              
exact controllability results even under the assumption that the system is
              
isotropic are problematic. While a few results exist, in most cases the
              
proofs are not accessible beyond a specialized audience or the geometric
              
restrictions are extremely stringent.  An approach based on the use of
              
Carleman type estimates, which allow higher order coupling terms to be
              
considered, is considered for both Dirichlet or Neumann boundary
              
conditions.  Finally, further applications of sharp trace regularity results
              
are seen in the case of cylindrical shells.  A particular question of
              interest 
is whether the stability properties are robust with respect to the
              thickness 
of the shell.

Exact controllability, i.e., the ability to drive
              a system to a desired state, is 
an important question arising in engineering.
              Random or uncontrolled 
vibrations which may occur can lead to serious
              consequences.  From 
witnesses to the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge to
              a businessman 
bothered by distortion on his cellular phone, almost everyone
              has 
experienced the effects of a lack of control.  If a system is uniformly
              
stable, any undesired vibrations can be damped out through an appropriate
              
choice of input, e.g., through a direct force or torque along the boundary
              
of the object.  Investigations in this project focus on the theoretical
              aspects 
of control when an elastic body is assumed to be composed of more
              than 
one material or is nonuniform.

