Title       : Investigations into Set Theory and Descriptive Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9803126

Award Number: 9803126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew D. Foreman mforeman@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of two parts.  The first involves continuing
              investigations into combinatorial set theory. This focuses on the use of strong
              ideals and generic embeddings to prove reflection properties and other
              combinatorial consequences.  These are wide ranging, from stationary set
              reflection at singular cardinals to infinitary Ramsey theory. The tools include
              methods of forcing, the PCF theory and large cardinals.  The second is the use
              of descriptive set theory to provide new invariants for studying objects of
              interest to ergodic theory.  The main thrust is to be able to classify the
              complexity of various classes of transformations with the hope of being able to
              distinguish between previously indistinguishable classes (e.g one may be Borel
              and the other true analytic.) An example of an important problem that may yield
              to such a technique is to show that there is an ergodic, finite entropy,
              measure preserving transformation that is not isomorphic to a smooth measure
              preserving transformation on a compact manifold. 

This work is in the
              Foundations of Mathematics:  how mathematics fits together and why it works. 
              These studies often involve consideration of problems that are not solvable by
              the usual assumptions of mathematics:  The Zermelo-Frankel Axioms with the
              Axiom of Choice.  Methods to be used imclude generic large cardinals, or
              symmetries of the mathematical universe that reveal powerful regularities that
              often solve intractable problems.  Considerations arising from studies of the
              foundations of mathematics have led to classifications of problems based on
              their inherent complexity.  These measures of complexity, in turn, can be
              applied to natural problems in dynamical systems and ergodic theory, as will be
              pursued in this project.


