Title       : Pattern Formation in Thin-Film Ferromagnets and in Spinodal Decomposition of
               Polymer Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9803389

Award Number: 9803389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66007              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Sideris sideris@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felix Otto  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The planned work investigates the predictive power of two 
simple continuum
              models in condensed matter physics. Do the
models predict the formation of
              certain spatial pattern in an
order parameter, patterns which are
              experimentally observed 
in special regimes?  The two considered models are
              
a) the micromagnetic model and b) a model for quasi-stationary 
flow of a
              mixture of two incompressible fluids of
different viscosity, a flow driven by
              slowly changing forces on each
component.  In case of model a), the objective
              is to identify a
regime of the physical parameters in which the model
              reproduces 
the characteristic domain and wall pattern 
of the magnetization
              which is observed in a ferromagnet 
with a thin film geometry.  In case of
              model b), the objective 
is to inquire if it explains the creation and
              self-similar 
coarsening of sponge-like pattern, which are formed by 
the
              concentration of the polymer phase during spinodal decomposition
of a mixture
              of polymer and water.  Mathematically speaking, 
model a) comes in the form of
              a non-convex, non-local minimization problem 
in the magnetization.  Model b)
              comes in the form of a partial 
differential equation of gradient flux type,
              which evolves the 
polymer concentration in time.  For model a), the
              mathematical goal is to 
characterize variational limits of minimizers in the
              targeted 
parameter limit. Rigorous proofs will be given. 
Model b) actually
              is a modification of the model proposed by
the experimentalists. The goal is
              to show that the modification
is necessary to reproduce their observations at
              least qualitatively.
A combination of asymptotic analysis and numerical
              simulation will
be employed.

Modeling certain phenomena is the key to
              control them - and to make
use of them. A good model is both simple and of
              high predictive power.
Models in sciences and engineering usually are cast in
              mathematical language,
and making prediction with the model then amounts to
              solving a mathematical problem.
The goal of this work is to use modern
              mathematics for two specific
models in order to assess the quality of a
              model's predictions and
to improve the models.  The first model describes
              
the behavior of magnetic thin films such as coatings in magnetic recording
              media.
The goal is a better understanding of the size and shape of
              micromagnetization 
patterns.  This is a major factor in the storage capacity
              of such media.  
The second model describes the behavior of polymer-water
              mixtures over time. 
Such mixtures are used in polymer processing and are
              ubiquitous in 
biochemistry.  The goal is to understand the patterns that
              often 
form during the polymer concentration process. The new tool at our
              disposal 
is a powerful computer, which allows to solve the mathematical
              problem 
behind the model numerically. Implementing a mathematical problem on
              the 
computer is delicate and requires a good theoretical understanding of the
              
problem. Modern tools in mathematical analysis have become indispensible
              
for this task and will be used in conjunction with numerical calculations
              
for the planned work. 
  

