Title       : Summer Program in Solid State Chemistry for Undergraduate Students and College
               Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a9803995

Award Number: 9803995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Thompson met@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Kaner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Sailor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9803995  Thompson    This summer program in solid state chemistry for
              undergraduate  students and college faculty will provide an interdisciplinary 
              forum for learning about recent advances in the area of solid-  state chemistry
              which will include the impact of materials  synthesis, development and
              application, and direct research  experience in selected solid-state chemical
              areas.  Integrating  the concepts and techniques of solid-state chemistry with
              the  well established and full curriculum of chemistry based upon  molecular
              concepts will continue to be a goal of the solid-state  chemistry summer
              program.  Selected students and teachers will be  offered opportunities to
              interact with internationally known  solid state chemists from various
              universities and industries  through a program of tutorials, site-visits, and
              summer research.  They will devote the summer period to tutorials on solid
              state  chemistry, and research on individual projects will be conducted  by the
              participants in university and industrial laboratories  across the U.S.  The
              results of these efforts will be presented  by each participant in a final
              symposium.  %%%  The scope and importance of solid-state chemistry is
              increasingly  recognized among students, university faculty and industrial 
              scientists not only because of the discovery of new classes of  materials of
              high technological relevance, but also because of a  deeper fundamental
              understanding of the diverse properties of  solids that is made possible by the
              availability modern  techniques.  Contributions to solid-state chemistry are
              now made  by researchers active in multidisciplinary areas of research that 
              include materials science and engineering, chemistry, chemical  engineering,
              physics, and mineralogy/geology.  ***
