Title       : Topology of Nonisolated Singularities and the Geometry of Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9803467

Award Number: 9803467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79339              (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Damon jndamon@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803467  Damon       Professor Damon's research will apply infinitesimal methods
              from  singularity theory (originally introduced by Mather) to investigate  the
              topological structure of a general class of highly nonisolated  singularities
              arising as nonlinear sections of varieties.  This class  includes discriminants
              of mappings, bifurcation sets, nonlinear  arrangements of hypersurfaces, etc. 
              He will use analogues of Morse  singularities for sections of varieties to
              derive general algebraic  formulae for certain fundamental topological
              invariants.  He will also  apply these ideas involving sections of varieties to
              understand the  geometry of functions using the notion of "relative critical
              sets,"  which extend the notion of ridges and "cores" used in computer 
              imaging.  He will combine these geometric techniques with other 
              singularity-theoretic methods developed for determining generic  properties of
              solutions to partial differential equations.  Together  they will be applied to
              "pixel intensity functions" representing  medical images.  In conjunction with
              Gaussian blurring or nonlinear  blurring techniques, they will associate
              certain geometric structures  that can be used for addressing various questions
              in medical imaging.       The first part of Professor Damon's research project
              will concern  qualitative properties of spaces defined as the set of solutions
              of  specific types of systems of nonlinear equations.  The specific form  of
              the equations will allow the investigator to use methods from the  field of
              mathematics called singularity theory.  Specifically, this  allows the analysis
              of the set of solutions by perturbing the  equations and reducing to the
              analysis of certain basic cases.  The  total contributions from the basic cases
              can be determined  algebraically, yielding a qualitative understanding of the
              structure  of the set of solutions.  Second, such systems of equations will be 
              specifically applied to analyze medical images.  They allow one to  associate
              to a medical image a g eometric structure, which captures  essential features
              of the image.  The geometric structure is defined  using systems of equations
              of the above type, and it even allows one   first to remove "noise" from the
              image by applying appropriate filters.  The basic properties of the geometric
              structure obtained from the  first part will allow it to be used to address
              several questions in  medical imaging.  ***
