Title       : Discriminant Analysis of Hyperspectral Data for Bio Species Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9803063

Award Number: 9803063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bin Yu binyu@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,9216,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bin Yu
DMS 9803063

Hyperspectral data consist of intensity readings of
              hundreds of bands from ground or airborne spectrometers.  The proposed research
              is to identify forest species by means of  (1) hyperspectral data measured
              directly from above forest canopies in the field, and (2) hyperspectral data
              from airborne instruments based on the understanding from part (1).  This
              research is motivated by the belief that the rich amount of spectral
              information contained in hyperspectral data should improve the level of
              discrimination of forest species and by the desire for a relatively simple
              method that can handle the large number of spectral bands in hyperspectral data
              while tolerant of spectral noise.  Data reduction will be carried out via
              nonparametric techniques such as spline fitting and penalized discriminant
              analysis (PDA) for interpretation and classification purposes. Model selection
              criteria derived from the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle will be
              investigated as both general model selection tools and criteria for spline
              knots selection and band selection for data reduction based on curve data. 
              Spatial PDA will be developed to classify hyperspectral images from airborne
              spectrometers to take into account the spatial dependence of pixels in the
              image.
 
Correct recognition of forest species is important in natural
              resource management, environmental protection, biodiversity and wildlife
              studies.  Conventionally reliable methods for tree species recognition depend
              mainly on inventory in the field or on interpretation of large-scale aerial
              photographs.  The use of these methods is frequently limited by cost and time
              and not applicable to large areas.  Digital remote sensing has been used to
              identify forest species of large areas, but two problems are encountered:
              different tree species often have similar spectral characteristics partly due
              to the lack of high spectral resolution and lack of large number of spectral
              bands; and the same tree species may have distinct spectral properties due to
              illumination conditions on which optical remote sensing is based.

