Title       : Curvature and Metric Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9803171

Award Number: 9803171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Cheeger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS-9803171  Principal Investigator:  Jeff Cheeger     
              The main thrust of this project is to study the analytic, geometric  and
              topological properties of various classes of metric measure  spaces, which
              while typically much more singular than smooth  riemannian manifolds, have
              enough good properties to give rise to rich  and interesting theories. 
              Specifically, we consider measured  Gromov-Haudorff limits of (possibly
              collapsing) sequences of  riemannian manifolds with a definite lower (or two
              sided) Ricci  curvature bound (including Einstein manifolds), corresponding
              limits  of manifolds with a definite two sided sectional curvature bound and 
              metric measure spaces (possibly fractal in nature) which satisfy a  doubling
              condition on the measure and a Poincar'e inequality. A  central concern is that
              of proving ``partial regularity theorems''.  Such theorems assert that the
              underlying space is regular (in a  suitable sense) off a set which is of
              measure zero or even of some  definite positive codimension.    Throughout
              mathematics and physics one finds a tension between the  notions of
              ``regularity'' and ``singularity''.  For instance, a  ``typical'' object (one
              which is chosen completely at random) will,  with high probability, be very
              irregular (or even singular).  On the  other hand, the most fundamental
              geometric shapes, say that of round  sphere, exhibit symmetry, homgeneiety, and
              smoothness.  In any event, in  many (if not most) problems of interest,
              singularities are simply  ``there'' and cannot be avoided (e.g. ``black
              holes'').  In such  cases, in becomes important to study the extent and
              structure of the  singularities.  This is precisely the focus of our project. 
              We  consider the problem for some very general but extremly natural  classes of
              geometric objects.
