Title       : Disordered and Lower Dimensional Porous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9633798

Award Number: 9633798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1760865            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Pinnavaia pinnavai@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is made in the Office of Special Projects of the Chemistry   Division
              for continuing support of the collaborative research of Drs.   Pinnavaia,
              Kanatzidas, Billinge, Mahanti and Thorpe at Michigan State   University. Also
              participating is Dr. Stuart Solin of the NEC Research   Institute. The research
              deals broadly with chemical, physical and   computational aspects of ordered
              and lower dimensional nanoporous   materials based on oxides and chalcogenides.
              Specific research elements   that will be investigated are the synthesis of new
              metal oxide  (silica,   zirconia and titania) molecular sieves by self-assembly
              on neutral amine   or polyethylene oxide surfactant templates; synthesis by
              surfactant   templating, of new porous chalcogenide phases based on the
              pillaring of   lamelear metal sulfides and selenides; experimental X-ray
              diffraction and   computational studies of disorder and diffusion in open
              framework   mesostructures; studies of network stiffness by c-axis X-ray
              diffraction   and diffusion by inelastic neutron scattering of nanoporous
              silicate   networks; and, the synthesis and characterization of magnetic
              transition   metal layered double hydroxides. The synthetic studies of the
              metal   oxides will lead to molecular sieves with controlled phases and  
              morphologies ranging from hexagonal or cubic to worm-like channel motifs.   The
              chalcogenide studies directed towards the synthesis of layered metal  
              chalcogenide phases with  metal cluster  pillars will provide new  
              semiconducting catalysts with the shape selectivity of zeolites.  Nanoporous
              materials with pore sizes in the 1.0-10 nm range offer   exciting opportunities
              for the rational design of adsorbents and   catalysts for applications in
              environmental remediation, molecular   separations and a variety of industrial
              processes based on large molecule   transformations. Semiconducting nanoporous
              structures hold great promise   for the fabrication of sensors, organic
              -inorganic hybrid materials and   solid state devices. The properties and
              performance of these nanoporous   materials are dominated by  long and short
              range disorder and the   dimensionality of the pore space. This combined
              experimental and   computational study will help elucidate the fundamental
              chemistry and   physics of these complex materials.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
