Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9633320

Award Number: 9633320
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca L. Gomez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, NM  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This two year fellowship for postdoctoral study will allow Dr. Rebecca Gomez to
              obtain training in linguistics at the University of Arizona.   Her research
              centers around structural cues in early language acquisition.  Research on
              language acquisition suggests that infants become sensitive to structural cues
              in language long before they begin using language referentially.  Knowledge of
              structural information in language might also support higher level processing
              such as that involved in language comprehension.  One problem with much of the
              existing work on this topic is that it focuses on infant's and children's
              sensitivity to structure in language, without addressing how they acquire that
              sensitivity.  Because of the considerable redundancy in natural language, it is
              often difficult to determine what factor or factors was responsible for
              infants' discriminations.  An approach that has been used to circumvent these
              problems with older learners capitalizes on the use of artificial languages,
              thus enabling more precise control over the language learning environment than
              is found in natural language studies.  The objective of this research,
              therefore, is to study structural cues in early language acquisition using
              artificial languages.  The extension of the use of artificial languages to
              infants is of potentially great importance to theories of language acquisition.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
