Title       : Dynamics and Microphysics of Narrow Cold-Frontal Rainbands as Investigated with
               a Three-Dimensional Cloud Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9633424

Award Number: 9633424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pao-Kuan Wang pao@windy.meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Schlesinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633424  Wang        The narrow cold frontal rainband (NCFR) is one of several
              types of  mesoscale rainbands observed in mid-latitude cyclones.  Previous
              studies have  shown that NCFRs have the potential to produce very heavy rains
              and high winds.          The Principal Investigators will utilize an advanced
              numerical mesoscale  weather model to simulate the dynamics and microphysics of
               NCFR.  Imbedded  along the synoptic-scale parent front, NCFR's are dominated
              by well-marked  mesoscale to microscale structure with quasi-periodically
              spaced precipitation cores  separated by gaps containing little or no rain. 
              Previous NCFR studies have shown  that riming of snow crystals is highly
              important to graupel growth aloft and thus to  surface rainfall.  The numerical
              model is configured to simulate line convection and  includes a three-class ice
              microphysics parameterization.  Initial parameters of main  interest will be
              mid- to upper-level environmental wind shear and the length of  mesoscale waves
              perturbing the leading edge of the cold air.  The choice of these  two
              parameters is motivated by recent observational evidence that upper wind shear 
              affects graupel growth in postfrontal snowbands and that strong positive
              correlations  exist among the depth of NCFR precipitation cores, their radar
              reflectivity and the  separation between them.        If successful, this
              research will increase our understanding of the fundamental  physics of these
              systems which are capable of producing severe weather.  This may   eventually
              lead to better predictions.    ***
