Title       : Ground Based Infrared Measurements in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9633041

Award Number: 9633041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Murcray murcray@ram.phys.du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Blatherwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Infrared observations of the atmosphere from to sites in the Arctic are
              proposed:  Fairbanks, Alaska and Eureka, NWT, Canada.  The instrument at
              Fairbanks will be a very high spectral resolution solar absorption
              spectrometer.  This instrument covers the range 2.5 to 15 (m.  At least 30
              chemical compounds have absorptions in the instrument bandpass.  This permits
              the derivation of total atmospheric quantities of those gases. The very high
              spectral resolution permits recovery of altitude profile information for at
              least half a dozen gases, including ozone, HCI, HF, and N2O.  This information
              will be used to study stratospheric chemistry and dynamics, and will be
              compared with data from McMurdo Station, Antarctic and other northern
              hemisphere sites.  Fairbanks is usually outside of the stratospheric polar
              vortex, but is in the area where maximum leakage of vortex air occurs.  This
              allows the study of filaments of materials with different temperature,
              sunlight, and chemical conditioning.    The Eureka, NWT, Canada (80(N, 86(W)
              instrument is a medium spectral resolution system designed to measure the
              infrared thermal emission of the atmosphere.  This instrument covers 6 to 15(m.
               The atmosphere is very cold, and the signal is small, but measurements can be
              made in the absence of sunlight.  Eureka is usually on the edge of the polar
              vortex, allowing observations in and out of vortex conditions within a few
              days.  The amounts of several gases can be determined from the observations,
              particularly HNO3, which is directly involved in the formation of polar
              stratospheric clouds (PSC) and the chemical processing that occurs in ozone
              destroying conditions. The spectral data also relate directly to the greenhouse
              effect, and will be used to study the effect of chemistry, clouds, and snow on
              the radiation balance.    Both instruments will be used for the study of
              chemical processes that occur in the Arctic during the winter.  The multiyear
              data set will be important in the study of seasonal cycles, and in  the study
              of global change.
