Title       : The Interactions Between Aluminum and Biogenic Silica in Marine Sediments: An
               Experimental Flow-Through Reactor Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9633351

Award Number: 9633351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe Van Cappellen pvc@aqchem.eas.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633351  Van Cappellen    Aluminum plays a major role in the benthic
              regeneration of nutrient  silicic acid and the preservation of biogenic opal in
              the  sedimentary record.  Based on results of a previous study of  sediments
              from the Indian sector of the Southern Ocean, potential  mechanisms by which Al
              intervenes in the early diagenesis of silica  include: (1) primary uptake of Al
              by biosiliceous skeletons during  biomineralization, (2) secondary uptake of Al
              by biosiliceous  microfossils at the seafloor, (3) readjustment of the Al/Si
              ratio  of the surface layers of biosiliceous debris during burial, and (4) 
              simultaneous precipitation of pore water silica and aluminum.  This  study will
              test the proposed Al-Si interaction mechanisms and, in  doing so, build a
              quantitative basis for predicting their relative  importance in different
              marine depositional environments. Stirred  flow-through reactors will be used
              in the experiments, because they  allow the measurement of reaction kinetics
              under reproducible,  steady-state conditions. The effect of primary Al uptake
              during  biosilicification will be studied by measuring the steady state  rates
              of silicic acid production from high-Al and low-Al samples of  pure diatom
              cultures. The kinetics will be determined as a function  of the degree of
              saturation, temperature, pH and Al content of the  silica frustules. The early
              diagenetic interactions between silica  and soluble Al will be studied by
              supplying dissolved Al via the  input solution, or by adding a solid source of
              reactive Al to  biogenic silica suspended in the reactor. In the latter 
              experiments, a given amount of biogenic silica will be mixed with  increasing
              amounts of the solid Al source. This will mimic the  increased dilution of
              biogenic silica by detrital material in  marine sediments. The experimental
              results will allow to examine  the hypothesis that the asymptotic pore water
              silica level in  detrital-rich sediments represents a kinetic steady state
              between  production of silicic acid  by biogenic silica dissolution and 
              consumption by precipitation of authigenic Al-Si phases.  The Al/Si 
              stoichiometry of the authigenic precipitates will be obtained from  the
              relative rates of Al precipitation and silica reprecipitation  in the reactor
              experiments. Batch adsorption experiments will also  be used to constrain the
              levels of Al sorption at which secondary  Al uptake by biosiliceous surfaces
              switches from adsorption to the  formation of precipitates. Scanning electron
              microscopy and solid  state chemical analyses will complement the reactor-based
               experiments.
