Title       : Theory of Ultrahigh Rydberg States of Molecules and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9633671

Award Number: 9633671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271750             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Farrelly david@habanero.chem.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Professor David Farrelly of Utah State University is being supported by   the 
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program.   The focus of this   research
              is to investigate ultrahigh molecular Rydberg states that are   typically
              excited in zero-electron kinetic-energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy.   These Rydberg
              states might also be used to probe the dynamics of   superfluid clusters
              containing impurity ions from seeding in beam   experiments. Such states lie at
              the correspondence principle limit of   quantum mechanics.  This research  will
              develop semiclassical theories to   describe the coupling between molecular
              core  and Rydberg electronic   degrees of freedom.  New adiabatic
              approximations will be developed to   describe the dynamics of such systems as
              well as the interactions with   external electric and or magnetic fields using
              complex coordinate   methods.     Studies of atoms and molecules in unusual
              situations, are of critical   importance to the advancement of the chemical and
              physical sciences.  The   superfluid state in particular continues to have an
              enormous impact on   technology and communications. Recently emphasis has been
              directed to   `nanotechnology` in which devices are  constructed that exploit
              the fact   that the physics of very small structures can  be dominated by
              quantum   effects not visible in the bulk. This research will  advance the  
              understanding of such single (or few) electron spectroscopies in the    context
              of elucidating the superfluid transition in finite size samples.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
