Title       : Programming-Language Structures for Representing and Optimizing Operating-System
               Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9633438

Award Number: 9633438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Sussman gjs@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olin Shivers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project seeks to demonstrate that fundamental  operating system
              services and resources can and should be  represented directly in the natural
              linguistic structures of  advanced programming languages. A component of this
              effort is to  develop aggressive optimisation strategies making this modelling 
              practical and efficient.    The central question underlying the research is:
              how can the  benefits of advanced programming languages be brought to bear 
              upon current systems-programming practice?  Modern computer  applications are
              most commonly written in C, a language well-  known for its lack of support for
              writing modular, robust  programs.  C has no module system, allows dangerous
              "casting" of  data types, violates abstraction barriers, provides no garbage- 
              collection support for automatic storage management, has no  concurrency
              operators, and generally exposes the details of the  underlying machine to the
              programmer. It is not defined in terms  of a mathematically sound underlying
              semantics. As a result,  modern software is fragile, error-prone, and difficult
              to build,  maintain or reuse.    Modern programming languages, such as the ML
              family of languages,  provide much more support to the programmer for writing
              large,  robust programs. Unfortunately, these languages are not yet  practical
              tools for implementing real-world systems software.  In  practice, programs
              written in these languages are slow, use large  amounts of memory, and have
              awkward interfaces to OS services.  Providing access from programs written in
              these languages to the  machine resources, in ways that are natural to the
              language,  should help to address these shortcomings.  This research enables 
              new optimisations and makes available new models to the  programmer, allowing
              systems programs to be written that exploit  the expressive power of advanced
              programming languages. A service  kernel provides access to the underlying
              machine resources in a  way that is tightly integrated, both in architecture
              and in  implem entation, with advanced languages. The research issue is to 
              investigate the architecture of an operating system that is  symbiotic, not
              with C,  but with a modern programming language,  and to develop technologies
              for exploiting the tight integration  of the OS and the compiler to provide
              efficient, high-level  services. The kernel is being developed in ML, on two
              hardware  platforms: a bare Intel PC system, and a wireless, mobile  "personal
              digital assistant" with limited on-board resources.  ***
