Title       : Nucleoid Visible vs. Non-Nucleoid Visible Bacterial Cells: A New Approach to
               Assessing in Situ Bacterioplankton Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9633712

Award Number: 9633712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry F. Sherr sherrb@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn B. Sherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   9633712       SHERR              Heterotrophic bacteria process a large
              share of primary       production in the sea, and are responsible for a
              significant       portion of respiration and remineralization in marine food   
                 webs. Elucidating the roles of bacteria is thus essential to      
              understanding the structure and functioning of marine       ecosystems,
              particularly with respect to the role of marine       biota in sequestering
              atmospheric carbon dioxide. A new       epifluorescence, DNA staining method
              has revealed that       bacterioplankton can be divided into two groups of
              cells:       those with, and those without, visible nucleoids (as      
              visualized by the method). Preliminary work suggests that       cells with
              visible nucleoids (NV cells) represent the       component of the
              bacterioplankton assemblage that includes       both currently metabolically
              active and recently active       cells. Cells without visible nucleoids
              (non-NV) appear to be       inactive/dormant; however under appropriate
              conditions such       cells can develop visible nucleoids, thus non-NV cells
              must       contain DNA. In coastal bacterioplankton assemblages,the      
              fraction of NV cells (20 ~ - 60%), and of cells separately       identified as
              metabolically active (6% - 40%, was more       variable than total bacterial
              abundance. The ability to       identify the currently active + recently active
              portion of       bacterioplankton on a routine basis may provide exciting new  
                  component can integrate the response of a bacterial       assemblage to
              environmental change over longer time scales       (days-weeks) than would the
              currently active fraction of the       assemblage (time scale of hours-days).
              In addition, the       ratio of currently active:NV cells is a potentially
              valuable       index of the growth state of NV bacteria. This project      
              represents a combined laboratory and field sampling program       to evaluate
              the implications of NV versus non-NV cells in       bacterioplankton 
              assemblages. Ideas to be examined include:       1) Non-NV cells can develop
              visible nucleoids by increasing       the amount of DNA/cell. 2) NV cells are
              subject to greater       grazing mortality compared to non-NV cells, which
              could       explain in part the persistence of inactive cells in      
              bacterioplankton. 3) The NV component of bacterioplankton       assemblages is
              more tightly coupled to indices of bottom-up       control (chlorophyll-a
              concentration, bacterial       productivity), and of top-down control
              (abundance of       nanoflagellates, rate of bacterivory) than is total      
              bacterial abundance in a coastal upwelling system. The       results of this
              research project should yield important new       insights concerning how
              marine bacterioplankton respond to       factors controlling their growth and
              biomass in the sea.       ***
