Title       : Electrochemistry of Supramolecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9633434

Award Number: 9633434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446676             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel E. Kaifer akaifer@umiami.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics program of the Chemistry Division,  
              Professor Angel E. Kaifer of the University of Miami (Florida)  will   study
              the electrochemistry of supramolecular systems, especially   rotaxanes,
              dendrimers, and host-guest systems. This is a continuation of   previously
              funded work (CHE-9304262) which showed that electron transfer   reactions and
              proton transfer reactions can be used to switch certain   rotaxanes between
              conformers having different electronic absorption   spectra. The present
              project will involve investigation of the   thermodynamics and kinetics of
              electron transfer involving such   supramolecular architectures, the
              preparation of new rotaxane systems,   and continuation of fundamental
              investigations of binding, structure, and   intermolecular forces in host-guest
              systems.  The electron transfer   reactions are selected for special emphasis. 
              The project will include   work intended to lead to facile preparation of
              supported monolayers   containing preformed binding sites. The monolayers
              chosen for emphasis   are amine functionalized receptors on carboxylate
              terminated   self-assembled monolayers.  This project will prepare some of the
              groundwork for the use of certain   chemical compounds as `molecular switches,`
              molecules which respond in   some observable way to external stimuli such as
              light or electricity.    The work  may eventually be useful in nanotechnology,
              since it leads to   new materials with the potential for molecular level
              information storage   and processing.  Work with self-assembled monolayers may
              lead to   selective molecular sensors.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
