Title       : Physiological Ecology of Marine Cyanobacterial Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9633111

Award Number: 9633111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Palenik bpalenik@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralf Goericke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bianca Brahamsha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9633111  PALENIK  This project will use an integrated multi-investigator 
              approach to determine the extent and causes of  cyanobacterial biodiversity in
              the marine environment. The  project  hypothesis is that stratification in the
              oceans,  although often transient, has led to the development of a  limited
              number of physiologically and genetically distinct  and recognizable groups
              ("species") of cyanobacteria  specifically adapted to the high light, low
              nutrient mixed  layer and others adapted to the higher nutrient, low light 
              life below it. Even this simple scenario is much more  complex than the current
              oceanographic paradigm. There is  currently little knowledge of the spatial or
              temporal  variations in natural cyanobacterial diversity, and we can  only
              guess at the factors that may be driving it. The  importance this diversity may
              have in determining  oceanographic rate processes, such as in situ growth or 
              carbon fixation rates, is unknown, and its role cannot  really be addressed
              until we understand the extent and  patterns of cyanobacterial diversity. This
              project is the  first step in being able to assay the growth rates and 
              metabolic activities of individual physiological or genetic  types. Since
              similar genetic and physiological processes  probably also occur in other
              groups of phytoplankton, these  questions are of general significance to
              biological  oceanography.    This project will also begin to look at not just
              the number  of microbial "species" in an environment, but why that  number? The
              microbiota of the marine environment are coming  to be seen as remarkably
              diverse, and an understanding of  the processes underlying this diversity will
              best be gained  by examining the diversification of a related group of 
              microorganisms in detail in relationship to physiochemical  parameters. The
              marine environment is probably the best  place to begin to understand these
              questions because there  is also considerable experience in understanding the 
              physiochemical gradients surrounding the o rganisms. RNA  polymerase gene
              sequences from strains and bulk community  samples, flow cytometric analyses,
              pigment analyses,  antibody assays for motile Synechococcus and other strains, 
              strain isolation techniques, physiological studies on  nitrogen and light
              utilization, and physiochemical data will  be the initial set of tools we will
              bring to these problems,  with others under development. Three sites in the 
              oligotrophic boundary of the Southern California Bight will  be sampled at
              several depths for two consecutive years at  the same season to ensure the
              reproducibility of our  conclusions. A third cruise will focus on
              characterizing the  same sites at a different season in order to begin to 
              explore temporal variations in diversity. This focused  sampling effort will
              ensure a tractable approach to  understanding the importance of cyanobacterial
              diversity to  marine ecosystems.  ***
