Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Glasses and the Glass Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9633385

Award Number: 9633385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525100             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Klein klein@buphy.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey A. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Brower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1022,9165,9218,9263,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9633385  Klein, Gould and Brower  This is a new award which is funded jointly by
              the Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities/MPS, and the Divisions of 
              Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced  Scientific Computing. 
              An integrated theoretical and  computational investigation will be made of the
              structural  properties of fragile glass-forming liquids and the relation  of
              this structure to the mechanisms of relaxation.    Glasses have become an
              increasingly important class of  materials in several new technologies.  They
              possess  advantages such as light weight and ease of processing, but  suffer
              from degradation through creep, fatigue, and  embrittlement.  To understand
              these mechanisms, it is  necessary to understand the structure of glasses and
              how  they relax.  At present, experiments can provide information  about
              relaxation processes in glasses, but do not yield much  information about their
              structure or relation of this  structure to the relaxation mechanisms.  In
              contrast,  computer simulations can provide information about  structure, but
              only on relatively short time and length  scales.  Moreover, theoretical
              understanding of glasses is  in a relatively crude state.    In this research,
              a sequence of models will be studied  beginning with a mean-field model of a
              glass-forming liquid  and proceeding via various approximation methods to
              include  non-mean-field effects.  Several parallel computer  architectures will
              be used to extend the  size and the time  scale of the systems simulated.  The
              simulations will be  based on an efficient message passing molecular dynamics 
              program, and by more speculative methods based on Fourier  acceleration
              algorithms and on cellular automata models.    The results of the theoretical
              investigations and computer  simulations, in conjunction with ongoing
              laboratory  experiments at Boston University and other locations, will 
              facilitate an understanding of the relation between the  relaxation observed 
              experimentally in deeply supercooled  liqui ds and glasses and the existence of
              structures seen in  computer simulations.  Understanding of this relation will 
              make it possible to use the structure of glasses to predict  their temporal
              evolution.    The research will be done in collaboration with colleagues  at
              Boston University in the Departments of Physics and  Electrical, Computer and
              Systems Engineering, and the Center  for Computational Science.  In addition,
              colleagues in the  Physics Departments at Clark and Brandeis Universities, the 
              Center for Computational Materials at NIST, and at Thinking  Machines
              Corporation will participate.  Graduate students  will also participate through
              the NSF-sponsored Graduate  Research Training Program at the Center for
              Computational  Science at Boston University.  Computer platforms include 
              Boston University's 38-processor SGI Power Challenge array,  a work station
              cluster and several CAM-8 machines.  A  workstation cluster at Clark University
              and the NIST Cray  YMP will also be used.  %%%  This is a new award which is
              funded jointly by the Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities/MPS, and the
              Divisions of  Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced 
              Scientific Computing.  The research combines aspects of NSF  programs on
              Advanced Materials and Processing and on High  Performance Computing and
              Communications.  An integrated  theoretical and computational investigation
              will be made of  the structural properties of fragile glass-forming liquids 
              and the relation of this structure to the mechanisms of  relaxation.    Glasses
              have become an increasingly important class of  materials in several new
              technologies.  They possess  advantages such as light weight and ease of
              processing, but  suffer from degradation through creep, fatigue, and 
              embrittlement.  To understand these mechanisms, it is  necessary to understand
              the structure of glasses and how  they relax.  At present, experiments can
              provide information  about relaxation processes in glasses, but do not yield
              much  information about t heir structure or relation of this  structure to the
              relaxation mechanisms.  In contrast,  computer simulations can provide
              information about  structure, but only on relatively short time and length 
              scales.  Moreover, theoretical understanding of glasses is  in a relatively
              crude state.    The results of the theoretical investigations and computer 
              simulations, in conjunction with ongoing laboratory  experiments at Boston
              University and other locations, will  facilitate an understanding of the
              relation between the  relaxation observed  experimentally in deeply supercooled
               liquids and glasses and the existence of structures seen in  computer
              simulations.  Understanding of this relation will  make it possible to use the
              structure of glasses to predict  their temporal evolution.    The research will
              be done in collaboration with colleagues  at Boston University in the
              Departments of Physics and  Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, and
              the Center  for Computational Science.  In addition, colleagues in the  Physics
              Departments at Clark and Brandeis Universities, the  Center for Computational
              Materials at NIST, and at Thinking  Machines Corporation will participate. 
              Graduate students  will also participate through the NSF-sponsored Graduate 
              Research Training Program at the Center for Computational  Science at Boston
              University.  Computer platforms include  Boston University's 38-processor SGI
              Power Challenge array,  a work station cluster and several CAM-8 machines.  A 
              workstation cluster at Clark University and the NIST Cray  YMP will also be
              used.  ***
