Title       : Predicting Physical Disturbance in a Changing Environment: Field Test of a
               Biomechanical Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9633070

Award Number: 9633070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Denny mwdenny@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633070  Denny                                   Disturbance plays a central
              role in  non-equilibrium theories of community structure, in which  high
              species diversity and species coexistence are  attributed to processes of
              stochastic recruitment in a  heterogeneously perturbed, patchy environment. 
              The  disturbance regime of the rocky intertidal system offers  an advantage for
              study in that it is characterized by  chronic high intensity physical
              disturbance due primarily  to a single factor -- the hydrodynamic forces
              imposed by  wave action. This controlling nature of "wave exposure" is  one
              reason the intertidal zone serves as a model system in  experimental ecology.  
                          Dr. Denny's lab has recently been able to  combine the results of
              earlier work in wave statistics and  hydrodynamics with empirical measurements
              of the strength  of intertidal organisms in a quantitative, biomechanical 
              method that predicts physical disturbance as a function of  time and the
              "waviness" of the sea. Preliminary  applications of this approach have shown
              that its  predictions are reasonably accurate, but a rigorous test  of the
              approach has not been conducted, which is the  impetus for this project.       
                     Extensive field measurements will be  conducted of the parameters that
              serve as inputs into the  biomechanical approach, and these data will be used
              to  predict the week-to-week rate of disturbance of each of  six representative
              species of plants and animals at a  series of sites along the shore. These
              predictions will  then be compared to the rates of disturbance measured 
              empirically at these same sites. The goodness of fit  between prediction and
              empirical measurement can then be  calculated to provide evidence of the
              overall predictive  ability of the biomechanical approach.                     
                                                                  The  inexpensive
              instruments developed in these studies will make it possible for  intertidal
              ecologists to repeat the basic steps of this approach  (measuring  maximal wave
              height, measuring habitat-specific maximal water velocities), and  thereby
              should facilitate the use and testing of the biomechanical method at a  wide
              variety of sites.  If these tests of the biomechanical approach confirm its 
              ability to predict species-specific rates of disturbance, the method can be a 
              valuable tool for understanding the ecological consequences of both seasonal
              and  year-to-year variability in wave exposure, and for the prediction of how
              rates of  disturbance will change if large-scale climatic change causes
              longterm shifts in  the waviness of the ocean.
