Title       : Theoretical Studies of Main Group Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a9633480

Award Number: 9633480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Gordon mark@si.fi.ameslab.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Prof.  Mark
              Gordon of Iowa State University.  The research to be performed will  be a
              combination of theory and code development in quantum chemistry and  related
              areas and applications of modern quantum chemistry to problems in  main group
              organometallic chemistry.  The new developments in theory will  focus on two
              areas: (1) an extension of the effective fragment method for  solvation to any
              solvent, to excited states, and to include higher-order  intermolecular
              interactions, and (2) to extend the interface between  quantum chemistry and
              dynamics to facilitate the study of dynamics of  liquids and solvation
              dynamics.  One of the key applications areas  interfaces with these new theory
              developments, namely the study of the  influence of solvation on mechanisms in
              organometallic chemistry.  Among  the many mechanisms of interest are the
              nature of the ring opening in  cyclic organosilicon compounds, the effect of
              catalysts on reactions such  as the hydrosilation and bis-silylation reactions,
              and the nature of the  organometallic coupling reaction.  Other applications
              include a   broad-based  study of the chemistry of titanium and other Group IVB
              elements, and  quantitative studies of the thermochemistry of main group-
              transition   metal  bonding.  Although most chemical reactions occur in the
              presence of a solvent,   until very  recently, the vast majority of theoretical
              studies have been carried out   on  isolated molecules.  Even now, most current
              models that include the   effects  of solvents do not explicitly treat the
              individual solvent molecules and  therefore cannot determine the nature of the
              interactions between the  chemical system of interest and the solvent.  The
              Gordon group has  developed a new solvent model, the effective fragment
              potential model,   that  is designed to treat the solvent molecules explicitly.
               Currently, this  model is limited to the most ubiquitous solvent, water.  This
              model will  now be extended so that any solvent of interest in organometallic  
              chemistry  will be accessible.  The new method will be applied to study the
              effects   of  solvation on several important chemical reactions.  It is
              anticipated   that  these studies will provide some fundamental understanding
              of how these  reactions occur and ultimately provide some guidance on the
              design of new  products.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
