Title       : Highly Reduced Organometallics of the d- and f-Block Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9633579

Award Number: 9633579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Ellis ellis@chemsun.chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. John Ellis, Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota-Twin   Cities,
              is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Program of
              the Chemistry Division  to study highly reduced   organometallics of the early
              d- and f-block elements.  The two primary   themes are the use of arene radical
              anions as precursors to classes of   homo- and heteroleptic arene complexes and
              the search for new carbon   monoxide and related acceptor ligand complex
              chemistry of these elements.   Homoleptic arene complexes containing polycyclic
              arenes such as   naphthalene, anthracene and substituted versions thereof will
              be   investigated. Such species are expected to be quite labile and may  
              function as neutral or anionic `naked` atom reagents for the early   transition
              metals. Access to unknown or rare homoleptic anionic complexes   will be
              pursued through reactions of these and related arenemetallates   with ligands
              other than carbon monoxide, such as phosphanes, phosphites,   isocyanides,
              dienes, and alkynes. Highly reduced organometallics are   important to an
              understanding of the chemical and structural properties   of unusually
              electron-rich compounds of very electropositive elements,   and provide a means
              of studying the chemistry of these elements in   previously inaccessible or
              unknown oxidation states.   Some metals, especially zirconium and tantalum,
              form highly reactive and   useful reagents in the presence of organic ligands
              such as naphthalene (a   common ingredient in moth balls) and when they are in
              a highly reduced   state.  `Highly reduced` simply means that more electrons
              have been added   to these metal complexes than they would normally have, often
              giving them   an overall negative charge. This work addresses the synthesis of
              such   highly reduced complexes and the issues which control their reactivity  
              once they are formed.  These complexes may prove to be useful reagents in  
              inorganic, organometallic and organic synthesis.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
