Title       : Effect of Earthquakes on Urban Highway Infrastructure Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9633386

Award Number: 9633386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masanobu Shinozuka   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Petak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9633386  Shinosuka  Recent earthquakes have demonstrated that urban 
              infrastructure failures in general and highway systems  failures in particular
              can cause significant economic loss.  This project examines the effect of
              earthquakes on urban  highway infrastructure productivity by making use of a 
              multidisciplinary and integrative approach, combining  expertise in civil
              engineering, urban planning, economics,  and public policy.  Emphasis will be
              placed on filling the  gap that currently exists between traditional
              engineering  and socio-economic and policy issues studies.  The objective  of
              this project is to develop an integrated framework and  innovative
              methodologies for evaluating the economic  consequences of urban seismic risk
              and risk reduction from  the perspective of infrastructure systems performance
              and  productivity. The results can contribute to the long-term  goal of
              optimally enhancing the productivity of urban  highway transportation
              infrastructure exposed to significant  seismic hazard. While the methodologies
              developed will be  applicable to urban areas in general, a prototyping exercise
               will refine the general framework in the case of highway  transportation
              systems in Los Angeles. The prototype will  provide a foundation for evaluating
              the general framework in  which it will be embedded. In addition, the framework
              and  results from the prototyping exercise will guide the  development of
              experimental civil infrastructure curricula  at the University of Southern
              California intended to serve  as a model for multidisciplinary education and
              training of  students.***
