Title       : Numerical Algorithms for Sensitivity Estimation in Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9633326

Award Number: 9633326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Laub   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9139,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633326  Laub    Standard approaches to measuring the condition of various 
              problems in control theory, such as solving an algebraic   Riccati equation
              (ARE), compress all sensitivity information into  a single condition number. 
              Thus, a loss of information can occur  in situations in which this standard
              condition number does not  accurately reflect the actual sensitivity of a
              solution or  particular entries of a solution.  In this project we shall 
              investigate a new method that overcomes these and other common  deficiencies. 
              The new procedure measures the effects on the  solution of small random changes
              in the input data and, by  properly scaling the results, obtains condition
              estimates for  each entry of a computed solution. This approach, which is 
              referred to as small-sample statistical condition estimation  (SCE), applies to
              both linear and nonlinear problems.  In the  former case (for example, when
              solving a system of linear  equations or a linear least squares problem), an
              explicit Frechet  derivative of the computed quantity is available.  Thus the 
              method is especially efficient and, in fact, costs no more than  standard
              normwise or componentwise estimates. Even in the  nonlinear case (for example,
              solving AREs), considerable  efficiencies are gained when iterative improvement
              by, say,  Newton's method is available. SCE also has the advantage of 
              considerable flexibility.  For example, it easily accommodates  restrictions
              on, or structure associated with, allowable  perturbations. The method has a
              rigorous statistical theory  available for the probability of accuracy of the
              condition  estimates. Finally,it is emphasized that SCE lends itself readily 
              to straightforward implementation into many existing computer-  aided control
              system design software packages.  ***
