Title       : A Formal Approach for a Specification-Based Software Architecture of Real-Time
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9633536

Award Number: 9633536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Tsai tsai@eecs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Prasad Sistla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Real-time systems are becoming increasingly important to everyday  life.
              Examples include command and control systems, process  control systems,
              telecommunication systems, patient monitoring  systems, flight control systems,
              robotics, avionics systems, and  so on. With increasing computing power and
              high demand for  multimedia applications, larger and more complex real-time 
              systems are being continuously developed. However, the  development of
              real-time systems is difficult and takes longer  time than the development of a
              system without real-time  constraints, and a significant portion of the entire
              effort  remains devoted to the maintenance activities of the software  life
              cycle.    The concept of software architecture has recently emerged as a  new
              way to improve our ability to effectively construct large-  scale software
              systems. In spite of many attempts to develop  architecture specification
              languages, this area still lacks a  solid formal foundation. Without a solid
              foundation, it is  difficult to develop and apply rigorous analysis methods to 
              assure the correctness of real-time software systems as well as  to analyze the
              impacts of changes on various system properties  such as safety, consistency,
              and reliability.    This research seeks to develop a formal foundation for an 
              architecture specification language using the integration of  non-monotonic
              logic and temporal logic. The syntax of the  language is based on the concepts
              of object, frames  and  production rules. This allows developers to easily
              describe the  attributes and constraints of each software component, and also 
              the hierarchical relations among the software components in the  software
              architecture.    The goal is to localize changes to software components in the
              low-  level architecture specification and avoid modifying the high-  level
              architecture specification. The semantics of multiple  inheritance and
              exception handling will be established using a  non-monotonic logic. Based on
              the formal foundation of the  architec ture specification language, it is
              expected that new  possiblities will exist for analyzing software properties
              such as  liveness, safety, consistency, and temporal constraints. This 
              foundation is also expected to provide a basis for analyzing the  impact of
              changes to a real-time software system.  ***
