Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Socio-Political Development and Wetland
               Agriculture in West Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9633628

Award Number: 9633628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Schoenwetter james.schoenwetter@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. James Schoenwetter, Mr Glen Stuart will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to gain insight into
              prehistoric Middle American agricultural techniques and to examine the
              relationship between the development of large scale agriculture and the
              emergence of complex societies. Investigation in many areas of Middle and South
              America has revealed the presence of `raised field` complexes. These are
              located almost exclusively in low-lying poorly drained areas and consist of
              rectilinear arrangements of raised earth separated by linear canals. These
              appear to be a widespread form of wetland control and modern experiments to
              reconstruct such fields indicate that they are capable of sustaining intensive
              planting. However archaeologists do not understand just what crops were planted
              on such fields and have not developed robust analytic techniques to provide
              such information. Prior research has indicated the presence of extensive
              wetland agricultural systems in the Jalisco region of West Mexico. Through a
              program of field studies of these system's remnants and laboratory studies of
              radiocarbon, ceramics and pollen obtained during the course of fieldwork, Mr.
              Stuart will accomplish several goals. First he will gain insight into the
              relationship between wetland agricultural intensification and socio-political
              and economic development. Through study of fossil pollen he will elucidate the
              types of crops grown and how these may have changed through time. He will also
              develop a method to recognize the palynological signature of wetland
              agricultural systems.        Archaeologists wish to understand how complex
              societies and civilizations arise. Central to the integration of large numbers
              of people is some form of hierarchical control and it is unclear what processes
              led to the development of social inequality. One influential idea ties this to
              the development of irrigation systems which are both central to survival in
              arid and semi-arid environments and which require some kind of centralized
              management to distribute water, an essential limited resource. In many Middle
              American environments prehispanic states arose and because this process
              occurred in wetland environments where irrigation is not necessary, the
              irrigation hypothesis does not hold. Archaeologists however have noted other
              types of large field systems and wish to know whether these played a causative
              role. Mr Stuart's research will address this question.       This project is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and help to develop a methodological tool of great potential
              use. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
