Title       : Semantic Foundations for Composition and Interoperation of Open Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9633363

Award Number: 9633363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Meseguer meseguer@csl.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposed research is to develop a  semantic foundation for
              semantic composition and  interoperation of heterogeneous components of open
              systems.  Composition and interoperation occur at many levels  (requirements,
              specification, code, executables) and along  multiple dimensions
              (functionality, reliability, security,  availability). Relations among the
              various levels and  dimensions must be preserved.  Existing work on composition
               and interoperation has largely focused on syntactic  structure. It is
              essential to develop a semantic basis in  order to provide for safe, secure,
              and  meaningful  combinations. Semantic structuring of complex systems should 
              provide a firm basis for determining what parts are  interchangeable under
              given conditions, and to predict  effects of changes: of components on the
              whole, and of  system requirements on requirements for the parts. There is  a
              wide range of applications where such a semantic  foundation for interoperation
              can be of value. It is  especially important in applications that combine
              components  from diverse domains such as: data bases, spread sheets,  knowledge
              bases, multi-media, mobile-agents, control theory,  or event-based simulations.
                 Metalogical methods from the theory of general logics, and  associated
              techniques of mappings in and across formalisms,  are used to achieve
              formalism-independent semantics for  system composition. This supports the
              multidimensionality of  a system's levels of description and formalization. 
              Techniques from the theory of Open Mechanized Reasoning  Systems (OMRS) as well
              as work on the formal semantics of  actor systems are used to study
              interoperation aspects.  Reflective techniques, particularly reflective logics
              and  multi-model systems are employed extensively.  This research  is expected
              to lead to a new technology for composition,  interoperation and dynamic
              evolution of software systems.  It seeks to treat interoperability at many
              levels and along  many dimensions:  components, languag es, specifications, 
              formalisms/logics, and tools.  This provides the capacity to  move in a
              mathematically rigorous way across the different  formalizations of a system,
              and to use the different tools  supporting these formalizations in a rigorously
              integrated  way.  The research is based on two key technical ideas:  module
              calculi (for integration) and open multi-model  systems (for interoperation). 
              The module calculus is  formalism-independent, and is intended to have powerful
              new  operations such as generalization.  Open multi-model systems  formalize
              the multidimensional aspects of independent  interoperating parts.  ***
