Title       : Synthetic, Structural and Reactivity Studies on Supramolecules Obtained from
               Catechol Functionalized Macrocycles. Studies in Nb/S Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9633568

Award Number: 9633568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitri N. Coucouvanis dcouc@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Dr. Dimitri Coucouvanis, Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan,  is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program   of  the
              Chemistry Division to perform synthetic, structural and reactivity   studies on
              supramolecules obtained from catechol functionalized   macrocycles.  The
              systems of interest include catechol-functionalized   tetraazamacrocyclic 
              complexes capable of undergoing intramolecular   electron transfer upon changes
              in pH,  supramolecular crown ethers which   change their function depending on
              what is bound in the crown ether   portion of the molecule, and optically
              active `propeller` molecules which   could be useful as supports capable of
              asymmetric induction in the   epoxidation of olefins.  Molecular `reactors`
              which contain separate   subunits for both the storage of electrons and the
              activation of small   molecules will also be synthesized and their reactivity
              patterns   delineated. The chemistry of coordinated sulfur and selenium ligands
              in   niobium and tantalum complexes and their reactivity with heteroallenes,  
              alkenes, alkynes, sulfur dioxide and molecular hydrogen will also be  
              explored.  Molecular architecture involves the synthesis of complex,  
              multi-functional systems which are designed to transform a bound   substrate
              molecule, much the way enzymes function in living systems.   
              Metallomacrocycles, systems which incorporate metal ions into large ring  
              structures, are examples of these so  called `supramolecular` systems.   These
              molecules may function as elementary molecular devices with   potential
              applications in photochemically induced charge separation,   photoswitching,
              catalytic redox processes, electron storage, or substrate   molecule
              activation.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
