Title       : Integrating Teaching and Research: The Engineering Education Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9633800

Award Number: 9633800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Corradini corradini@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denice D. Denton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT      Corradini  9633800    The future success of U.S. higher education
              requires better integration of both teaching scholarship and research
              scholarship.  Likewise, the future success of the U.S. economy requires that
              some of our best and brightest young people choose to enter the engineering
              profession.  In addition, both pedagogical techniques and content knowledge are
              necessary to prepare effective teachers for engineering classrooms.  To these
              ends, the University of Wisconsin-Madison proposes to implement a cultural
              change approach to engineering education that will create an improved,
              student-centered, problem-based, teach approach to teaching and learning
              instead of a faculty-centered, traditional approach and that will focus on both
              research and teaching instead of primarily research.  These goals will be
              achieved by developing an integrated Engineering Scholars Program (ESP) which
              will consist primarily of a one-week summer workshop for graduate engineering
              students and new engineering faculty.  Given the need for curricular and
              pedagogical reform in engineering and given the high attrition rates of
              students in engineering, we will focus our attention nationally on engineering
              graduate students and new faculty, especially women and minorities, interested
              in pursuing an academic career.  We will collaborate with the engineering
              coalition schools to recruit and identify thirty participants each year for
              three years.  Fully aware that our cultural change approach entails a complex
              and iterative process, our activities will be guided by collaborative,
              continuous improvement teams of local, on-campus and outside experts who will
              be responsible for 1) program content that integrates research and teaching, 2)
              program evaluation and assessment to insure the highest possible program
              quality and 3) program transition from a dependency on outside experts to a
              reliance on local experts.  Together with our partners in industry, we propose
              an innovative, three-year program that will evolve i nto a UW-Madison sponsored
              program in collaboration with engineering education coalition schools.  Our
              program will have these major components: 1) workshops for content knowledge
              about teaching and learning plus hands-on application and a reflective
              approach, 2) collaborative, cross-disciplinary teams of participants as well as
              local and outside experts, 3) networking strategies to build collaborative
              faculty teams at home institutions, 4) a transition plan to move from outside
              experts to local experts teams, and 5) evaluation, adaption, and dissemination.
               ***
