Title       : Advanced Semiconductor Structures for Next Generation Wireless Systems:
               Interplay Between Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9633535

Award Number: 9633535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369997             (Estimated)
Investigator: April S. Brown april.brown@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633535  Brown  In this proposal program, The Georgia Institute of Technology
              (Georgia Tech), The University of Illinois (UIUC), and TRW will collaborate to
              significantly advance the growth and fabrication technologies for
              phosphorous-based microwave and millimeter wave devices.  The framework for
              this effort is provided by the current system drivers for improvements in
              wireless communication systems.  These criteria are reduced process cost,
              improved efficiency, linearity and output power, minimization of bias voltage
              and current drain, and reduced noise.    Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) is the
              most widely used growth technique for commercial microwave and millimeter wave
              devices which require epitaxial films.  It is widely recognized that InP-based
              materials offer significant advantages for these targeted device applications. 
              Significant improvements, however, are currently required to advance these
              materials to an adequate state of maturity for manufacturing.  The ability to
              utilize phosphorus in a "standard' MBE configuration, i.e. all solid sources,
              will enable specific performance and process cost improvements.  We propose to
              address this vital need.  Concurrent with this goal will be the advancement of
              MBE as a process technology.  We will address both of these issues by
              performing the materials experiments in conjunction with the development of a
              physically-based MBE model.    The effort at The University of Illinois will be
              focused towards the development of improved process technologies for InP-based
              HEMTs.  In particular, the improvement in dry etching uniformity and the
              development of improved device structures and schemes for ohmic contacts will
              be investigated.  The process issues chosen will enable improvements in process
              cost and in device performance.    Materials characterization and device
              fabrication and measurement will be performed at TRW.  TRW has committed a
              significant effort (- 60% cost sharing) towards this collaborative project.  In
              addition, TRW will provide summer e mployment for students working on this
              project.  ***
