Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Phase Selection in Ceramic Oxides under
               Non-Equilibrium Conditions, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9633039

Award Number: 9633039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vikram Jayaraman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos G. Levi  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Science
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This proposal is for a US-Indo research collaboration between
              materials scientists Carlos Levi of the University of California, Santa Barbara
              and Vikram Jayaram of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.  The project
              is entitled `Phase Selection in Ceramic Oxides Under Non-Equilibrium
              Conditions.`  The investigators will study the evolution of oxide
              microstructures in ceramic oxides synthesized under conditions wherein
              thermodynamic equilibrium is highly constrained.  The   program will focus on
              relatively simple binary and higher component systems using techniques with
              proven potential to bring about substantial metastability.  Compositions
              produced in this manner will be heat treated to study the hierarchy of states
              by which the non-equilibrium structure evolves towards a more stable one.  The
              primary objective is to enhance the understanding of phase selection processes,
              their relationship to fundamental forms of metastability, as well as their
              impact on microstructure evolution through subsequent transformations.   Scope:
               The PIs have extensive experience in this area and have  collaborated
              productively in the past.  The bulk of the experimental work will be carried
              out at the Indian Institute of Science.  The US collaborator will provide
              guidance in the design of experiments and analysis of results, as well as
              access to atomization and characterization facilities at the UC, Santa Barbara.
               The research is expected to generate a mutually beneficial interaction with
              the ongoing research on the synthesis of structural ceramics and functional
              inorganic oxides at the NSF Materials Research Laboratory at UC.  This project
              will provide a unique international opportunity for a US graduate student to
              participate in the experimental research at the IISc, Bangalore.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
