Title       : Fault Tolerance Analysis of Mobile Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9633444

Award Number: 9633444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa A. Dahlberg tdahlber@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Deployment of wireless, mobile networks is rapidly increasing as advances  in
              digital cellular systems promise large-scale, reliable voice, data, and 
              multimedia communications in a mobile environment.  The realization of 
              Personal Communications Services (PCS) will increase dependence on mobile 
              networks by the mass public and private sectors, implying that system  failure
              resulting in loss of communication or critical data will not be  tolerated. 
              Fault tolerance analysis provides an understanding of system  functionality in
              the wake of failures.    Fault tolerance analysis such as the reliability,
              availability, and  survivability problems continues to be well researched for
              wired networks.  The mobility of the user along with the unpredictability of
              motion indicate  that models and assumptions for wired networks cannot be
              carried over to  the wireless, mobile domain.  Very little focus has yet been
              placed on  fault tolerance analysis for mobile networks in particular.    This
              project fills this void through exploratory research on fault  tolerance
              analysis of systems which provide large-scale PCS, including  voice, data and
              multimedia communications.  These systems are comprised of  radio frequency
              communications within mobile cellular or picocellular  networks that are
              interconnected to the existing (wired) infrastructure.  The fault tolerance
              criteria and evaluation approach are not immediately  apparent for these
              systems due to the heterogeneity of the services  provided and of the
              underlying interconnection network, and due to the  inherent unreliability of
              the wireless communications medium.  The goal of  this project is to formulate
              the appropriate research problems regarding  fault tolerance of mobile systems
              and to indicate an analysis strategy.  This includes identifying fault
              tolerance parameters (or propose new ones)  which are most useful to measuring
              system robustness, developing a network  modeling approach (or set of
              approaches), and proposing preliminary fault  tolerance algor ithms using these
              models.
