Title       : GOALI: Electromagnetic Compatibility Educational Experiences: A Joint Effort
               Between Chrysler Corporation and Michigan State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9633648

Award Number: 9633648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis P. Nyquist nyquist@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Rothwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number:                ECS-9633648    Principal Investigator:        
              Dennis Nyquist    Title:  GOALI:  Electromagnetic Compatibility Educational
              Experiences:  A Joint Effort Between Chrysler Corporation and Michigan State
              University    In this GOALI program, the initial agenda of a long term
              interaction with Chrysler Corporation involving electromagnetic compatibility
              (EMC) issues will be implemented.  Problems involving electromagnetic immunity
              and emission are particularly important to automotive engineers, who must deal
              with complex electronic systems in every part of a vehicle.  The continuing
              move to higher frequencies is expected to exacerbate the problem.  In this
              GOALI research, a new senior level EMC course will be developed jointly by
              Chrysler personnel and the Michigan State University faculty.  The course will
              be taught as part of the standard electrical engineering curriculum at MSU and,
              in a modified form, internally to personnel at Chrysler.  An associated
              laboratory will be developed and taught at the state of the art Chrysler
              Technical Center.  Graduate students will also be part of this program and will
              be trained in state of the art EMC testing techniques, and will help in the
              development of the laboratory and course materials. Usefulness even beyond the
              important automotive context is apparent, as EMC problems are also a growing
              concern in wireless communications, and in many other areas. The
              multidisciplinary and "hands-on" nature of the electromagnetics training which
              this project provides is expected to be an excellent training ground for
              students.
