Title       : Integrating Formal and Informal Techniques: An Approach to Evolutionary Systems
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9633391

Award Number: 9633391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty H. Cheng chengb@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mats Per Erik Heimdahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A formal method consists of a well-defined specification  language and a
              rigorously defined set of rules that can be  used to reason about the
              specifications expressed in that  language. The specification language is used
              to describe the  intended system behavior. In order to facilitate the use of 
              formal methods for software development, particularly for  high-assurance
              systems, the objective of this project is to  produce a set of integrated
              techniques that support the use  of formal methods for all phases of software
              development.  Towards this end, several new techniques and tools are being 
              developed that support the application of formal methods for  software
              engineering. These include tools to support correct  program derivation from
              formal specifications, to formally  specify requirements analysis and design
              information, to  determine software reuse based on formal specifications, to 
              reverse engineer existing software to obtain formal  descriptions, and to
              statically analyze requirements  specifications for completeness and
              consistency.    Formal specifications can be checked for consistency and 
              completeness using automated techniques. However, during the  initial phases of
              a project, it may be difficult to  construct formal specifications directly. In
              contrast, many  developers find it more intuitive to create diagrams to  model
              their systems.    As a means to bridge the gap between formal and informal 
              approaches to software development, this research  investigates the
              formalization of a commonly used modeling  notation, known as the Object
              Modeling Technique. The  notation comprises three complementary diagrams:
              object  (entity-relation) diagrams, state diagrams, and data flow  diagrams.
              These three diagrams, respectively, model the  architecture (static), behavior
              (dynamic), and data flow and  services of a given system. The results of the
              formalization  studies will enable the automated generation of formal 
              specifications from diagrams. The next step is to  investigate and develop 
              formal semantics for the integration  of the three models. Finally, design
              transformations are  studied that can be applied to the diagrams and the 
              corresponding specifications.  ***
