Title       : Polarization-Insensitive Double Quantum Wells for Electro-Optical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9633780

Award Number: 9633780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theda Daniels-Race tdr@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633780  Daniels-Race  The goal of this project is to develop
              polarization-insensitive double quantum well (DQW) structures for applications
              in the modulation, detection, and amplification of optical signals. 
              Specifically, we will investigate the growth and electron-hole interactions of
              tensile strained GaAs quantum wells sandwiched between InxA11-xAs barriers. 
              With this configuration we are able to control the polarization characteristics
              of the optical response while maintaining compatibility with GaAs-based
              processing.  The potential for the use of such structures in devices wherein
              polarization of the optical response is important has been demonstrated by our
              recent work in single quantum wells.    In this 12 month project we will
              determine optimum MBE growth conditions which enhance the optical response at
              room temperature, as is required for device applicability.  Using band-offset
              modeling in conjunction with optical techniques to examine structures of
              different barrier/well widths and strains, we will explore the DQW designs most
              suitable for further technological development.      The primary methods of
              growth and characterization to be employed will be molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
              and  photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, respectively.  These will be
              supported by electrical analysis techniques such as Hall and current-voltage
              measurements, X-ray diffraction, and both transmission and scanning electron
              microscopy.  Optimal growth conditions will be examined by variation of MBE
              controlled (e.g.-substrate temperature, growth rate, V/III ratio, As
              overpressure) and structurally based (e.g.-well/barrier widths, strain, doping)
              parameters.  As in our initial work, most of our studies will be of structures
              grown as GaAs substrates.  However, we will also compare the optical
              characteristics of these structures to those of structures grown on ternary
              substrates, which provide lattice matching with the InA1As barrier layers.  PL
              measurements, using temperature, excitation intensity and excitat ion
              wavelength, and polarization state variations, will be used to elucidate
              phenomena normally unobservable due to electron-hole transition selection rules
              for quantum wells.  Our parallel goals with respect to the MBE and PL efforts
              will lay the necessary groundwork for development of practical devices based on
              these DQW's and similar structures.  This is a collaborate research project
              between Theda Daniels-Race of Duke University and Laurie McNeil of the
              University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill.  ***
