Title       : Variability in Spore Dispersal and its Role in Kelp Population Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9633329

Award Number: 9633329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Reed reed@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Libe Washburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633329  REED  Kelp forests, dominant features of subtidal temperate reefs
              worldwide, undergo relatively frequent and unpredictable local extinctions and
              recolonizations.  This project is a continuation of ongoing investigations of
              the causal mechanisms that allow for rapid forest recovery following widespread
              kelp loss. The objective of the project is to predict the frequency of
              occurrence and relative importance of the physical and biological conditions
              that promote extended spore dispersal in giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) and
              determine: (1) the role of spore immigration rates in regulating the dynamics
              of local kelp populations and (2) the potential for limited dispersal to
              destabilize populations by reducing individual fitness. The research approach
              is to collect measurements of water motion simultaneously with measurements of
              spore release and dispersal from isolated plants over a wide range of physical
              and biological conditions.  This information will be used to build an
              individual-based model that will predict effective spore dispersal within and
              away from a local population for varying conditions of water motion, plant
              fecundity, plant spacing, spore release, and population size.  Predictions from
              the model will be tested using an experimental population of adult plants. The
              model will also be used to predict the frequency and spatial extent of
              self-fertilization under different conditions of water motion, plant fecundity,
              plant spacing, spore release, and population size. The effects of
              self-fertilization on individual fitness will be experimentally determined for
              all life stages. The information obtained from the project will apply generally
              to dispersal patterns of a large number of sessile marine organisms that
              release competent spores or larvae into nearshore waters. The general
              significance of this work is that it will provide much needed insight into the
              hydrodynamic conditions that promote extended propagule dispersal and the
              degree to which propagule immigration influences t he dynamics of species
              perceived to have relatively closed populations. Additionally, the
              individual-based approach to this study will provide information on spore
              dispersal away from individual plants, which will be used to evaluate the costs
              of self-fertilization in giant kelp, a member of a dominant group of  temperate
              marine algae whose life history and dispersal characteristics place them at
              high risk to the adverse effects of self-fertilization.  ***
