Title       : Dissertation Research: Community Organization on the Chacoan Frontier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9633771

Award Number: 9633771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11928              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Mills bmills@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Mills, MS Sarah Herr will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological research in the
              Mogollon rim area of Arizona and supplement this with the analysis of museum
              collections. Her focus will be on the period between the 10th through 12th
              centuries AD. Kivas are large, usually well constructed partially underground
              structures with wooden roofs and were used for religions purposes. Because they
              serve as a central focus for a community, by determining a kiva's size, care
              expended on its construction and its internal organization it is possible to
              gain insight into the structure of the community which built it. MS Herr, will
              coordinate her work with the University of Arizona field school and excavate
              the kiva at the Hough's Great Kiva site. She will study the ceramics and other
              materials collected and augment these data with analyzes of materials from
              other Mogollon rim sites. On this basis she will reconstruct the social
              organization of the region and compare it to that in neighboring areas.  The
              Southwest has long served as a focus for archaeological attention because of
              the imposing ruins present and the roads which linked many of them. Clearly
              prehistoric people achieved a significant degree of social complexity in a
              harsh desert environment. Most researchers have concentrated their efforts on
              the largest sites and the areas which contain them and relatively work has been
              done in what appear to be underpopulated regions. Thus little is known about
              how communities in these latter areas functioned and how they were integrated
              (or not integrated) into more `central` areas. The Mogollon Rim has
              traditionally been viewed by archaeologists as a peripheral area and it forms
              the focus of MS Herr's study. She has proposed an original perspective -
              frontier theory - from which to view this area and to examine its relationships
              with more `central` regions. This work will provide the data to test her idea. 
              This research is important for several regions. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on the American past. It
              will serve to develop the application of a very powerful theoretical approach
              and will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
