Title       : Distribution and Transport of Larvae of Inner-Shelf Benthic Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9633013

Award Number: 9633013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171062             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Largier jlargier@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will be conducted under the auspices of the Coastal Ocean
              Processes (CoOP) program and is a continuation of a previously funded research
              project.  Funding is provided for an integrated, interdisciplinary analysis and
              synthesis of  extensive physical and biological samples and data collected off
              Duck, North Carolina in 1994 during the CoOP  project, entitled "Suspension,
              cross-shelf transport, and deposition of planktonic larvae of inner-shelf
              benthic invertebrates."  The field program provided simultaneous and
              comprehensive sampling of physical and biological patterns that  comprise a
              unique resource from which investigators will derive a greater understanding of
              processes (both physical and behavioral) influencing the distribution and
              transport of invertebrate larvae over the inner continental shelf, as well as
              detailed knowledge of physical processes on the inner shelf.  Sample analysis
              and data integration will continue on this unique data set in order to achieve
              the basic scientific objectives of the originally proposed research:  (1) Do
              larval distributions show water mass or interface (i.e., fronts or clines)
              affinity? (2) Are there large changes in larval distributions during
              wind-driven, cross-shelf circulation (i.e., upwelling and downwelling)? (3)
              Does the freshwater plume from the Chesapeake Bay influence larval
              distributions on the inner shelf, both in terms of species composition (i.e.,
              as a source of estuarine larvae) and of inner-shelf circulation? (4) Is there a
              semi-diurnal (i.e., tidal) variation in near-bottom larval concentrations? (5)
              Is there a correlation between near-bottom larval distributions and turbidity
              profiles? Do near-bottom larval distributions change during resuspension events
              and how might these changes affect larval transport?    The work will be
              accomplished by six different teams of investigators at five separate
              institutions as a collaborative interdisciplinary effort.
