Title       : Quantum Dynamics in Many-Body Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1998   
File        : a9633796

Award Number: 9633796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Pechukas pechukas@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Pechukas is being supported by the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program.  His research will focus on three   problems of many-body
              quantum dynamics:  the problem of computing the   dynamics efficiently and with
              accuracy, the problem of generalizing   quantum rate theory to accommodate
              complex kinetic processes with   randomly fluctuating activation barriers, and
              the problem of devising and   analyzing simple soluble models for many-body
              quantum dynamics to   illuminate a number of obscure issues in the theory of
              open systems.    Specific areas of interest are to further develop and test his
              phase   space path integral Monte Carlo method for real-time quantum dynamics, 
               based on a compact `Fourier` expansion of wavefunctions in coherent   states. 
              Another aspect of this research will push the fluctuating   barrier problem
              beyond the simplest case--classical Kramers problem in   the spatial diffusion
              limit, barrier fluctuations driven by an external   stochastic process--to
              which this work and that of others has so far been   restricted.  In a third
              aspect this research will explore a simple   collision model recently devised
              for quantum Brownian motion, to answer   questions about initial state
              preparation and long-time Markovian   dynamics in open systems that interact
              strongly with their surroundings.    The motivation for all three projects is
              the same.  Chemistry is   fundamentally quantum-mechanical and typically
              complex.  Chemical   processes in complex systems--charge separation in
              photosynthesis, oxygen   fixation at the active site in thermally fluctuating
              hemoglobin,    hydrogenation of carbonmonoxide at metal surfaces in synthetic
              fuel   production--these are fundamentally quantum-mechanical processes  
              involving many atoms simultaneously.  To describe and to simulate complex  
              chemical processes properly is fundamentally to study quantum dynamics in  
              many-body systems.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
