Title       : Self-Assembled and Modulated Domain Epitaxial Oxide Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9633638

Award Number: 9633638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Roytburd roytburd@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamoorthy Ramesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9633638 Roytburd  This combined theory and experiment research project aims
              for a rigorous theoretical understanding and experimental verification of
              strain controlled structural modulation(cooperative ordering) in epitaxial
              systems.  Fundamental aspects of solid state transformation under coherently
              constrained conditions in metal oxides such as perovskites will be studied with
              respect to understanding the mechanisms and kinetic parameters of the
              transformations, and with respect to developing new routes to the design and
              realization of transversely modulated domain and heterophase microstructures
              inside heterostructure and superlattice layers.  The correlation of transversal
              modulations in layers of superlattices and possibility of 3-dimensional
              superlattices will be explored.  The thermodynamics and kinetics of the
              evolution of modulated structures in solid-solid phase transformations will be
              studied specifically in ferroelectric, ferroelastic, and ferromagnetic
              transformations. %%% The project is multidisciplinary combining fundamental
              materials theory and experimental synthesis and processing studies with
              advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to address forefront
              issues in a topical area of technological relevance and high potential payoff. 
              The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to several aspects of advanced electronic devices and integrated
              circuitry.  The knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
              is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
              advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a
              basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. ***
