Title       : GOALI: Advanced Weather Satellite Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9633015

Award Number: 9633015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold L. Broberg broberg@cvax.ipfw.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul I. Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joe Predina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad S. Alam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hossein M. Oloomi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9633015    Principal Investigator:  Harold Broberg   
              Title:  GOALI: Advanced Weather Satellite Instrumentation      In this
              research, a university-industrial collaborative project between Indiana
              University Purdue University Fort Wayne and ITT-Aerospace/Communications
              Division to investigate more accurate and reliable imaging  (visible spectrum)
              and sounding (infrared spectrum) for next generation weather satellites is
              proposed.  Adaptive control techniques will be investigated and modeled to
              improve the useable spectral bandwidth of infrared Michaelson interferometers
              infrared Michaelson interferometers are under consideration by the industry as
              the next logical step to improve the useable spectral bandwidth. Adaptive
              control to replace electromechanical control in the following areas are
              proposed for investigation:  (1) adaptive control to improve imaging and
              sounding.  This refers to control of the interferometer itself; (2) digital
              post-processing of spectra to replace complex electromechanical dynamic
              alignment techniques currently in use.  This could results in a considerable
              weight savings which is important in space-based applications.  Post processing
              to compensate for the mirror tilt is the main focus; (3) development of an
              adaptive filter of estimation method to accurately determine the position of
              the moving mirror and (4) basic research and development of microbolometric
              techniques for used in space-based systems.  Currently available
              microbolometers are unusable for space-based applications due to slow response
              time, low efficiency and high self-heating.
