Title       : Dynamically Extensible Computational Reflection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9633109

Award Number: 9633109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Friedman dfried@cs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Reflection has been explored in an interpreted framework and  has tended to
              assume the availability of particular pieces  of the state of a program's
              interpretation, even the current  source code expression. Instead of programs,
              this research  emphasizes computations as the primary elements of  reflection.
              The research has two facets. The first is to  formalize and continue the
              theoretical development of a  system for computational reflection that is free
              from  interpreter-based constraints. This system supports the  introduction of
              multiple user-defined reflective properties  that can be designed independently
              and combined in arbitrary  fashion. Furthermore, new reflective properties can
              be  introduced after the programs in which they are to be used  have already
              been compiled. The second facet is to explore  the many uses of such a system.
              In addition to the simple,  but powerful, uses already explored, the system is
              expected  to be useful for rapid prototyping of language features, 
              collaborative software development, and static analysis of  programs for
              intense optimization.    Prior research in programming with first-class
              contexts has  investigated the meaning and use of static meta-level  contextual
              information. The word static here is intended to  refer to that information
              available in the text of a  program, without running it. The current research
              extends  the previous work by exploring the meaning and use of  dynamic
              meta-level contextual information, which is that  information available in the
              meta-level of a running  process. As in the previous work, this project
              emphasizes  modularity, allowing many different kinds of meta-level  knowledge
              to be utilized simultaneously.  ***
