Title       : CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure: Infrastructure Improvements to
               Increase Access for Minorities to CISE Career Paths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9633155

Award Number: 9633155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42715              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasha J. Karant   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Owen J. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C.E. Tapie Rohm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josephine G. Mendoza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2886,9218,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9633155  Karant, Yasha J.  Lin, Frank    California State University - San
              Bernadino (CSUSB)    CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure:  Infrastructure
              Improvement to Increase Access for Minorities to CISE Career    The purpose of
              this NSF CISE MII planning grant proposal is to provide minority students
              enrolled in the CISE disciplines of Computer and Information Science at
              California State University, San Bernadino (CSUSB), with facilities to pursue
              careers in the CISE fields.  To achieve this goal, this planning grant will
              develop an NSF MII proposal and integrate the NSF funding with existing and
              newly developed funding sources necessary for the proposed quality instruction
              and improved minority opportunities.  These funding sources involve vendor
              participation and support, including minority owned small business vendors.  A
              number of specific strategic program areas have been identified :     -improved
              minority recruitment and retention into the CISE disciplines, using both the
              pool of  students at CSUSB and recruitment of otherwise unsupported minority
              students;      -upgrades and innovations in curriculum to produce minority
              graduates with both an industrial  and an advanced degree path open to them;   
                -establishment of facilities to teach modern data communications;   measures
              to address the problems faced by minority students with physical disabilities; 
                  -means to improve minority student access to facilities from remote (home)
              sites; and      -upgrades to general infrastructure in terms of computers and
              communications to support these  programs
