Title       : Gene Flow and Species Diversity in Deep-Sea Hydothermal Vent Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9633131

Award Number: 9633131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Vrijenhoek   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Lutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1319,4444,9117,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              9633131                              Vrijenhoek                                
                       Funding is requested for genetic studies of organisms  associated with
              mid-ocean ridge systems and cognate environments  in the deep sea. The primary
              objectives of the study are: (1) to  examine spatial and temporal effects of
              fast- versus  slow-spreading ridge axes on intraspecific phylogeography, 
              patterns of dispersal, and rates of gene flow; and (2) to continue  our studies
              of evolutionary relationships among organisms from  deep-sea hydrothermal vents
              and cognate communities in other  reducing environments (e.g., cold-water
              sulfide/methane seeps,  whale fall, etc.). As a result of previous oceanic
              expeditions, an  extensive collection of frozen specimens from fast-spreading
              ridge  systems in the eastern Pacific already exists at Rutgers  University.
              These organisms have been the focus of ongoing studies  of gene flow and
              patterns of dispersal. To test the hypothesis  that the spreading rate of a
              ridge system plays a dominant role in  shaping ecological and evolutionary
              processes, comparative studies  will be conducted with organisms from a
              slow-spreading system (the  Mid-Atlantic Ridge) and a super fast-spreading
              system (the  southern East Pacific Rise). Additionally, ongoing molecular 
              systematic studies of vent and seep bivalve mollusks will be  continued, as
              many new populations and new morphospecies have been  described during the last
              several years. Some of the vesicomyid  clam species, in particular, appear to
              wide distributions that  span oceanic basins and terrestrial barriers to
              dispersal. As the  goal of these studies is to obtain multi-locus genealogical 
              information for population level and phylogenetic analyses, a  variety of
              genetic techniques are employ ed (e.g., allozymes,  restriction analysis of
              mitochondrial DNA and anonymous nuclear  DNAs, and sequencing of PCR amplified
              genes). Partial use of an  automated sequencing facility is available to the
              principal  investigators. These proposed studies will provide a comprehensive 
              picture of ecological, geological, and evolutionary processes  affecting the
              dominant species that live in these unusual abyssal  environments. Present
              research already has produced molecular  markers that are of broad use for
              students of invertebrate  systematics and population genetics. The biodiversity
              aspects of  this research have been recognized with a supplementary award 
              (NIH) to facilitate materials and technology transfer to parties  interested in
              marine natural products discovery.
