Title       : Biogeochemical Cycling in the Organic-Rich Coastal Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9633456

Award Number: 9633456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Martens cmartens@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc J. Alperin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Albert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633456  Martens      The burial and preservation of organic matter on the
              continental  margins of the world ocean is a process of global importance.  In 
              fact, burial out of direct contact with the atmosphere is  responsible not only
              for the deposits of fossil organic matter  found throughout the world but also
              for the persistence of  molecular oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere.
              Understanding the  factors impacting the decomposition, preservation, and
              burial of  perimarine organic matter has understandably been one of the 
              classical problems of low-temperature geochemistry.    In this project, a group
              of biogeochemists will be continuing their  work on this problem of
              environmental and economic importance.  In  this next phase of their research,
              the focus will be on the  relationship of organic matter decomposition and
              preservation to  organic sorption onto sedimentary grains with large surface
              areas  per unit mass (essentially the very finest components of sediments, 
              such as clay minerals). They will carry out laboratory experiments  to
              complement studies of organic sedimentation, decomposition, and  burial and
              four contrasting inner-shelf field sites characterized  by different types and
              rates of organic input as well as different  microbiological and
              sedimentological characteristics. The  researchers expect that this approach
              will lead to an improved  quantitative understanding of the relationship of
              organic  preservation to such variables as organic deposit rate, differences 
              in microbial decomposition processes, adsorption and desorption of  dissolved
              organic matter on mineral grains, and burial rate.
