Title       : Interactions of Physics and Biology: Gelatinous Predators in Chesapeake Bay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9633607

Award Number: 9633607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer E. Purcell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1316,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                      Purcell       9633607              This 
              research will interface with the ongoing  5-yr  LMER  II  program  (TIES) in
              Chesapeake Bay, which will provide logistic  and  analytical  support  and data
              on hydrography, mesozooplankton,  and  ichthyoplankton.  A  bay-wide data set
              will  be  collected  on  the  distribution of gelatinous predators (medusae and
              ctenophores),  as  they  are related to large-scale hydrographic features in
              the water  column.  The  features  of particular focus will  be  the  seasonal 
              pycnocline,  fronts,  the hydraulic control point,  and  biological  patches.  
              Regions   of   the  bay  for  intensive   mapping,   and  process-oriented 
              studies include the polyhaline southern  bay  and  the  mesohaline mid-bay. In
              process-oriented studies,  feeding  and  fecundity  will  be  measured to
              determine if trophic  interactions  increase  at hydrographic features. TIES
              will continuously  measure  mesozooplankton abundances and temperature,
              salinity,  chlorophyll,  and   dissolved   oxygen.  Depth-discrete  samples  of
                gelatinous  predators  will  be  made  using an  opening  closing  net 
              system.  Biovolumes,  numbers,  and sizes of the live  gelatinous  organisms 
              will  be  determined  on board ship. Small and  delicate  specimens  (larval 
              ctenophores  and  hydromedusae) will  be  quantified  from  additional 
              vertical plankton hauls. Individual specimens  will  be  collected  and (1)
              preserved immediately for gut content  analysis,  and  (2) incubated overnight
              for egg production. Data analysis will  emphasize  3-dimensional mapping and
              correlations  of  hydrographic  data  with  population data on regional,
              seasonal, and  interannual  bases, as well as comparisons of the trophic and
              reproductive  data  relative   to  hydrographic  features.  Gelatinous 
              predators   are  important  components of the pelagic food web  in  Chesapeake 
              Bay.  Aggregations  of jellyfish occur because of interactions  of  their 
              behaviors  with the physical  characteristics of the  water  column. 
              Chesapeake   Bay   is  physically  complex,  with   many   possible 
              aggregating  features.  Population  data  exist  for   only   three  gelatinous
               species in the bay, but 30 species have been  reported.  This  research  will
              provide critical studies on  how  physics  and  biology  interact to cause
              intensification of trophic  interactions  at fronts and other physical
              features.       ***
