Title       : Thin Film Growth, Deposition and Interface Studies under Energetic Process
               Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9633731

Award Number: 9633731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Irene GENE_IRENE@UNC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9633731 Irene  This research project, co-funded by the Electronic Materials
              and Solid State Chemistry programs, aims for significant advancement in
              fundamental understanding of ECR plasma deposition of dielectric films on GaAs
              and Ge single crystal surfaces. Film growth will be monitored in situ by both
              spectroscopic and single wavelength ellipsometry.  Specific goals include
              investigation of the electronic properties of the semiconductor-dielectric
              interfaces resulting from the deposition by examining the I-V behavior of MIS
              junctions derived from the interfaces formed.  In addition, a variety of
              ex-situ characterization tools including XPS, AFM, and FTIR will be employed to
              gain detailed information on the deposition process and fundamental
              structure-property relationships. The general approach is expected to provide
              new fundamental information and insights into the creation of environmentally
              stable, defect-free terminations of Ge and GaAs surfaces. %%% The project is
              multidisciplinary combining fundamental solid state surface and interface
              chemistry and materials science synthesis and processing studies with advanced
              characterization tools and analysis methods to address forefront issues in a
              topical area of strong technological relevance and high potential payoff.  The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to several aspects of advanced electronic/photonic devices and integrated
              circuitry.  Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this
              research project is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the
              performance of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
              materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area. ***
