Title       : Support for the 4th Japan-U.S. Global Change Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9633476

Award Number: 9633476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Terry Rambo rambot@ewc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Cult&Tech Interchange
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96801    /   -

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               Land-use and land-cover change have been identified by the U.S. Global Change
              Research Program as a major integrating scientific issue that need greater
              attention if we are to have the necessary understanding of how different
              components of the Earth system interact with each other.  In addition to the
              substantive significance of this topic, research on land-use and land-cover
              change also is important because it is a fertile ground for interdisciplinary
              collaborations between natural and social scientists.  For these reasons,
              land-use and land-cover change has been selected as the topic for the fourth in
              a series of global change workshops jointly sponsored by the U.S. and Japanese
              governments.  This workshop will be held in Tsukuba, Japan, during the last
              week of February 1996.  Participants will include 17 scientists from the U.S.,
              30 from Japan, and 8 from other nations of the Pacific Rim.  This award will
              provide support for three general purposes: (1) to help provide logistical and
              operational support for the workshop; (2) to provide travel support to enable
              the participation of the principal investigator as a member of the U.S.
              delegation, and (3) to provide support for follow-up activities related to the
              principal investigator's research on land-use and land-cover change.   Through
              this award, the work of a bi-lateral workshop bringing together leading
              scientists from the U.S., Japan, and other nations will be facilitated.  In
              addition to new knowledge and awareness of substantive and methodological
              problems, the workshop will facilitate the development of interdisciplinary
              collaborations among scientists from the U.S., Japan, and other nations.  The
              award also will enable the participation of a leading U.S. scientist who
              already has strong working relationships in this international setting.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
