Title       : Multi-Investigator Study of the Dynamics of Political Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9633743

Award Number: 9633743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Sniderman paulms@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry E. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip E. Tetlock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project engages the study of the dynamics of political preferences through
              the vehicle of a large multi-investigator cooperative survey.  Thirteen
              research teams and twenty investigators are drawn together under the umbrella
              of this "group" project to conduct a series of experiments within a single
              national probability survey.      Experiments focus on uncertainty and
              ambivalence as sources of response variability; the role of issue salience in
              immunizing individuals against persuasive messages; judgments about the
              fairness of racial representation as a function of group conflict and racial
              attributions; the connection between preferences for policies to help
              disadvantaged groups and perceptions of the social conditions of those groups;
              the role of political institutions in shaping the dynamics of persuasion; the
              group specific character of political tolerance; the framing of issues by
              elites; the impact of public mood and emotional awareness of policy judgments;
              the dynamics of candidate credibility and persuasion in campaigns; the
              interplay of issue framing and deliberation; the connection between situational
              threats and tolerance; the interaction of social conditions, value priorities,
              and issue salience in conditioning egalitarian commitments; and the
              disentangling of opinion, non-opinion, and guessing.      Each component study
              is independently conceived and executed.  But the component studies all make
              contributions to the cumulative impact of the overall study.  The
              multi-investigator survey provides a means for the cost-efficient
              implementation of a large number of research projects within the scope of a
              common survey instrument and serves as a model for collaboration among
              scholars.
