Title       : Semantic Foundations for Composition and Interoperation of Open Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9633419

Award Number: 9633419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119566             (Estimated)
Investigator: John McCarthy mccarthy@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Talcott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a semantic  foundation for semantic
              composition and interoperation of  heterogeneous components of open systems.
              Composition and  interoperation occur at many levels (requirements, 
              specification, code, executables) and along multiple  dimensions
              (functionality, reliability, security,  availability). Relations among the
              various levels and  dimensions must be preserved.  Existing work on composition
               and interoperation has largely focused on syntactic  structure. It is
              essential to develop a semantic basis in  order to provide for safe, secure,
              and  meaningful  combinations. Semantic structuring of complex systems should 
              provide a firm basis for determining what parts are  interchangeable under
              given conditions, and to predict  effects of changes: of components on the
              whole, and of  system requirements on requirements for the parts. There is  a
              wide range of applications where such a semantic  foundation for interoperation
              can be of value.  It is  especially important in applications that combine
              components  from diverse domains such as: data bases, spread sheets,  knowledge
              bases, multi-media, mobile-agents, control theory,  or event-based simulations.
                 Metalogical methods from the theory of general logics, and  associated
              techniques of mappings in and across formalisms,  are used to achieve
              formalism-independent semantics for  system composition. This supports the
              multi-dimensionality  of a system's levels of description and formalization. 
              Techniques from the theory of Open Mechanized Reasoning  Systems (OMRS) as well
              as work on the formal semantics of  actor systems are used to study
              interoperation aspects.  Reflective techniques, particularly reflective logics
              and  multi-model systems are employed extensively. This research  is expected
              to lead to a new technology for composition,  interoperation and dynamic
              evolution of software systems.  It seeks to treat interoperability at many
              levels and along  many dimensions: components, languages, speci fications, 
              formalisms/logics, and tools. This provides the capacity to  move in a
              mathematically rigorous way across the different  formalizations of a system,
              and to use the different tools  supporting these formalizations  in a
              rigorously integrated  way. The research is based on two key technical ideas: 
              module calculi (for integration) and open multi-model  systems (for
              interoperation). The module calculus is  formalism-independent, and is intended
              to have powerful new  operations such as generalization. Open multi-model
              systems  formalize the multidimensional aspects of independent  interoperating
              parts.  ***
