Title       : Workshop on Aerogeophysical Research in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9633601

Award Number: 9633601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15655              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sridhar Anandakrishnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Anandakrishnan  9633601    Abstract    This award supports a workshop on
              Aerogeophysical Research in  Antarctica to be held 18-19 March, 1996, at the
              National Science  Foundation offices in Arlington, Virginia.    The National
              Science Foundation has established a facility to  collect airborne geophysical
              data in Antarctica.  The Support  Office for Aerogeophysical Research (SOAR)
              (administered by the  Institute for Geophysics of the University of Texas at
              Austin)  operates state-of-the-art instruments for ice-surface elevation,  ice
              thickness, gravity, and magnetics on board a ski-equipped  Twin Otter aircraft.
               This workshop will bring together earth  scientists and glaciologists to
              discuss the best possible use of  these tools and these types of data.    To
              date the facility has been used with great success in the West  Antarctic to
              image the Byrd Basin/Ross Embayment region.  This  area is a key to both
              glaciologic problems of ice sheet stability  and ice stream flow as well as
              tectonic problems of Gondwana  reconstructions and West Antarctic rifting. 
              Identifying other  such intersections of cross-discipline problems will be of
              great  importance in the long-term viability of SOAR.    This facility can be
              used in reconnaisance mode to map the  magnetic, gravity, and ice-thickness
              signatures of large areas or  as a high-resolution mapper to characterize in
              detail areas of  particular interest.  These two modes of operation are
              distinct  in philosophy and we will discuss the pros and cons of each mode.   
              The practical aspects of data handling, data visualization, and  final product
              delivery from SOAR will also be discussed.  The  different customers of SOAR
              require different levels of analysis  or integration of the data streams
              available.  These and other  issues of data delivery will be discussed.    The
              specific goals of the workshop are: 1) Educate the Antarctic  science community
              on the capabilities and limitations of the SOAR  facility; 2) Identify and
              prioritize research objectives of b road  interest and possibly global
              applicability that would be best  studied in the Antarctic using
              aerogeophysical data; 3) Link the  research goals of geologists and
              glaciologists to identify areas  of the Antarctic where these data would be of
              value to both  communities; and 4) Encourage the development of coordinated 
              proposals for future use of SOAR.
