Title       : Epitaxial Microstructures and Metallic Interfaces on Siliconand Silicon
               Germanium Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9633547

Award Number: 9633547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Nemanich Robert_Nemanich@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9633547 Nemanich  This research project aims for significant advancement in
              fundamental understanding of metal-semiconductor interfaces, particularly with
              respect to formation of Schottky barriers on GeSi surfaces, but also with
              respect to broader issues such as the effect of strain on barrier height. 
              Specific goals include investigation of the effect of strain on barrier height,
              combined experimental/theoretical investigations of Metal-Silicon-Germanium
              phase formation, and the effect of surface roughening on contact resistance. 
              The general approach is to combine advanced MBE and CVD growth methods and
              in-situ surface characterization techniques with high resolution TEM and other
              ex-situ film characterization techniques to explore the chemical stability of
              model ternary interfaces, examine the Schottky barrier at the interface of
              strained and relaxed SiGe alloys, to explore materials and electrical
              properties of morphologically rough epitaxial interfaces, and to initiate new
              studies of epitaxial silicide/silicon nano-structures. %%% The project is
              multidisciplinary combining fundamental materials physics and materials science
              synthesis and processing studies with advanced characterization tools and
              analysis methods to address forefront issues in a topical area of strong
              technological relevance and high potential payoff.  The research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to several
              aspects of advanced electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. 
              Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
              is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
              advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a
              basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. ***
