Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology: Business Group Structure and the
               Dynamics of Firm Performance in the People's Republic of China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9633121

Award Number: 9633121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7496               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Nee vgn1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9633121  Nee    The way in which firms in the People's Republic of China conduct
              business has been fundamentally altered in the past two decades.  Firms have
              gained increasing independence from central authority and, in the process, have
              begun to grow at unprecedented rates.  Chinese firms are not, however,
              conducting business as isolated economic entities.  Rather they are joining
              business groups and conducting business from within these interfirm networks. 
              Researchers have documented the central role organizational environments play
              in determining firm behavior and outcomes, but no systematic effort has been
              made to document the impact interorganizational networks have on firm behavior
              and performance.  The proposed research will provide an account of the
              structure of the emergent Chinese business groups and document their impact on
              the performance of member firms.  In the process, this research will also
              inform more general theoretical discussions about the role interfirm networks
              play in structuring the behavior and performance of individual firms.  The
              proposed research also has implications for mangers and policy makers both in
              China and abroad as China's firms continue to expand and play an increasingly
              important international role.  This research will employ quantitative panel
              data, financial and network data on the 40 largest Chinese business groups and
              their 522 member firms, as well as qualitative case study data on six of the
              groups included in the broader data set.  The dynamic, multi-level quantitative
              data will facilitate the use of the techniques of social network analysis to
              describe the structure of the groups and hierarchial regression analysis to
              test the effects the structure has on firm behavior and performance.  The
              funding of this proposal will facilitate the collection of the second wave of
              the quantitative data (including all network data) as well as the case study
              data.  ***
