Title       : GOALI: Methane Upgrading: Optimal Reactor Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9633359

Award Number: 9633359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herschel A. Rabitz hrabitz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R.  A. Yetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christodoulos A. Floudas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Rabitz - 9633359    The objective of this research project is to
              employ optimal control theory to maximize the yields and conversion
              efficiencies for the upgrading of natural gas to C2+ hydrocarbons and/or
              methanol.  Specifically, a new type of chemical reactor will be designed and
              developed that will allow for controllable addition of mass and energy fluxes
              along the length of a continuous flow reactor.  Modular non-catalytic
              homogeneous gas-phase reactors as well as modular catalytic fixed bed reactors
              will be considered.  The program will consist of both experimental and modeling
              efforts interconnected by the use of optimal control theory and sensitivity
              analysis.  As part of the modeling effort, optimal designs will be obtained to
              assist in the creation of the reactor and to suggest optimal experimental
              operating conditions. e.g., the temperature and mass flux distribution profiles
              required along the length of the reactor, the selection of which chemical
              species should be injected along the reactor, and methods to control the
              quenching process (rates of energy extraction, dilution by chemical species,
              etc.). Finally, the reactor will be constructed to allow for laboratory
              feedback to fully optimize the yields of desired products and conversion
              efficiencies of natural gas under the actual operating conditions.    This
              project involves a collaborative effort between Princeton University and Exxon
              Research and Engineering in Annandale, New Jersey.  The collaboration will
              involve conducting laboratory experiments and modeling calculations at both
              Princeton and Exxon that complement each other, provide confirmation of each
              group's work, and stimulate an active exchange of technology between the two
              groups in order to expedite the development and industrial implementation of
              new economic reactor designs for methane upgrading.  Optimal reactor designs
              will be considered for specific chemical systems that include (1) conversion of
              methane to ethylene, (2) conversion of methane to synthesi s gas, and (3),
              conversion of methane to methanol.  Because of the importance of developing an
              economic process, projected cost analyses for implementation of the proposed
              reactor methodology into industrial practice will be performed during the
              second and third years of the program.
