Title       : Self-Assembly of Inorganic/Organic Multilayer Thin Films: Novel Chemical Systems
               for Self-Assembly and Incorporation of Nonlinear Optical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9633062

Award Number: 9633062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine J. Page cpage@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is made in the Office of Special Projects in the the Chemistry  
              Division  in support of the research of Dr. Catherine Page at the   University
              of Oregon. The research deals with the design, synthesis and   characterization
              of self-assembled inorganic/organic multilayer thin   films. Two specific areas
              will be investigated: (1) the incorporation of   nonlinear optical (NLO)
              chromophores into metal bisphosphonate   multilayers, both as new  NLO films,
              and as a diagnostic tool for    assessing orientational order and kinetics of
              monolayer formation; and,   (2) the synthesis of new hybrid multilayer films
              based on transition   metal diisocyanide coordination complexes. In the latter
              system, the role   of solvent, transition metal and diisocyanide structure will
              be explored.   Synthesis and dynamics of metal diisocyanide multilayers and
              hybrid   multilayers of metal diisocyanide and metal bisphosphonates will be  
              investigated. Multilayers will be characterized by FTIR, grazing angle   x-ray
              diffraction, ellipsometry and XPS. Additionally, the orientational   order of
              the layers and the kinetics of monolayer formation will be   determined by
              second harmonic generation measurements.  This research has elements of both
              fundamental importance and commercial   relevance. Incorporation of nonlinear
              optical chromophores into   self-assembled films provide a means of addressing
              fundamental issues of   film orientation and growth. Additionally, multilayer
              structures with   nonlinear optical properties offer the prospect of
              applications in   electrooptic conversion, optical switching and frequency
              doubling   devices.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
