Title       : Performance Modeling of Optoelectronic Communication Networks for Ultracompact
               Massively Parallel Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9633673

Award Number: 9633673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose L. Cruz-Rivera rivera@eecom.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9633673  Cruz-Rivera  The objective of this Minority Research Planning Grant
              proposal is to present a plan for preliminary studies that will facilitate the
              development of a competitive research project in the area of optoelectronic
              communication networks, with the full expectation that this project will form
              the basis of a subsequent regular research proposal to the NSF's Optical
              Communication System program.  In addition to the technical activities that
              will be carried out during the planning period, the work proposed herein seeks
              to address certain infrastructure-related issues that are unique to the
              establishment of an Optoelectronic Systems Research Group at the University of 
              Puerto Rico-Mayaguez - a primarily undergraduate institution that is currently
              making great strides towards the development of a strong Ph.D. program in
              Computer Science and Engineering.    The technical activities to be carried out
              during the proposed twelve month planning represent a single component of a
              broader area of investigation that would constitute the main focus of the
              Optoelectronic Systems Research Group at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez
              (UPRM).  In particular, the proposed line of inquiry seeks to advance the
              development of an Applications-Driven Optical Interconnect Technology (ADROIT) 
              Model that would allow, for a given application class, the determination of :  
               (1) the optimal optoelectronic system implementation given set of algorithmic,
                                                  architectural, topological, and
              technological parameters, and    (2) the relative impact the optical
              interconnect technologies in question would have on the overall
              cost/performance metric of these systems.    The proposed activities would, on
              the one hand, advance the short-term development of certain aspects of this
              ADROIT model by providing insight into the topological-technological design
              space associated with the implementation of optoelectronic communication
              networks for ultracompact massively parallel processing sy stems, while on the
              other, provide a framework that will allow the identification of the specific
              research tasks to be undertaken and methodologies to be employed in the
              long-term development of this model.  The identified tasks and methodologies
              would in turn form the basis for the subsequent research proposal.  ***
