Title       : Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Population Regulation in Migratory Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a9633522

Award Number: 9633522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas L. Rodenhouse nrodenho@firstclass.wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9633522  Rodenhouse  This research is designed to test and evaluate the
              mechanisms (i.e., processes) determining population size in North American
              migratory songbirds.  The study will help in understanding why some species are
              currently showing population declines. The work focuses on breeding populations
              of Black-throated Blue Warblers (Dendroica caerulescens) in the Hubbard Brook
              Experimental Forest in north central New Hampshire.  Through monitoring and
              experimental studies, we will quantify the occurrence and strength of two types
              of population regulation, namely density-dependence and site-dependence.  Each
              type is capable of generating negative feedbacks on population size.  One test
              will involve evaluating the effects of experimental reductions of local
              population density, while monitoring will examine how habitat quality
              influences bird survival and reproduction.  Habitat quality will be defined in
              terms of food abundance, weather, predator abundance, and vegetation
              composition and structure.  The ability of these measures, singly and
              collectively, to predict territory-specific reproduction, survival, and
              dispersal of these species over broad spatial and altitudinal scales will be
              examined.  Data from these studies will be employed in computer simulation
              models for comparisons of the regulatory strength of the two potentially
              important regulatory processes.  Model projections and analyses will help to
              identify, assess, and integrate the factors and processes determining
              population changes and abundances of this migratory bird species.  Results of
              this research will contribute not only to basic ecological theory, but also
              will have direct management applications for migratory songbirds, some of which
              are declining in abundance and are of conservation concern.
