Title       : Circadian Rhythms of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9633267

Award Number: 9633267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl H. Johnson carl.h.johnson@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Johnson  9633267    Organisms at all levels of biological complexity
              manifest circadian (daily) rhythms which are controlled by an endogenous
              biochemical oscillator.  Many physiological and cellular processes, including
              sleeping/waking, body temperature, homeostatic functions, gene expression, cell
              division, and enzymatic activities, are regulated by these "biological clocks".
               In addition, these oscillators are also the timers that measure the daylength
              in photoperiodic timing of reproductive processes in plants and animals. 
              Therefore, understanding the biochemical mechanism of circadian clocks is of
              fundamental biological interest .  The biochemical nature of these biological
              clocks has been elusive, but their salient properties (persistence, temperature
              compensation, and entrainment) are conserved in all organisms in which
              circadian behavior has been observed, from bacteria to mammals. This suggests 
              that the biochemical mechanism has also been conserved--if not in exact
              homology, then at least in terms of the general components and composition of
              the clock.  The approach to unveiling the mechanism of circadian oscillators
              described in this proposal focuses on the least-complex and most
              technically-approachable organism in which a biological clock has been
              demonstrated, the cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942. The
              technical advantages of this organism are that it has a small genome which is
              easily manipulated genetically, and that a bioluminescent strain has been
              developed in which the monitoring of circadian gene expression is the most
              flexible and facile of any system presently available.  Screening of thousands
              of colonies for mutations that disrupt the clock or otherwise cause aberrant
              rhythmic behavior is possible within a single experiment.  Therefore, this
              cyanobacterial system has excellent tools for detailed molecular/genetic
              analyses and for clock investigations. This project will use this system to
              address three aspects of biological rhythmicity: (1) identi fication and
              characterization of genes that are involved in generating circadian rhythms,
              (2) characterization of the mechanism by which the oscillator controls rhythmic
              outputs, and (3) assessment of the fitness advantage that organisms derive from
              their circadian oscillators.  %%%  Organisms at all levels of biological
              complexity manifest circadian (daily) rhythms which are controlled by an
              internal biochemical oscillator. Many physiological and cellular processes,
              including sleeping/waking, body temperature, homeostatic functions, gene
              expression, cell division, and enzymatic activities, are regulated by these
              "biological clocks."  In addition, these clocks are also the timers that
              measure the daylength in photoperiodic timing of reproductive processes in
              plants and animals.  Psychiatric and medical studies have shown that circadian
              rhythms are involved in some forms of depressive illness, "jet lag," drug
              tolerance/efficacy, sleep disorders, and other aspects of human physiology. 
              Understanding the mechanism of these biological clocks has been elusive, but
              one principle which has emerged is that their major properties are conserved in
              all organisms in which circadian behavior has been observed, from bacteria to
              mammals. The approach to unveiling the mechanism of circadian oscillators
              described in this project focuses on using the least-complex and most
              technically-approachable organism in which a biological clock has been
              demonstrated (a cyanobacterium) to discover how the clock works at a molecular
              level.  Information gained from this work about the mechanism of circadian
              clocks is of fundamental biological interest and may lead to insights which
              will be useful in agriculture and in the diagnosis and treatment of mental
              health and other human disorders.  ***    ??
