Title       : Dissertation Research: Technological Styles of Late Preclassic Lowlands Maya
               Architectural Sculpture: Cultural Explanations of Technological Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9633770

Award Number: 9633770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Leventhal rml@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal, Mr. Eric Hansen will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will collect samples of stucco and samples
              which have secure archaeological contexts and which have been collected from a
              series of Preclassic lowland Mayan sites. These will be subjected to a series
              of analyses including optical microscopy, image analysis of petrographic thin
              sections and paint cross sections supplemented by instrumental examinations.
              With this information he will be able to determine whether technological styles
              - standardized techniques for preparation of these products - are present,
              their degree of uniformity and how they change over time. Stucco and plaster
              were widely used by Maya to coat temple walls, as a base for painted design and
              as the material to shape into sculptures. They are produced by burning lime,
              slaking it with water and then adding a variety of tempers. Preliminary work by
              Mr. Hansen indicates considerable variability in the details of Mayan
              production practices.   Archaeologists study style for several reasons. Because
              styles change over time, by looking at designs on potsherds for example one is
              often able to construct chronologies, date selected examples by radiocarbon and
              then fit other excavated examples in the proper time slot. Secondly,
              archaeologists study standardization among items from a same site because it
              provides insight into the degree of centralized organization and control.
              Standardization and centralization are directly related. Through his research
              Mr. Hansen will both develop a new technique of stylistic analysis and provide
              information on specific Mayan sites. He, together with several other
              archaeologists believe that the rise of Mayan civilization dates to a period
              earlier than many researchers accept and the data he produces will be directly
              relevant to this question.  This research is important for several reasons. It
              will produce data of interest to many archaeologists. It will help to pioneer
              the development of a new technique of potentially wide archaeological
              applicability and it will assist in the training of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
