Title       : Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9633374

Award Number: 9633374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $770000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Bergman pgates@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              program provides continued support for studies of organometallic reaction  
              mechanisms by Dr. Robert G. Bergman, Chemistry Department, University of  
              California at Berkeley.  Efforts will be focused on three projects.  The  
              first concerns interaction between transition metals from the left and   right
              sides of the series, respectively, within a single molecule.  A   second goal
              is generation of organometallic complexes that are highly   reactive due to the
              presence of an unpaired electron at the metal center.     In such species,
              relatively strong covalent bonds are formed to the   metal so that organic
              compounds that do not ordinarily associate with   metals may bond and then
              exhibit new reactivity.  Some chemistry of   analogous 18-electron metal anions
              will also be included.  The third   project is the synthesis of new ligands
              that confer planar chirality on   early and late transition metal complexes so
              that the stereochemistry of   metal-centered reactions that carry out organic
              transformations with   asymmetric induction may be investigated.   New metal
              dimerization   catalysts for preparing oligomers and polymers with unusual
              structures   from dienes and polyenes will be developed.  Chemical reactions
              involving organic molecules and transition metal   complexes are fundamental to
              the understanding of important catalytic and   biological processes.  In this
              program, the details of reactions in which   the presence of one or two metals
              imposes steric restrictions or develops   unusual electronic driving forces
              will be investigated.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
