Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Agricultural Intensification in the Formation
               of the Tarascan State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9633745

Award Number: 9633745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Feinman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Gary Feinman, Mr. Christopher Fisher will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Currently Mr. Fisher is conducting
              archaeological research in the Lake Patzcuaro Basin in Western Mexico and
              National Science Foundation support will allow radiocarbon analyses to date
              cultural features, examination of botanical samples and the study of geological
              sediments. The Lake Patzcuaro Basin figures prominently in Mesoamerican
              prehistory because of the large prehistoric state which developed in that
              region and which challenged the Aztecs for domination. At the time of European
              contact, the area was the core of a Tarascan state which controlled most of
              Western Mexico. Recent archaeological investigations in the basin have revealed
              large tracts of relict raised fields, canals and small scale settlements
              located on recently exposed lake bed. This land was inundated at the time of
              European contact and both archaeological and paleo-environmental evidence
              suggest that these features date to the Late Classic period. The intact nature
              of this previously unknown wetland agricultural complex and the ability to date
              the agricultural features and settlements provides an excellent research
              opportunity. Mr. Fisher is currently excavating the field system to obtain data
              which will allow placement of the water management features within a regional
              archaeological context. Samples recovered during the excavation will be
              radiocarbon dated to establish chronology. In addition, extensive botanical and
              pedalogical analysis will be conducted to further characterize sediments. These
              data will be combined with settlement pattern information and on this basis it
              will be possible to elucidate the relationships between environmental
              modification, demographic growth and the changing political organization in the
              Lake Patzcuaro region.       Archaeologists wish to understand how complex
              societies develop and reach a state level of organization. They have noted that
              in many areas of the world, the appearance of hierarchical social systems and
              large scale agricultural projects such as irrigation systems seem to go hand
              and hand. Yet the exact causal relationships and the factors which lead to both
              these phenomena are not well understood. Traditional approaches to this
              question in Latin American prehistory have tended to emphasize population
              pressure and centralized bureaucratic management as necessary preconditions for
              the construction and maintenance of intensive agricultural projects. However
              recent archaeological investigation has challenged this perspective and
              suggested that such management systems can be found in pre-state contexts. Much
              of this research however is inconclusive and Mr. Fisher's work will contribute
              information of direct relevance.       This research is important for several
              reasons. It will shed new light on the processes which underly the development
              of early states. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
