Title       : Collaborative Research: Pseudo-Nitzschia Species, Toxin Production, and
               Eutrophication in the Northern Gulf of Mexico: Past and Present
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9633805

Award Number: 9633805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34008              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Doucette greg doucette@ccgate.ssp.nmfs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DOUCETTE  9633805           Understanding the relationship between environmental
               conditions and Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) in coastal  areas is essential for
              predicting blooms, protecting human  health, and preventing economic losses. 
              Recently,  considerable interest has focused on Pseudo-nitzschia, a  diatom
              genus in which some species produce domoic acid, a  potent neurotoxin, causing,
              among other things, death or  short-term memory loss (Amnesic Shellfish
              Poisoning; ASP).  Preliminary data from the Louisiana coastal zone show that 
              Pseudo-nitzschia spp. (including potentially toxic  species) reach very high
              abundances every spring in the  plumes of the Mississippi and Atchafalya
              Rivers, and high  abundances occur frequently, but less predictably in a 
              Louisiana estuary. The hypothesized link between HABs and  eutrophication will
              be tested by 1) comparing the highly  eutrophic shelf environment with the less
              eutrophic  estuary and 2) examining changes in Pseudo-nitzschia  preserved in
              cores taken from the shelf where increasing  eutrophication over time is well
              documented.  Through a  combination of new sampling and analysis of archived 
              samples, a nearly ten year record of Pseudo-nitzschia  species composition at a
              shelf site and a four year  database of species composition and toxin
              production at  both the estuarine and shelf sites will be related to a  suite
              of environmental factors measured at the same time.  New biotechnological
              methods for measuring toxin  concentration, using a competitive receptor
              binding assay,  and identifying Pseudo-nitzschia species, using molecular 
              probes, will be tested in comparison with other more  standard methods. The new
              techniques were developed as  rapid and accurate screening methods which will
              ultimately  be used for a wide range of applications in both the  public and
              private sectors. Using these methods as part of  this research represents a
              mutually beneficial  collaboration between academic and government researchers 
              and private industry.
