Title       : Integration of Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry and Fourier Transform
               Infrared Spectroscopy into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0127120

Award Number: 0127120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna G. Cavinato cavinato@eou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Hermens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Woodford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Oregon University
	      One University Blvd.
	      La Grande, OR  978502899    541/962-3700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

The chemistry laboratory curriculum is being transformed and
              revitalized by the introduction of context-based experiments that emphasize
              critical thinking and that challenge students with real-world problems.
              Students are also being provided with service learning opportunities. From
              these activities, the students are understanding the role of chemistry in our
              society, particularly toward solving environmental issues, the capabilities and
              limitations of modern instrumentation and technology, and building connections
              with their community. These laboratory experiences are being adapted from the
              educational and research literature and are being implemented in part through
              the use of a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) and a Fourier
              Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectrophotometer. Teams of students from lower and
              upper division laboratory courses including Environmental, Analytical,
              Instrumental, and Organic Chemistry and Physical Science for pre-service
              teachers are investigating environmental issues related to protecting and
              sustaining natural resources on a nearby Native American Reservation. As a
              consequence of the inquiry-based laboratories and their service-learning
              component, students are focussing on the scientific process and the
              significance of results, rather than following cookbook-type experiments.
