Title       : NSF/USDOT Partnership for Exploratory Research - ICSST: A Zero Public
               Infrastructure Vehicle Based Traffic Information System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0127540

Award Number: 0127540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios K. Ziliaskopoulos a-z@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Athanasios K. Ziliaskopoulos
Northwestern University
NSF/USDOT : A Zero
              Infrastructure Vehicle Based Traffic Management System 
This research project
              introduces and studies an innovative, fully decentralized traffic information
              system that is based only on data exchanged by equipped vehicles. It does not
              require any infrastructure to be installed on the network by government
              agencies.  Vehicles exchange traffic information as they move through the
              network, which allows drivers to adjust their routes and avoid or be prepared
              for congestion, incidents or other hazards.  Since the system is solely based
              on in-vehicle devices, it will be market-driven and self-maintained and it will
              work on all types of roadways, if there is sufficient market penetration
              (freeways, arterials, rural and dirt roads).  It will be upgraded as newer
              cars, with more advanced technological capabilities for obtaining, exchanging
              and processing information, are introduced into the market-similar to the to
              that of the computer hardware and software industry today. While the concept is
              outside of the current policy philosophy of government agencies, the
              investigated system is quite simple: participating vehicles equipped with
              on-board computing and communication devices will be able to determine the
              vehicle's current location and past spatio-temporal trajectory as they traverse
              the network and exchange traffic measurements with other equipped vehicles. 
              Equipped vehicles moving in opposite directions on the same roadway or at
              intersections will exchange traffic information.  

This research will use
              analytical probabilistic and simulation based methods to answer questions, such
              as what is the necessary market penetration to have effective information
              generated and propagated throughout a street network, the relationship between
              shockwave and information-wave propagation, and the functional and algorithmic
              requirements of online routing algorithms to convert the data exchanged into
              meaningful routing information.   The analysis will consider benefits for
              equipped and non-equipped drivers under various scenarios of recurrent and
              non-recurrent congestion.  If the above analysis demonstrates potential for
              significant benefits, we intend to work with major communication and auto
              manufacturing companies that have strong ties with Northwestern University to
              develop a preliminary assessment of the technical feasibility of the system and
              potentially deploy a pilot. 

