Title       : Implementing a Project-Based Genetic Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0127035

Award Number: 0127035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19035              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Hobbie hobbiel@adelphi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adelphi University
	      South Avenue
	      Garden City, NY  11530    516/294-8700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
In an effort to improve students' understanding of
              genetics, their long-term retention of genetic concepts, and their ability to
              think, work, and analyze scientific problems independently, the genetics
              laboratory course at Adelphi University is being substantially modified. The
              revised course emphasizes open-ended project-based learning, and consists of
              two projects, one focusing on genetics and one on molecular biology. In the
              first project, an adaptation of a plant physiology lab developed by Dr.
              Jonathan Monroe of James Madison University, mutants of Arabidopsis are
              isolated and characterized genetically and physiologically. In the second
              project, an adaptation of a lab developed by Dr. Daphne Preuss of the
              University of Chicago, an Arabidopsis mutation is mapped using molecular
              markers. In both projects, students work in small groups on challenging
              problems. Under the instructor's guidance, they master technical skills,
              understand and pursue approaches to genetic problems, and use the scientific
              literature to develop their own set of experiments. These inquiry-based
              projects increase student intellectual involvement in the course and thereby
              should improve student learning. Colleagues in the Adelphi Office of Research,
              Assessment, and Planning are assessing the outcomes of the course improvements.
              Results are being disseminated to the science departments and Adelphi community
              through workshops, discussions, and presentations, and at a national
              conference.
