Title       : Collaborative Research: Network-Based Interactive Laboratory Modules for the
               Study of Movement Biomechanics, and Coordination and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0127221

Award Number: 0127221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Les G. Carlton lcarlton@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
In science education, laboratory sessions are valuable
              for reinforcing concepts introduced in
lectures. However, it has become
              increasingly difficult to acquire equipment, space, and
personnel resources to
              manage laboratory classes in higher education. The objective of the
project is
              to develop a set of interactive laboratory modules utilizing a previously
              developed
Internet-based video digitizing system. The developed modules will
              allow students to quantify the motion of an object or the human body by
              acquiring coordinate data from video images. The kinematic parameters resulting
              from the processing of coordinate data can be used for the learning of basic
              mechanical concepts and the study of movement coordination and control.
              Specifically, laboratory modules will be developed for the learning of basic
              mechanical concepts (e.g., linear and angular kinematics, muscle mechanics)
              that are usually taught in undergraduate level biomechanics and physics
              courses. The modules for the learning of concepts in motor coordination and
              control (e.g., inter-limb coordination, postural control) utilize a
              multidisciplinary approach, integrating concepts from biology, psychology and
              engineering. The use of the Web provides students unlimited accessibility in
              terms of both time (when) and location (where) to complete the laboratories.
              The modules have applications for distance learning courses and for educational
              settings where resources for specialized undergraduate laboratories are limited
              or unavailable. The project provides a unique integration of information
              technology and education for laboratory environments and the laboratory modules
              developed will be made available to the public. Teachers/Professors can
              selectively incorporate some or all of the modules in their courses. This is a
              collaboartive effort with the University of Florida (DUE 0127338).
