Title       : Integrating Computing with Geometry into an Upper-Level Computer Science
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0127401

Award Number: 0127401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Kuang Shene shene@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Lowther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

Since this world is built around geometric objects, we
              should not be surprised that many areas in computer science and engineering
              focus on representing, processing, and modeling geometric objects. These
              familiar areas include computer graphics, computer-aided design, 3D vision,
              visualization, robotics, NC machining, molecular modeling, terrain modeling and
              GIS. However, a typical computer science curriculum has a little or even no
              discussion about computing with geometry. 

This project addresses this
              deficiency in the training of future computer professionals, especially at a
              time that more and more applications require highly trained programmers with
              geometric and modeling skills. This project is an extension of a previous very
              successful proof-of-concept project, Geometric Computing in the Undergraduate
              Computer Science Curricula. A web-based textbook and a software tool
              DesignMentor were developed and used worldwide and are highly regarded. The
              project builds on the lessons learned in this previous project and on the
              experiences of instructors and users from all over the world. 

The primary
              goal of this project is to design and develop a set of comprehensive,
              elementary, and flexible course materials for teaching topics in computing with
              geometry that can be used in a dedicated course or across several courses
              (e.g., computing with geometry, computer graphics, computer-aided design,
              geometric modeling, and visualization). 

A secondary goal is to develop
              tools with which students can experiment and visualize the concepts, geometric
              algorithms, and skills in an intuitive, non-mathematical, and learning-by-doing
              way. 

With a set of well-organized contemporary course materials and
              pedagogical tools, we expect that students will be familiar with the
              state-of-the-art of computing in the geometric world, acquire basic knowledge
              and skills, know how to handle geometric problems in different applications and
              environments, and be well-prepared to approach geometric applications and their
              software development with confidence. 
Moreover, this project may also improve
              the retention rate of students, especially those geometric-minded students who
              may not perform well in traditional courses, in computer science. On the other
              hand, this project may also help students who are weak in visualization and
              geometry to improve their skills. Most importantly, this project impacts the
              future by preparing computer scientists, mathematicians, and engineers for
              professions that need a solid foundation in computing with geometry.
