Title       : Mathematics And Science Teacher Education Program (MASTEP): Follow-on Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0127800

Award Number: 0127800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan B. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy W. Carnal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald P. Drucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The MASTEP (Mathematics And Science Teacher Education Program), funded under the
              NSF Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher preparation program is continuing
              three crucial activities of the large and successful project. Under the
              leadership of San Jose State University, MASTEP includes San Francisco State
              University (the other teacher preparation program), four Community Colleges
              (City College of San Francisco, College of San Mateo, Evergreen Valley College,
              and San Jose City College), several local school districts, several local
              institutions for informal education, and several local supportive industries
              within the San Francisco Bay area. The project is evaluating the lasting
              impacts of MASTEP while also sharing experiences with colleagues nationwide
              through dissemination activities. In order to evaluate the teaching practices
              and leadership roles of MASTEP mathematics and science teacher graduates
              through their first 3-5 years in classroom teaching, the project is continuing
              the New Teacher Support Networks at both San Jose and San Francisco State
              Universities. Network activities include teaming the new teachers with local
              mentoring teachers, partial day workshops on relevant topics to teaching and
              leadership, and one residential workshop per semester to further network the
              new teachers together while promoting additional reform strategies.
              Dissemination activities consist of expanding the project's website to include
              rich descriptions of all of the major course revisions that have been funded by
              MASTEP. Accompanying many of these descriptions will be evaluation data on the
              impact of the course revisions or other activities. Faculty presentations on
              reform efforts are targeting Arts and Science faculty to inform such faculty of
              the project's successes and to encourage other faculty to embark on similar
              reforms. Evaluation efforts are leading to a summative assessment of the
              lasting impacts of MASTEP on students, instructors, and institutions. The
              evaluation is coordinated with the CETP Core Evaluation effort . The
              anticipated outcome of this project is a well documented assessment of the
              features of MASTEP that have had important and lasting impacts, especially on
              the new teachers produced and on the college/university faculty related to
              teaching practices, leadership roles, advances in personnel careers, and
              institutional reform.

