Title       : Creation of an Introductory Engineering Course Based on Sooner City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0127117

Award Number: 0127117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Parker parkerp@uwplatt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Max L. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Platteville
	      1 University Plaza
	      Platteville, WI  538183099    608/342-1261

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54)

Retention of first year engineering students is
              approximately 75% in the US. One reason for the low retention rate may be the
              ineffectiveness of the introductory engineering course. A poorly designed
              introductory course does not engage the students and does not motivate them to
              persevere through their heavy load of mathematics and science courses.

The
              project is creating an introductory civil and environmental engineering course
              that adapts the "Sooner City" program. "Sooner City" is a virtual city that
              allows students to design a variety of infrastructure needs such as roadways,
              building structures, foundations, earthen dams, etc. "Sooner City" program had
              been developed to be used in a design across the curriculum environment, and
              thus adaptation of the concept to a single introductory course appears to be
              promising for retention.

The project consists of:
1. Creating a portable
              first year "Introduction to Civil and Environmental Engineering, (ICEE)" course
              based on the Sooner City program.
2. Assessing the success of the ICEE course
              at meeting the following global objectives:
 a. Stimulating interest in
              engineering among freshmen;
 b. Providing freshmen with an understanding of
              the breadth of the civil and environmental engineering profession;
 c.
              Positively impacting retention of freshman civil and environmental engineering
              students.
 d. Widespread adoption at other universities as a result of its
              portability, modularity, and cost-effectiveness.
3. Providing course materials
              on a web site to facilitate implementation of the course at other
              universities.
4. Beta testing the ICEE course at other universities.

