Title       : Real-Time Multi-Dimensional Assessment of Student Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0127650

Award Number: 0127650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535866             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Hanson david.hanson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice A. Grackin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Troy A. Wolfskill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A web-based assessment instrument that provides real-time, multi-dimensional,
              formative assessment of student learning is being developed. This instrument
              provides measures of learning by topic and by level of mastery. The levels of
              mastery are defined as the information level, the algorithmic level, the
              conceptual level, and the problem solving level. The information level is
              characterized by memorization and the ability to recall, repeat pieces of
              information, and identify information that is relevant. The algorithmic level
              is 
characterized by the ability to mimic, implement instructions; and use
              memorized 
information in familiar contexts. The conceptual level is
              characterized by the ability to visualize, rephrase, change representations,
              make connections, and provide explanations. The problem-solving level is
              characterized by the ability to use material in new contexts; to analyze
              problems; to identify the information, algorithms, and understanding needed to
              solve them; to synthesize these components into a solution; and to evaluate the
              quality of this solution. Four products are resulting from the project: 1) A
              web-based assessment system founded on a coded database of questions; 2) A
              coded database of questions for use in measuring student learning in
              introductory college chemistry, calibrated to reproduce measurements generated
              through student interviews; 3) Protocols for developing and calibrating
              databases for use in other SMET courses; and, 4) Quantitative and qualitative
              analyses of the use of this system by both students and teachers, including the
              impact of the instrument on the users learning and teaching strategies and the
              impact of the instrument on student performance. 

Students are using the
              instrument to self-assess their learning after each assignment, to clarify
              expectations for their performance particularly with regard to conceptual
              understanding and problem solving, and to identify strategies for improving
              their achievement. Faculty are using it to prepare formative and summative
              assessments, to target particular practices and topics for improved
              instruction, to identify groups of students who need immediate assistance, and
              to assess the effectiveness of new teaching strategies and materials.


              
Important co-funding of this project is being provided by the Division of
              Research, Evaluation and Communication. 


