Title       : Video and Image Data Access (VIDA) for Science Inquiry During Teacher
               Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0127164

Award Number: 0127164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Pelaez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra Winters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara L. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Future teachers are expected to understand how past
              and current research fits together into a structure of knowledge, at the same
              time as they learn how to model scientific inquiry. This project bridges
              science research and teaching practice with Video and Image Data Access (VIDA),
              a collection of digital science images for prospective K-6 teachers. The VIDA
              database of annotated science research images builds upon knowledge from CIELO,
              a database for art history courses at California State University, to create a
              science image project that is partnering with BioSci Education Network (BEN).
              Project objectives are to (1) identify content areas where images can best
              support learning by prospective K-6 teachers, (2) build a database of digital
              images from research that can be shared and analyzed in an inquiry approach,
              (3) catalogue the images into a meaningful hierarchy with text annotations to
              make them searchable, (4) assist prospective K-6 teachers to achieve subject
              matter information competence in science, (5) provide a prototype database that
              can be adapted by other institutions to link prospective teachers with the
              science research community through the use of images from modern research. The
              VIDA images serve as a starting point to develop questioning strategies about
              systems, scale, constancy, and change. VIDA gives prospective teachers a role
              in contributing annotated images using a controlled science vocabulary by
              providing a clearly defined database structure and a cataloging manual written
              for K-6 teachers. VIDA helps K-6 teachers understand how a database can be used
              for inquiry, while making it possible to share the excitement of current
              research and complement hands-on inquiry through the use of images.

