Title       : CRI: The Longitudinal Effects of Racial Identity on Parenting Styles and Racial
               Socialization of African-American Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0127529

Award Number: 0127529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marva L. Lewis mlewis@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The Longitudinal Effects of Racial Identity on Parenting Styles and
              Racial Socialization of African American Children

Marva L. Lewis

	This is
              a project to evaluate the long-term impact of African American parents'
              ethnicity and racial identity on their parenting styles with infants and
              toddlers. The project expands Ron Rohner's theory of parental acceptance and
              rejection to include the racial context of African American children's
              development. The Principal Investigator argues there are intense emotions
              associated with being accepted or rejected or teased about phenotypic racial
              features by various members of the child's family and social networks. 
              Phenotypic racial features -- skin color, hair texture, nose and lip size --
              may have been an ongoing source of ridicule, pride or shame to during the
              parent's early childhood.  These early intense emotional experiences associated
              with race compose the parent's ethnobiography. Their ethnobiography includes
              their ethnic identity, early childhood experiences of racial acceptance and
              rejection and internalized stereotypes. We also propose that the best
              culturally valid context to study the interactions between parents and children
              is to use the racially charged task of hair combing.  
 Several exploratory
              and pilot studies have been conducted by the P.I. over the past several years
              using a questionnaire based on this theory and using the hair-combing task. 
              The findings from these pilot studies suggest that early experiences of racial
              acceptance and rejection are associated with depression and anxiety, feelings
              of security and insecurity, self-esteem, and racial identity and racial pride
              in adult African American mothers.  Further, early experiences of racial
              rejection were associated with higher levels of internalized stereotypes about
              Blacks. A pilot study funded by a grant from the National Institute of Mental
              health was conducted with 41 mother-child dyads and examined the robustness of
              Hair Combing Task (in conjunction with a teaching task and free play task) as a
              viable context to evaluate parenting styles.  
The current project is to plan
              research and to develop the measures.  The primary research questions to be
              addressed are: 1)."Is there a relationship between African American parents'
              ethnobiographies and their current childrearing beliefs and attitudes about
              children? 2). What is the relationship of African American parents' early
              experiences of racial acceptance and rejection with their parenting styles with
              their children?"  The goal is to develop a scientifically rigorous project to
              replicate and expand the previous research findings.


