Title       : The Virtual Manufacturing Environment as a Capstone for Systems and Industrial
               Engineering Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0127470

Award Number: 0127470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen C. Way way@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold W. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
Industrial and systems engineers go on to jobs that
              often involve the design and/or management of complex large-scale projects.
              Such projects require exceptional skills in knowledge integration, teamwork and
              decision-making. Unfortunately, there are few cost-effective ways for
              developing the necessary skills for working on projects of this scale and
              complexity. As a result, students rarely see more than unrealistically
              simplified problems and finish their undergraduate engineering education with a
              collection of disjoint tools, techniques and skills without the necessary
              experience to unify and integrate them. Engineering schools often use capstone
              classes with projects in industry to culminate undergraduate education. While
              this can be a valuable experience, students rarely get the kind of projects
              that integrate their technical skills. This project develops a different kind
              of capstone class: one that takes advantage of Active Learning, where the
              students are immersed in realistic experiences of designing and running a
              virtual manufacturing floor. The manufacturing environment consists of compiled
              documents, role-playing, and a software virtual floor. Unlike many other
              manufacturing simulations that concentrate on the details of the machines and
              products, this product focuses on the experience of designing and running
              fairly generic large-scale process projects. In this capstone project, the
              students draw on all of their engineering skills, apply them to a wide range of
              problems, and face the consequences of their decisions.
