Title       : Studies in Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0127926

Award Number: 0127926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Lebowitz lebowitz@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is supported by the Divisions of Materials Research, Physics, and
              Mathematical Sciences.  The research covers a broad program in statistical
              mechanics with an aim to better understand macroscopic phenomena originating in
              the collective behavior of its microscopic constituents.  The methods used
              range from rigorous mathematical analysis to computer simulations.  Topics to
              be studied include: 

(i) Symmetry breaking transitions leading to the
              formation of spatial (temporal) patterns are fascinating and important examples
              of collective phenomena.  They are paradigms of emergent behavior, with no
              counterpart in the properties of individual atoms or molecules.  They occur in
              very diverse situations, ranging from crystallization in equilibrium systems,
              the development of rolls and cells in fluids heated from below to the formation
              of patterns in morphogenesis.  For equilibrium systems the state observed with
              overwhelming probability is the one which maximizes the entropy: the logarithm
              of the number of microscopic states (with given constraints) corresponding to
              the macroscopic structure.  This translates into minimization of the free
              energy at a fixed temperature, etc.  For nonequilibrium systems there is no
              such general principle.  We have however recently found a rigorous
              generalization of free energy to a model nonequilibrium system.  Extending this
              work to more realistic systems will provide a framework fo rpattern formation
              in nonequilibrium with some of the generality now enjoyed by equilibrium. 
              

(ii) The behavior of alloys and fluid mixtures following a quench from a
              uniform high temperature phase into the coexistence region continues to offer
              challenging problems.  Of particular theoretical interest and practical
              importance is the case of alloys with elastic interactions where the kinetics
              determine many of the important physical properties.  Our approach to these
              problems includes analytic derivations of macroscopic equations describing
              phase segregation from microscopic models; investigations of the solution of
              these highly nonlinear equations; and, computer simulations.  An important
              simplification occurs when the interactions giving rise to the phase
              segregation are long range Kac potentials.  These systems permit the
              investigation of detailed properties of the interface (soliton) between
              different phases. 
  
(iii) Work on other aspects of nonequilibrium phenomena
              include dynamical systems approach to current carrying systems in which the
              time evolution is described by thermostated deterministic non-Hamiltonian
              dynamics; the study of very large, formally infinite, Hamiltonian systems which
              can be divided into a subsystem and reservoirs; microscopic derivation of
              macroscopic (hydrodynamics type) equations for realistic systems. 

(iv) A
              surprisingly large number of macroscopic phenomena, such as boiling and
              freezing, can be treated as if the atomic world was (effectively) classical. 
              This is no longer so at low temperatures or ano sizes.  There one is in the
              world of the quantum where the phenomena is much richer and calculations much
              harder.  Work will continue on both equilibrium and nonequilibrium systems
              which are intrinsically quantum mechanical.  The Schroedinger time evolution of
              even the simplest model system is exceedingly complex and fascinating once one
              goes beyond perturbation theory.  

(v) Biological systems are now at the
              frontier of science.  There have already been many applications of statistical
              mechanical ideas to biology.  These range from ecological and epidemiological
              systems to neural network models of the immune system and the brain.  While
              only a few of these applications have really been on target, the methodology of
              statistical mechanics does seem to provide the right framework for describing
              how higher level patterns or behavior emerge from the activity of a multitude
              of interacting simpler entities.  Research will be carried out on a number of
              these topics. 
%%%
This grant is supported by the Divisions of Materials
              Research, Physics, and Mathematical Sciences.  The research covers a broad
              program in statistical mechanics with an aim to better understand macroscopic
              phenomena originating in the collective behavior of its microscopic
              constituents.  The methods used range from rigorous mathematical analysis to
              computer simulations.
***



