Title       : Implementation of an Active Learning Pedagogy into the General Physics
               Curriculum at Towson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0127028

Award Number: 0127028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30464              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Schaefer dschaefer@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The Physics Department at Towson University is restructuring the
              calculus
based general physics courses in order to a) provide a more effective
              learning
environment for the students, b) provide appropriate course content
              in the service
courses, c) increase the retention of declared physics majors
              in the general physics
courses, and d) teach the general physics courses in
              such a manner so as to recruit
additional students. This is accomplished by
              offering two sequences of calculus
based general physics; one acts as a
              service course to other science disciplines, and
the other is an Honors
              Physics course. The Honors Physics sequence not only
has students from the
              Honors College enrolled, but all declared physics majors take
the course.
              Placing the physics majors in a class
with highly motivated, interested
              students such as from the honors college helps to
increase the retention rate
              of the majors. Additionally, this low enrollment course is
taught using
              adaptation of Workshop Physics techniques. This highly interactive, active
              learning
environment has been demonstrated to be a more effective method of
              teaching physics
than traditional lectures, and students are expected to
              retain their enthusiasm
and interest in physics. Additionally, by separating
              the physics majors from the present
calculus based general physics courses,
              the department can modify the content of the courses
to suit the needs of the
              other science disciplines. Equipment is being used
in both the Workshop
              Physics honors course and the regular general physic course. In the
regular
              general physics course, the equipment allows the faculty to
explore
              implementation of a calculus-based version of Realtime physics.
