Title       : Actively Engaging Undergraduates in Geologic Problem Solving by Integrating
               Petrographic Microscopy and Digital Image Analysis into an Earth Systems
               Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0127006

Award Number: 0127006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40462              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Templeton templej@wou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Oregon University
	      345 N Monmouth Avenue
	      Monmouth, OR  973611329    503/838-8174

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
Using the recommendations from a workshop supported jointly by
              NSF, AGU, and the Keck Consortium (NSF, 1996), Western Oregon University
              recently implemented a broad-based, integrated Earth systems science approach
              to undergraduate geoscience education that is a unique program in the state of
              Oregon. One of the key objectives of this state-of-the-art curriculum shift is
              to engage undergraduate Earth Science majors in the process of "doing science"
              (NSF, 1996). The primary objective of this course improvement project is to
              adapt and implement an active, inquiry-based approach to teaching mineralogy
              and petrology within the context of this new Earth systems science curriculum.
              This pedagogical model integrates geologic problem solving with petrographic
              microscopy and digital image analysis in an introductory petrology course that
              serves as the foundation for the study of Earth materials in the Earth Science
              major. Using thin sections as a geologic database, Earth Science majors become
              proficient in making observations, identifying scientific problems, proposing
              working hypotheses that can be tested using computer-based technologies, and
              defending their results in class-wide discussions via multi-media presentation
              systems and written reports. To implement this innovative pedagogical model, a
              petrographic microscope and digital camera are interfaced with a computer,
              digital image analysis software, and a set of student petrographic microscopes.
              In addition to the petrology course, this instrumentation is being widely
              utilized throughout the broad-based, undergraduate Earth systems science
              curriculum and is being used for outreach activities that are designed to
              showcase the exciting world of microscopy and digital image analysis to K-12
              students and science educators.
