Title       : Computer Integrated Investigative Physiology Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0127087

Award Number: 0127087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45240              (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Schulte gschulte@truman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Rutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura J. Fielden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The goal of this project is to make the physiology
              student laboratories at Truman State University more investigative. The main
              obstacle in transforming our laboratories from traditional formulative
              exercises into student-driven investigations lies in our data handling
              capabilities. The stand-alone instruments we had been using require manual
              adjustments for which no record is generated, which made it difficult to
              compare data from different instruments or work sessions. In addition, the data
              records consisted of extensive collections of strip charts. There was no
              efficient method for sharing these records within a work group. Worse yet, this
              form of record did not facilitate in-depth analysis, comparisons, and
              contrasts; quantitative evaluations could only be made after painstaking
              hands-on measurement of each bit of pertinent record. This project is upgrading
              the technology of our physiology labs with the aim of improving our data
              collection and interpretation capabilities by providing instruments which allow
              computerized data acquisition and analysis. It is an adaptation of models
              introduced by the University of Central Florida, Harvey Mudd College,
              California State University at Hayward, and Cornell University, with NSF
              support. The expected outcomes of this project are: 1) students able to design
              and carry out procedures which allow them to answer specific physiological
              questions; 2) the ability to highlight the relationships between procedures,
              data, and the interpretation of data so that students have a better
              understanding of how "real science" works; and 3) giving the students an
              opportunity to compare and contrast results from related procedures and draw
              conclusions therefrom.

