Title       : Learning through Writing about Environmentally Significant Analysis using Atomic
               Absorption Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a0127174

Award Number: 0127174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence D. Margerum margeruml@usfca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Karney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University San Francisco
	      2130 Fulton Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941171080    415/666-6886

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

Chemistry students at the University of San Francisco (USF)
              complete many traditional wet chemistry techniques in their introductory lab
              courses. With this project, we are making use of an atomic absorption
              spectrophotometer (AAS) and web-based writing-to-learn technology (Calibrated
              Peer Review, CPR) to explore environmental chemistry problems in general and
              analytical chemistry courses. We are adapting a number of environmentally
              significant chemistry experiments from the chemical education literature to
              improve conceptual understanding of technical subjects, to develop skills in
              reading for content and in scientific writing, and to link the writing
              assignment to hands-on experiments using atomic absorption
              spectroscopy.
On-line source material on environmental problems and published
              experiments using AAS are being adapted for pre-lab and post-lab writing
              assignments using the web-based Calibrated Peer Review (CPR) program developed
              by the NSF-funded Molecular Science Project. First and second year science
              students in general and analytical chemistry, plus a group of non-science
              majors in a general education course are impacted by the project. Assignments
              are designed to explore how quantitative analysis by AAS can help identify
              environmental problems. The immediate impact includes (i) a deeper
              understanding of an environmental problem via the CPR pedagogy of reading for
              content and peer-review of writing assignments, (ii) exposure of introductory
              students to high quality analytical instrumentation, and (iii) more confidence
              and interest in quantitative chemistry. We are assessing student confidence and
              learning by conducting surveys tracking their exam performance, their writing
              assignments and by arranging informal discussions with students.

