Title       : Incorporating Structural and Image Analysis Investigations Across the Biology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0127622

Award Number: 0127622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74126              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Howard howard.davi@uwlax.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel T. Gerber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Galbraith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Sutherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Miskowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin La Crosse
	      1725 State Street
	      La Crosse, WI  546013742    608/785-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) This project is incorporating digital imaging and image
              analysis technology across the biology curriculum so as to more fully implement
              investigative pedagogical approaches. The project adapts several key features
              of curriculum-wide imaging projects successfully implemented at other
              universities, most notably Franklin and Marshall College, Kutztown University,
              and Kent State University. However, the scope of the project is larger than
              those at other institutions in that digital imaging is being used extensively
              in the largest General Education lab science class, Introductory Biology. This
              course serves non-science majors, science majors, and pre-service K-12
              teachers. The project is organized to provide Biology majors proficiency with
              this technology by introducing them to it in their first year and incrementally
              increasing their use of digital imaging and analysis in their upper division
              core and elective courses and undergraduate research. To accomplish these
              goals, the project is using a two-tiered approach. In the first tier students
              use workstations consisting of basic digital cameras, student compound and
              stereo microscopes, and computers to answer guided-inquiry questions in both
              Introductory Biology and upper division labs. At the second tier, two low-light
              level CCD cameras attached to high-quality microscopes are being used by all
              Biology majors in a centralized microscope facility to perform more
              sophisticated digital imaging and quantitative image analysis in classes and
              research projects. Faculty development is being accomplished through instructor
              training on equipment acquired.
