Title       : Collaborative Research: Combining Real and Virtual Professional Development for
               Current and Future Geoscience Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0127310

Award Number: 0127310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2643530            (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Heather Macdonald rhmacd@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40)
The National Association of Geoscience Teachers
              (NAGT) and the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) is offering a
              professional development program to improve the quality of undergraduate
              geoscience education. The program is designed to enhance the participants'
              content knowledge in emerging fields and promote exemplary teaching practices;
              develop effective on-line resources to support existing workshops; provide
              electronic versions of workshops to extend the influence of the workshops; and
              develop an active cohort of educators involved in further dissemination. The
              professional development program includes both emerging topics in geoscience
              and faculty development workshops. Two emerging topics workshops are being
              offered each year, one in an interdisciplinary field related to Earth systems
              and one in geoscience pedagogy. Mature topical workshops, based on successful
              previous work, include: course design workshops, workshops for early career
              faculty, and workshops for graduate students and post-doctoral fellows
              preparing for careers in academia. Web resources developed by the project
              provide a collection of background resources and are designed to engage
              participants in on-going discussion. The project also explores tutorials,
              synchronous discussion, and on-line courses for delivering workshop content.
              Participants in the workshops are expected to develop course materials based on
              the principle of actively engaging students in their own learning, test
              materials following the workshop, and ultimately contribute to the DLESE
              Collection and Community Center. Integration of workshop planning and
              web-resource development are combined in a unique on-line resource aimed at
              extending the workshop experience far beyond those who attend the face-to-face
              workshops and beyond the lifetime of the grant.

