Title       : Interactive Software Across the Science Curriculum with Java and XML
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0127337

Award Number: 0127337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Grisham grisham@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

Using Java/XML software, suites of design tool/player pairs of
              programs and educational materials for the chemistry and biochemistry
              curriculum are being developed. The design tool software permit instructors to
              build their own intellectual and instructional content into highly interactive
              electronic exercises for students. The design tool/player pairs provide total
              independence both to instructors, for selection of content, and to the
              students, for self-paced instruction. The design tool/player pair concept is
              sufficiently general that it is adaptable to most areas of undergraduate
              chemistry. This generality and flexibility permit students, with guidance from
              the instructor and via collaboration with peers, to problem-solve, not only via
              the application of the scientific method, but also via processes of
              self-reflection, trial and error, and the construction of a body of knowledge
              that emerges as students link practice and theory. The design tool program is
              menu-driven and requires no programming knowledge. It converts the logic and
              content of an instructor's interactive design into XML-tagged text. The XML
              file that results can be "played" by a Java player program, which presents the
              interactive exercise to the student and keeps track of the students responses
              (mouse clicks or keyboard input). We have demonstrated the efficacy of this
              approach by designing a tool/player pair for enzyme mechanism tutorial
              exercises in a biochemistry course. The mechanism tool/player pair can be used
              to create mechanism exercises for virtually any enzyme mechanism (or any
              chemical reaction mechanism, for that matter). This proof of Concept project is
              intended to show 1) the broad usefulness of this approach to software creation
              ; 2) the creation of tool/player pairs for a variety of interactive exercises
              covering many aspects of an undergraduate education in chemistry; and 3) the
              potential to expand our development efforts to an entire science curriculum.

