Title       : Scaffolding Scientific Inquiry Within a Natural Resources Bachelor of Science
               Degree Program: From Asking Testable Questions to Developing Ecosystem Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0127155

Award Number: 0127155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Celia A. Evans evansc@paulsmiths.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Mihuc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paul Smith's College
	      
	      Paul Smiths, NY  12970    518/327-6223

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Paul Smith's College (PSC), located in the Adirondack
              Park of New York State, offers students the opportunity to pursue a
              baccalaureate degree in Natural Resources. We are actively re-evaluating our
              course curricula to provide students with a set of science experiences and
              research challenges that build upon one another across a course sequence. This
              project will develop a series of hierarchical research and modeling activities
              that effectively scaffold the process of scientific inquiry across the sequence
              of courses leading to a degree. Data collected by classes throughout this
              process will be added to a data repository and will be accessible to future
              Paul Smith's College students. These data will also be available to other
              interested members of the Adirondack community. Several activities designed for
              introductory courses will improve question development, and hypothesis testing
              skills. Activities designed for second and third year courses will introduce
              simulation models that allow students to expand their research ideas across
              larger spatial and longer temporal scales. Finally, in the third phase,
              students will work with STELLA, and other computer models to build and
              parameterize simple ecological models, explore model assumptions, and conduct
              sensitivity analyses. In all phases, oral and written presentation skills and
              collaboration will be emphasized. At the onset of the project, PSC faculty will
              be involved in a two-day workshop to field-test activities, discuss project
              implementation with science education experts, and work with new computer
              programs.
