Title       : Supporting Assessment in Undergraduate Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0127694

Award Number: 0127694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499928             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Pearson pearson@maa.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Rishel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bernard L. Madison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to support faculty members and departments in
              efforts to assess student learning in at least one of the following:
(1)
              Coherent blocks of courses of undergraduate mathematical sciences, including
              entire degree programs; and (2) Individual courses, especially reform courses,
              using various assessment tools across varieties of institutions. The targeted
              blocks of courses are: (a) the major in mathematics, (b) courses for future
              teachers; (c) school mathematics as a preparation for college mathematics,
              usually called college placement programs; and (d) general education courses,
              including those aimed at quantitative literacy. This latter block includes
              study of assessments of the mathematical and quantitative literacy achieved in
              entire degree programs, recognizing that much mathematics is learned outside
              mathematics courses. Assessment cycles that use assessment for program
              improvements are of special interest, including those that use research on
              learning.

Support from this work includes: (1) Nationwide distribution and
              discussion of a 1999 volume of case studies on assessment practices in
              undergraduate mathematics; (2) Compilation and nationwide distribution of a
              second volume of case studies and syntheses of coherent sets of case studies;
              (3) Construction and maintenance of a website to contain an annotated
              bibliography, literature synopses, interviews, and assessment designs; and (4)
              Development and operation of a series of workshops for faculty working
on
              campus-based assessment programs, including both face-to-face and electronic
              venues.

Assessment cycles for program improvement have not been integrated
              into core operations of departments. This project greatly facilitates
              assessment program development through wide dissemination of knowledge gained
              through experiences with assessment. 

