Title       : Virtual Labs, Real Data, Including Biological Materials for Statics and
               Mechanics of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0127434

Award Number: 0127434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73101              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan T. Zehnder atz2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang H. Sachse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56) A proof-of-concept is being undertaken for the
              development of web-based laboratory modules for statics and mechanics of
              materials, two foundational courses for Mechanical, Civil, and Biological
              Engineering students. Two modules are being developed. The first module is a
              very preliminary experiment using the pressure in a soda can as a demonstration
              of thin-walled pressure vessel theory. The second module and principal activity
              of the project focus on the torsion of both engineered and biological
              materials. This module features web-based instructions which combines audio,
              text and video of the sample preparation process and the process of conducting
              the actual experiments. Furthermore, this module also provides data from real
              tests, which includes data from biological materials that the students download
              and analyze as part of their laboratory reports. One goal of the project is to
              develop a web-based laboratory that serves a variety of educational needs. As a
              consequence, this second module is being developed in consultation with
              colleagues from several schools including two-year community college. Once
              developed, the module will be implemented and evaluated at Cornell and at the
              other schools. The approach to web-based laboratories, which combines web-based
              instructions with real data, serves as a model across many engineering
              disciplines. It is also a step towards making web-based instruction more active
              by requiring substantial analysis by the student in addition to providing
              visualization and explanation of the processes. The project will have immediate
              impact on the large number of students who are taking the statics and mechanics
              of materials classes at Cornell and at other institutions. If successful, the
              project will lead to a full deployment proposal and to exploration of the
              commercialization of the laboratory materials. If commercialized, the
              laboratory materials could impact a larger number of engineering and technology
              students, since statics and mechanics of materials are taught at many
              institutions other than the ones involved in the project. 

Key Words:
              Web-based laboratory modules, Web-based instructions for statics, Web-based
              instructions for mechanics of materials 


