Title       : Assessment of Student Achievement in Undergraduate Education (ASA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0127777

Award Number: 0127777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493156             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Orr jorr@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn W. Ledder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Lindsley-Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing improved practices and tools for the use of Web-based
              assessment in SMET courses. The University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) is
              singularly well suited for such a project. For more than five years faculty and
              students have been making increasing use of a Web-based assessment system,
              Enterprise Diploma (EDU), based on software created at UNL. The level of
              activity with Web-based assessment at UNL, in pedagogical content development,
              software development, and institutional commitment, makes this campus a fertile
              site for groundbreaking advances in this area. During the 2000 - 2001 academic
              year, the EDU software was in use in more than 30 courses, and was used by more
              than 8,500 students. In addition, earlier versions of this web-based assessment
              system have been published nationally and adopted by a diverse range of
              postsecondary institutions. 
This project is engaged in assessing, expanding,
              and enhancing the use of this assessment system. Thus it is contributing to the
              improvement of student learning and satisfaction with basic math, statistics,
              physics, astronomy, and geology, and enabling instructors to improve
              instructional practices and course design as a result of increased knowledge of
              their students' skills and abilities. The objectives of this project are to:
              
1) Assess the effects of systematically varied use of Web-based assessment on
              student learning and motivation; 
2) Develop and test new question suites and
              types of questions that allow more complex assessments, and conduct detailed
              item analysis on the archives of questions and student assessments; 
3)
              Develop an implementation program that includes individual coaching and
              training workshops to prepare instructors to use EDU.
The ultimate products of
              this project will be Web-based pedagogical assessment materials for
              introductory
SMET courses that will be disseminated nationally through the
              proposing team's established links with traditional text-book and software
              publishers, and/or through open-source, "authorshare"- style Web-based means.
              The project also will produce educational research leading to recommendations
              for improved practice of Web-based assessment, with the potential to improve
              SMET teaching and learning in undergraduate institutions nationwide. Web-based
              assessment allows students to practice, fail, succeed and develop proficiency
              in a student-centered environment and enables instructors to assess and respond
              to student needs and tailor instruction accordingly. Yet, despite the
              attractiveness of the idea and the popularity of
EDU at the University of
              Nebraska - Lincoln (and of similar products at other schools), most of the
              evidence of its effectiveness, or possible lack of effectiveness, is anecdotal.
              It is vital to experimentally measure and test its effectiveness as an
              assessment tool in SMET courses.
This project will focus on assessing the
              validity and use of EDU in large foundational courses, first- and second-year
              classes with enrollments of 100 or more students. These classes are often the
              first encounter undergraduates have with SMET disciplines. The experience of
              undergraduates in them can shape their attitudes and expectations about
              science, math and engineering in profound ways.
