Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Craniodental Form, Functional Convergence,
               and the Evolution of Dietary Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a0127915

Award Number: 0127915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6996               (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Ravosa m-ravosa@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Researchers have long sought to understand the environmental variables
              underlying behavioral and anatomical evolution in early primates.  While
              disagreement persists over which factors were of greatest significance, diet is
              widely thought to have played an important role.  Therefore, efforts to
              illuminate trends in early primate evolution will require the ability to
              reconstruct diet from fossils.  To this end, investigators over the past two
              decades have attempted to identify features of the skull and dentition that can
              be used to achieve this.  

While these studies have identified many such
              features, significant gaps remain.  First, to ensure that a structure and
              function are consistently linked in a specified manner, they must be evaluated
              in ecologically similar, yet distantly related groups.  As few predictions have
              been tested in nonprimates, it is unclear whether patterns observed in these
              animals can confidently be extrapolated to their distant fossil relatives. 
              Second, the study of jaw or dental form alone is not sufficient to discriminate
              among all diets.  Since previous studies have considered these separately, the
              usefulness of evaluating both to fully characterize a species feeding habits
              remains largely unexplored.      

The goal of this research is to fill these
              gaps by using marsupials as a natural experiment to test the hypotheses that
              dental and mandibular form reflect a species' diet.  Specifically, ten
              predictions relating tooth surface features and the internal and external
              proportions of the lower jaw (determined from x-ray film) to the physical
              properties of a species' diet will be evaluated.  By testing these predictions
              in a group that extensively overlaps primates in most aspects of feeding
              ecology, this study will not only allow greater confidence in the utility of
              these variables for inferring diet in extinct primates, but it will also
              greatly expand our understanding of the ecological bases of evolution in
              mammals in general.  




