Title       : Adaptive Teaching and Learning Environments in Science and Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0127423

Award Number: 0127423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Crouch gcrouch@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abbie Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Hallgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Brahler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew G. Hudelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Adaptive Teaching and Learning Environments (ATLes) is a
              project that is providing undergraduate science, mathematics, engineering, and
              technical students with problem-based, authentic learning activities designed
              to help them develop problem-solving skills and master content. The ATLes
              project is founded on constructivist learning theory and peer-to-peer faculty
              development while using technology to bridge learning goals and promote problem
              solving. Adaptive Teaching and Learning Environments is a collection of
              collaborative communication tools and content tutorials in science and
              mathematics education embedded into generative adaptive tutorials based on
              progressive disclosure of key concepts, facts, and data. Regardless of the
              course or topic, ATLes requires students to write hypotheses, sketch problem
              analyses, and prepare summaries or reports using the same technology-based
              tools recent graduates are using in the workplace. Additionally, the learning
              path a student takes through an ATLes course is being tracked, allowing
              instructors to identify successful learning pathways, and of equal importance,
              those areas that are not successful, where students struggle with material.
              Finally, this project incorporates a unique research design that assesses the
              effect ATLes has on student critical thinking and command of discipline
              specific knowledge. ATLes development is broken into three major themes: 1)
              adaptive software "engine" design, 2) ATLes lesson module design, and 3)
              comprehensive assessment of the effects of ATLes on student critical thinking
              and mastery of discipline- specific knowledge.
