Title       : NSF/USDOT Partnership for Exploratory Research - ICSST: Decentralized
               Surveillance, Control and Data Transmission for Transportation Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0127944

Award Number: 0127944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin A. Coifman coifman.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI:Coifman
Institution:	Ohio State University Research
              Foundation.
Decentralized surveillance, control and data transmission for
              transportation applications
This research will reexamine the control and data
              transmission  systems used by highway operating agencies to reduce the combined
              surveillance and communications costs, without sacrificing traffic management
              effectiveness. These agencies rely on automated surveillance tools to monitor
              conditions throughout the road network. Under conventional operation, the
              fixed-point surveillance systems transmit data at constant intervals to allow
              for a rapid response when conditions change. Yet most of the time, the response
              to the data is simply that no action is necessary. The required communications
              network and transmission costs can become significant. 
Some states spend
              several million dollars each year to cover the associated communication
              expenses. This problem will intensify as new traffic management surveillance
              technologies are deployed in the future.

The research will develop
              distributed control algorithms to make decisions in the field and the systems
              will only transmit data when it would be beneficial for wide scale control. The
              research will focus on the decision to transmit data, based on prevailing
              conditions at the detector station, to reduce the costs of surveillance. Key to
              this event driven approach is the recent emergence of new communication
              technologies, such as cellular digital packet data. With a slight increase of
              processing power in the field, the detector station could initiate
              communications as soon as conditions warrant reporting. The fundamental
              contributions of this research include quantifying the benefits of information,
              modeling various communication network topologies to optimize system
              performance, developing efficient communication and distributed control
              algorithms for these networks, and demonstrating the work in a detailed case
              study.

