Title       : Designing a New Learning Environment for Introductory Environmental Engineering
               and Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0127139

Award Number: 0127139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84648              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen M. Cashman emc7001@humboldt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Eschenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Humboldt State Univ Fnd
	      P.O. Box 1185
	      Arcata, CA  95518    707/826-4189

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
Two introductory courses-- Introduction to
              Environmental Resources Engineering and Science and Introduction to Design-are
              being revitalized to better prepare students to solve the difficult
              interdisciplinary problems of the 21st century. These courses are being
              redesigned to provide integrated, interdisciplinary approaches to solving
              environmental problems, including: (1) interdisciplinary presentation of
              environmental and human systems via hands-on team projects, field and lab
              experiences, (2) clear presentation of course requirements and careers
              available to environmental scientists and resource engineers, and 3)
              development of computational, technical communication and teamwork skills
              through projects, field and lab experiments. These courses are going to give
              students the knowledge, skills and attitudes they need to be successful in
              their majors. The Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's studio teaching and
              Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT) approaches are being adapted.

Project approach
              consists of modifying existing curricula to incorporate the Studio Teaching
              
and Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT) approaches, and PROMISE Project materials.
              WebCT software and the new ERE Design Studio are being used to integrate
              technology into the curriculum. The project addresses NSF themes of diversity
              and integration of technology in the curriculum. The two PIs are women in a
              field where women are underrepresented; the PROMISE curriculum is more
              inclusive of underrepresented groups in SMET areas. Both JiTT and Studio
              Teaching require the integration of technology in the classroom.

Project
              dissemination plan consist of making WebCT course modules containing
              engineering curricula available through course web pages, making presentations
              at national meetings, conducting on- and off-campus faculty development
              workshops, and journal publications.

