Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ritual and Status: Mortuary Display at
               the Household Level at the Middle Horizon Site of Conchopata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0127302

Award Number: 0127302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6440               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ancient Andean empires were communications dinosaurs; information and
              
decision-making traveled only as fast as a human could, and the Andean
              
peoples did not know writing.  Lacking the administrative technology of
              
contemporaneous European or Asian states, the native empires of the Andes
              
were forced to develop alternative modes of statecraft, and other
              
principles to integrate their subject populations. Archaeologists have long
              
suspected, based on Spanish eyewitness accounts of the Inka empire, that
              
one of the crucial integrative mechanisms of prehispanic statecraft was the
              
elaborate mortuary practices of the politically important.  In the Inka
              
empire, the carefully kept bodies of deceased rulers served as material
              
symbols of dynastic succession and political continuity.  Through periodic
              rituals and
fine mausoleums mummies were the setting for public communication
              of 
messages of political legitimization and imperial authority.  While the
              
role of the dead in Inka statecraft has been well studied, much less is
              
known about this topic in early Andean empires, such as the Wari; in some
              
ways a fore-runner of the Inka that dominated the highlands between AD 400
              
and 800.  Ms. Charlene Milliken's doctoral dissertation project, conducted
              
under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, will investigate the site of
              Conchopata, 
Peru.  At its height, Conchopata was a secondary center of the
              Wari empire 
(A.D. 600-1000) and consisted of residential zones, public
              plazas, pottery workshops, 
temples, and specialized mortuary complexes.
              Excavation will center on 
residential contexts associated with two mortuary
              
complexes, and research will test the hypothesis that these mortuary
              complexes were 
used by Conchopata elites in the veneration of important
              ancestors. 
Conchopata is a particularly good location for this research
              because 
several intact mortuary structures have been uncovered; normally
              these 
kinds of facilities were looted or destroyed long ago. This project
              will 
provide the first investigation of the potential role of mortuary
              activity 
in Wari political statecraft as one native means by which authority
              is 
constructed and expressed in non-literate, non-Western
              populations.




