Title       : On-line Support for Modern Programming Language Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0127444

Award Number: 0127444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert N. Moll moll@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen R. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Eliot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

This country urgently needs more people trained in
              computer science. At present the number of students entering the CS pipeline in
              American colleges and universities is not increasing and, in the case of female
              and minority students, is actually declining. Thus if we are to meet our
              national need for CS researchers, software developers, and information
              technology workers, it is vital to attract, engage, support, and retain
              computer science students more effectively. 

Our project addresses these
              issues by developing a prototype for innovative multimedia instructional
              software for introductory computer programming classes. These software tools
              will be built on top of the existing OWL on-line instruction system, a system
              that has been used with great success in chemistry, physics and mathematics.
              The array of proposed software tools is designed to make the techniques of
              introductory programming and problem-solving more accessible for students with
              a wide range of backgrounds in computing. 

This proof of concept project
              will include a fairly extensive suite of "single-step" OWL-based learning
              activities, a small collection of more complex, multistage problem solving
              exercises, an evaluation plan for a full study, including baseline data for
              that study, and a preliminary statistical assessment of the performance of
              CS-OWL machinery in our classes.

- Construction of a suite of questions
              about code behavior by creating multiple choice and fill-in-the-blank questions
              for beginning CS1 activities, and using existing OWL machinery to automate
              grading, gather statistics, and keep class records for participating
              students
- Construction of a collection of OWL-embedded interactive
              activities, which illustrate and develop elementary OO programming skills.
-
              Develop the indexing scheme for a database of elementary Java code examples,
              for the purpose of developing student reading skills, and for the purpose of
              supplying raw material for other CS-OWL activities. 
- Development of guided
              problem solving exercises, which are designed to teach multi-step problem
              solving skills. develop three or four multi-stage problem-solving examples
-
              Develop an evaluation plan in which lays the groundwork for a future full
              evaluation by establishing a baseline assessment of student performance in our
              CS1 classes over the next several semesters. We also expect to provide some
              preliminary statistics that show some early signs that our CS-OWL system is an
              effective learning tool.

