Title       : Creating Large Activity-based Introductory Courses for Physics and Chemistry by
               Adapting the SCALE-UP Approach and Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0127050

Award Number: 0127050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery M. Saul saul@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Paradis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The main project goal is to deliver more effective introductory
              science instruction to University of Central Florida's growing, diverse student
              population. It is well known that the majority of introductory physics students
              learn significantly more from carefully constructed activities than from
              traditional lectures. The Student-Centered Activities for Large Enrollment
              University Programs (SCALE-UP) project developed at North Carolina State
              University offers UCF a way to teach large studio classes where the emphasis is
              on learning by inquiry instead of learning by listening. The SCALE-UP approach
              is a complete revision of the standard lecture/laboratory. The students work in
              groups of 3-4 with computers and lab equipment for 4-6 hours each week in a
              large technology-rich laboratory designed to promote collaborative learning.
              Evaluations of NC State classes show that this approach is well matched to
              UCF's objectives of improving students' conceptual understanding, problem
              solving ability, and overall experience with introductory science classes. This
              project is developing curriculum materials and purchasing equipment for
              SCALE-UP physics and chemistry courses in an 80-student studio classroom. In
              addition to adopting activities developed at NC State, the UCF physics and
              chemistry education research groups are also developing new activities and
              instructor materials, particularly in chemistry where work is just starting.
              Curriculum development and evaluation are conducted in close collaboration with
              the SCALE-UP developers. This project should demonstrate that other schools can
              successfully adopt the SCALU-UP approach, which may lead to widespread changes
              in undergraduate math and science classes across the country.
