Title       : Collaborative Research: Network-based Interactive Laboratory Modules for the
               Study of Movement Biomechanics, and Coordination and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0127338

Award Number: 0127338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316875             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Chow jchow@hhp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Cauraugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The objective of this project is to develop a set of
              interactive laboratory modules utilizing a previously developed Internet-based
              video digitizing system. The modules allow students to quantify the motion of
              an object or the human body by acquiring coordinate data from video images. The
              kinematic parameters resulting from the processing of coordinate data can be
              used for the learning of basic mechanical concepts and the study of movement
              coordination and control. Specifically, laboratory modules are being developed
              for the learning of basic mechanical concepts (e.g., linear and angular
              kinematics, muscle mechanics) that are usually taught in undergraduate level
              biomechanics and physics courses. The modules for the learning of concepts in
              motor coordination and control (e.g., inter-limb coordination, postural
              control) utilize a multidisciplinary approach, integrating concepts from
              biology, psychology and engineering. The use of the Web provides students
              unlimited accessibility in terms of both time (when) and location (where) to
              complete the laboratories. The modules have applications for distance learning
              courses and for educational settings where resources for specialized
              undergraduate laboratories are limited or unavailable. The project provides a
              unique integration of information technology and education for laboratory
              environments and the laboratory modules developed will be made available to the
              public. Teachers/Professors can selectively incorporate some or all of the
              modules in their courses. This is a collaborative effort with the University of
              Illinois-Urbana-Champaign (DUE 0127221).
