Title       : Development and Evaluation of a Multimedia Instructional Package for Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0127249

Award Number: 0127249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Greenstein gsgreenstein@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) The project is developing a prototype and evaluating
              
Interactive Astronomy, a multimedia instructional package for a widely taught
              undergraduate 
science course: Introductory Astronomy for Non-Science Majors.
              This course serves a great 
number of college students, including many future
              teachers, and has great potential for improving 
their science skills and
              influencing their understanding of and appreciation for science. 
The
              multimedia package includes software which incorporates two 
innovative
              elements: the revolutionary improvements in instruction offered by information
              
technology, and the emerging paradigm of inquiry-based learning. Utilizing
              the high degree of 
interactivity which computers make possible, students are
              led to discover things for 
themselves, as opposed to learning them passively.
              Utilizing the dynamical simulations which 
computers make possible, students
              can live in the world of science, yielding a vivid experience 
of its normally
              abstract world. Two important elements of the package are 
Guided Discoveries,
              which are extensive, highly interactive instructional exercises, designed
              
with careful attention to pedagogical issues; and Intelligent Tutors, which
              customize their 
instructional strategies, based on an assessment of the
              student's learning needs. 
Design of seven of the Discoveries has already been
              completed. In this project, three are being
fully implemented, and then a
              proof of concept test is conducted of their effect on student learning. 
This
              formative evaluation (to be conducted in the Fall at Greenfield Community
              College and 
Amherst College, and in the Spring at the University of
              Massachusetts) runs parallel to, and 
be interactive with, further software
              development.
