Title       : Infrastructure for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0127884

Award Number: 0127884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $678730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall E. Moss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger C. Bales  (Principal Investigator former)
              Upmanu Lall  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Christopher J. Duffy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Marc B. Parlange  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              John S. Selker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Mark W. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1317,1325,1579,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0127884
Bales
A number of recent studies by the National Academy of Sciences
              and other groups have articulated critical needs for vigorous new
              interdisciplinary programs of research and education in hydrologic science to
              provide the basis for sound, infonned decisions at local, regional, national,
              and international levels.  It has become apparent that the science
              infrastructure in hydrology and related sciences is currently inadequate to
              meet many of the enumerated priority science questions and societal needs. 
              Specifically, coordinated investments in instrumentation, field measurement
              strategies and analytical tools are critically needed to gain greater
              understanding of hydrologic processes and the linkages between hydrologic and
              related biogeochemical processes.
In response to this need for infrastructure
              in hydrologic sciences, the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of
              Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) has been created to facilitate such research.
               During its first two years, the Consortium will undertake science and
              implementation planning aimed at establishing research infrastructure in three
              main areas: i) Long Term Hydrologic Observatories to provide the consistent,
              integrated, long-term information from point to continental scales; ii) a
              Hydrologic Infon-nation System program to support the data, information, and
              analysis requirements of the community; and iii) a Hydrologic Measurement
              Technology program to develop and operate state-of-the-art systems and provide
              support services for hydrologic research.
In year two, the formulation of
              plans and proposals for programs in education and technology transfer also will
              be developed.
This infrastructure initiative will be driven by the hydrologic
              community's desire and society's need to develop new understanding about
              priority questions in hydrology and related sciences that will have significant
              implications for the health and sustainability of regional and national
              economies as well as for the ecosystems in which they may flourish.

