Title       : Inquiry-Based-Learning Modules for Conservation Biology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0127506

Award Number: 0127506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor J. Sterling sterling@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Gibbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm L. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Conservation of the earth's biological diversity is a
              pressing problem that excites and
motivates students from a wide range of
              institutions and disciplinary backgrounds.
Conservation biology is widely
              taught now, but it is seriously hampered by a lack of
resources that capture
              its potential for inquiry-based learning. To foster changes in course
content,
              curricula, and educational practices in conservation biology, The Center
              for
Biodiversity and Conservation (CBC) at the American Museum of Natural
              History, the
State University of New York's College of Environmental Science
              and Forestry (SUNY-
ESF), and the University of Maine (UMaine) have formed a
              partnership to link faculty,
graduate students, and undergraduates with
              practicing professionals to generate an
extensive set of classroom-tested,
              inquiry-based-learning materials. Each completed draft
module will be
              evaluated in a classroom situation at UMaine and SUNY-ESF as well as
at
              several pilot sites: Antioch New England Graduate School, Holyoke
              Community
College, Lehman College, City University of New York, Long Island
              University,
Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, Prescott College,
              and Columbia
University. A distinguishing project feature is its
              self-sustaining dissemination.
Distribution of materials to undergraduate
              instructors will happen through three media: 1)
an edited volume published by
              a commercial publisher; 2) CD-ROMs distributed by the
CBC at cost; and 3) via
              an internet portal website hosted by the CBC. Over three years,
approximately
              50 instructors and 50 students will work directly on developing
              materials;
about 20 instructors in 25 diverse courses will test modules with
              at least 600
undergraduate students at pilot sites and provide feedback.
