Title       : Integrating GIS, Remote Sensing and GPS Technologies into Undergraduate
               Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0127072

Award Number: 0127072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kazimierz J. Zaniewski zaniewsk@uwosh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shunfu Hu  (Principal Investigator former)
              John T. Bowen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Trudy Kavanagh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    920/424-1415

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geography (88)
This project supports NSF's goal of integrating technology into
              education. It enhances and revitalizes the undergraduate GIS curricula at
              University of Wisconsin Oshkosh (UW Oshkosh) by adapting and implementing
              high-quality educational materials and effective educational practices in
              geographic information science, including the GIS core curriculum developed by
              the NSF supported National Center of Geographic Information and Analysis, and
              the remote sensing core curriculum being developed by the American Society for
              Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing. This project is engaged in a major
              curriculum renovation that will integrate GIS, remote sensing and Global
              Positioning System technologies into undergraduate education and research. In
              particular, this proposal demonstrates two major changes in the development of
              the new GIS curricula. First, three current geographic technique courses are
              being enhanced and two new technique courses developed to provide students with
              laboratory-based learning and additional opportunities to enhance their
              critical thinking abilities. Students now have the opportunity to learn
              cutting-edge technologies in geography. Second, a new GIS Laboratory is being
              assembled using high-end personal computers in a network environment for use in
              the new technique courses. This lab is also enhancing opportunities for
              student-faculty collaborative research. The University of Wisconsin at Oshkosh
              is a comprehensive, suburban, commuter campus. These improvements in teaching
              geographic information science may serve as a model for many similar
              institutions.

