Title       : Integrating Modern Design and Manufacturing Equipment into Engineering Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0127081

Award Number: 0127081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87299              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorin Maletsky maletsky@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Hale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Sorem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
One of the greatest challenges facing engineering
              education is to provide realistic and engaging learning experiences for
              undergraduates that properly reflect the concerns and needs of industry.
              Technology in the areas of product design and manufacturing is increasing at a
              rapid pace and education must keep up to produce engineers capable of
              contributing effectively to cost-driven projects with significantly reduced
              cycle times. This project adapts the integrated use of modern rapid prototyping
              and CNC machining equipment into the curricula of three engineering
              departments: mechanical, aerospace, and civil. Both technologies are being used
              in the design sequence of mechanical engineering, similar to their use at
              Purdue University and MIT. Students are able to quickly fabricate design
              concepts and working models, reinforcing the design sequence taught in class.
              Aerospace engineering students are using the equipment during a course sequence
              to design, build, and test student created aircraft. Where current methods of
              production are slow and out-dated, the proposed equipment provides individual
              learning experiences similar to those found in industry. Civil engineering
              students are using the equipment for stress analysis and enhanced visualization
              in the classroom. This project is providing a hands-on learning environment for
              students, and enabling the implementation of modern engineering practices in
              design and manufacturing to produce future leaders in industry. Assessment
              involves industrial advisory panels. Educational resources, quality assessment
              data and machine capabilities are being shared with local and national
              educators.


