Title       : Broadening the scope of statistical education through technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0127557

Award Number: 0127557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Nolan nolan@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terence P. Speed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)
This project develops software material for teaching
              mathematical statistics to advanced undergraduate students in science,
              mathematics, and engineering. The project is a collaborative effort of
              educators and researchers at the University of California, Berkeley and Davis,
              the Naval Postgraduate School, and Lucent Technologies.

The software
              integrates case studies based on real-life problems from diverse fields with
              multimedia demonstrations of statistical concepts that use visualization,
              animation, and simulation to create a unique interactive learning environment.
              The philosophy behind the project is well represented by Moore's statement,
              "The case for substantive change in statistical instruction is built on strong
              synergies between content, pedagogy, and technology," (ISR, 1997). The case
              studies from Stat Labs: Mathematical Statistics through Applications (Nolan &
              Speed, 2000) provides a model and example content for integrating cases into
              the software. A distinguishing feature of this interactive environment is the
              use of professional statistical software, R, as a plug-in to the browser for
              running demonstrations. Some implications of this feature are that: extensive
              Java programming of plotting and numerical routines are avoided, the content
              (cases) and demos can be integrated into one cohesive document, more attention
              can be paid to the pedagogical aspects of the software. Further the project
              provides an electronic framework that is easily extensible and adaptable to
              different contents, therefore making it easier for instructors to incorporate
              the material into their teaching and to adapt the material to special
              audiences.

