Title       : Intra-Curriculum Software Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0127439

Award Number: 0127439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74919              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Fenwick, Jr. jbf@cs.appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry L. Kurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

The academic setting of an undergraduate software
              engineering course imposes fundamental obstacles to the goal of providing
              students practical experience and skills development. Some major differences
              between an academic and industrial setting include motivation, amount of
              available time, and the size and scope of projects. Furthermore, the academic
              environment requires ensuring a certain level of competency in all students. We
              accept these differences and are developing a software engineering methodology
              tailored to the academic setting.

One objective of this methodology is to
              increase the size and scope of the software engineering course project in a way
              that affords students practical experience in project management and system
              design without increasing their workload. We also wish to insure an individual
              level of competency, particularly in the programming skills of lower division
              students.

To achieve these objectives, we are devising a project methodology
              as the centerpiece of an upper division software engineering course. This
              methodology is unique in that it will use an intra-curriculum approach
              involving multiple courses at different levels in the curriculum. The software
              engineering course will simultaneously cooperating with introductory CS
              courses, data structures courses, as well as with advanced, specialized
              elective courses like database, Human Computer Interface, and networks.
              Software engineering students will focus on design and management activities
              while the implementation burden is shared with other courses. 

An automated
              testing and management system has been developed as part of this project. This
              system tracks individual skills competency, particularly of lower division
              students, and assists in coordination between the various courses.
