Title       : Mardu Foraging, Food Sharing, and Gender
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0127681

Award Number: 0127681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Bird douglas.bird@umit.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca L. Bird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Among Aboriginal people in Australia's deserts, as among all humans, food
              acquisition is not simply about eating: practices related to what types of
              foods are acquired, who obtains the food, how food is treated and distributed,
              are infused with value other than simple nutrition. Often these practices are
              attached to gender roles. Traditional explanations have assumed that gender
              differences in foraging and food sharing are bound by a common goal of
              provisioning--that like a mini-economy of scale, a household will be better
              provisioned through gender specialization. But recent work among other people
              that hunt and gather suggests that under some circumstances critical aspects of
              gender differences in labor may arise from the ways in which different
              strategies of food acquisition and distribution meet different foraging goals,
              some of which can conflict with household provisioning. This is especially the
              case when the activity of acquiring food can provide public goods that are
              distributed widely, or when food contains symbolic value beyond its simple
              caloric content. This research proposes to quantitatively test the predictions
              of hypotheses that examine factors influencing food acquisition, sharing, and
              their link to gender differentiation among the Mardu of Western Australia. To
              what extent are different (sometimes conflicting) foraging goals influencing a
              sexual division of labor? To what extent are Mardu foraging decisions designed
              to more effectively provision themselves and their households, and to what
              extent are they influenced by the ways that different activities can honestly
              signal underlying qualities of the acquirer? How do changes in household
              composition, environmental dynamics, and social dynamics affect male and female
              foraging strategies? Answering these questions will involve quantitative
              measures of the economics of resource patch utilization, prey selection, food
              transfers, and Mardu camp composition and ecology. Delineating these and how
              they structure subsistence decisions will have broad relevance for our
              understanding of basic features of human family organization in small scale
              economies. 


