Title       : Context-Rich Interactive Science Teaching and Learning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0127427

Award Number: 0127427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thompson Webb III thompson_webb_III@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Cutts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Targan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon M. Swartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Core concepts, such as Newton's second law of motion or
              the ideal gas law, underpin a rigorous science education. These ideas and laws
              come from physics, math, and chemistry; their necessity to practical and
              advanced science literacy is evidenced by widespread institutional standards
              requiring study in these disciplines by students in the sciences. Over the
              course of their careers, students mature in their understanding of fundamental
              scientific concepts, moving from memorization to analysis and synthesis of core
              ideas. The goal of science education at Brown University is to provide learning
              environments where students can become self-driven inquirers and investigators
              capable of scientific discovery. To achieve this growth, students require
              grounding in core scientific concepts and practice in the in self-driven
              inquiry and investigative behaviors they will use as scientists and
              scientifically literate citizens. To improve understanding of key science
              concepts and promote inquiry-based learning, we are developing a prototype
              Context-Rich Interactive Science Teaching and Learning System (CRISTALS) for
              pilot testing in 13 Brown University courses and at Rhode Island College and
              Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The web-based CRISTALS environment provides
              students with information and problems facilitating the exploration of a core
              concept in a context rich in interdisciplinary applications and examples. The
              CRISTALS environment is expected to support instructors in adapting science
              pedagogy to better meet the needs of a diverse student population. The CRISTALS
              tool provides students with opportunities to improve their ability to apply
              core scientific concepts in problems from multiple disciplines, and encourages
              self-driven inquiry into fundamental scientific principles.
