Title       : Incorporation of FT-NMR into the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0127193

Award Number: 0127193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence E. Gavin TGavin@iona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome S. Levkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D'Alessio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iona College
	      715 North Avenue
	      New Rochelle, NY  108011830    914/633-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful
              method for structure determination in organic chemistry. In addition, it is
              critically important in chemical education, since interpretation of the
              experiments compels students to confront the details of the structural theory.
              Over the past decade the development of pulsed Fourier transform (FT)
              techniques combined with the increased capability of small computers has led to
              vast improvements in NMR instrumentation. It is essential that undergraduate
              students at small institutions have some access to this type of analytical
              equipment. Thus, this project has the following objectives: (1) Convert an
              operational continuous wave (CW) spectrometer to a pulsed FT-NMR instrument
              through an Anasazi upgrade (2) Use the upgraded spectrometer to enhance student
              learning in the organic chemistry laboratory and participation in research in
              organic chemistry (3) Expand student appreciation and knowledge of chemical
              concepts through the use of more advanced FT-NMR techniques in the physical
              chemistry and instrumentation laboratories (4) Make the data from the upgraded
              spectrometer available through online services (5) Make FT-NMR spectroscopy
              available to students at the College of New Rochelle. The conversion process
              retains the durable magnet from the older spectrometer, but transfers
              instrument control to a computer. The upgrade allows students to obtain
              hydrogen and carbon NMR spectra, perform spectral editing tasks and produce
              correlated two-dimensional spectra. Of considerable importance is that students
              are able to obtain routine spectra rapidly and in a form that is electronically
              portable. The FT-NMR spectrometer is being used to expand the current
              laboratory curriculum by adapting a number of experiments from the Journal of
              Chemical Education. Exposing students to the high level of understanding of
              molecular structure and dynamic chemical processes offered by FT-NMR is
              expected to have a profound effect upon their educational experience.

