Title       : Establishment of a Collaborative Thermal Engineering Technology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0127075

Award Number: 0127075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Renken renken@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Reisel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Andrew Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy J. Posnanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)

The project adapts work on thermal systems
              laboratories at University of Virginia, US Naval Academy, and Union College to
              establish an undergraduate laboratory in thermal engineering technology for
              three undergraduate thermal science courses. The project provides students with
              hands-on experiences of abstract concepts discussed in lecture and allows
              exceptional undergraduate students the opportunity to learn about the subject
              material in more depth by co-designing and constructing an experimental
              apparatus. Furthermore, it supports collaboration between faculty to enhance
              the learning experience of undergraduate students and provides potential future
              teachers experience in the design of educational materials. Finally, it
              develops a model that can be used in the development of other laboratory
              experiments in the institution's mechanical engineering curriculum.
              Experimental stations are being constructed and tested by undergraduate
              students who have recently completed the courses into which the experiments are
              being implemented. The project addresses the DUE themes of teacher preparation,
              faculty development, and integration of technology in education. The evaluation
              program, under the direction of a collaborator from the Center for Mathematics
              and Science Education Research, includes student interviews and surveys,
              classroom observation, and follow-up studies with faculty members teaching in
              subsequent courses. The investigators plan to disseminate the organization and
              evaluation of the project, along with two lab manuals, through conference
              presentations, journal articles, and web site postings. 




