Title       : Bioinformatics Education Dissemination: Reaching Out, Connecting, and
               Knitting-together (BEDROCK)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0127498

Award Number: 0127498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1414857            (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jungck jungck@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel S. Donovan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Bioinformatics is central to biology in the 21st
              century. The use of computer based
analytical tools on electronically stored
              and distributed data is fundamentally changing
life science research and its
              application to problems in medicine, agriculture,
conservation, and forensics.
              In light of this "information revolution" undergraduate
biology curricula must
              be redesigned to prepare the next generation of informed citizens
and prepare
              those who will pursue careers in the life sciences. The BEDROCK
              initiative
(Bioinformatics Education Dissemination: Reaching Out, Connecting
              and Knitting-
together) is enhancing, expanding, and empowering a national
              community of bioinformatics
educators. The project goals include: 1) Identify
              and support faculty who can take a
leadership role in bioinformatics
              education; 2) Highlight and distribute innovative
approaches to incorporating
              bioinformatics data and techniques throughout undergraduate
biology education;
              and, 3) Establish mechanisms for the broad dissemination of
bioinformatics
              resource materials and innovative teaching models. To achieve these goals
we
              are holding a series of faculty development workshops around the country;
              recruiting
and supporting a group of innovative faculty to implement and
              disseminate bioinformatics
education materials; publishing resources for
              bioinformatics education and building a
networked collaboratory environment
              for developing and sharing bioinformatics
educational approaches. This project
              builds on the established pedagogical philosophy and
academic community of the
              BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium. Specifically,
BEDROCK extends our work in
              bioinformatics education over the last four years during
which we have
              established a community of collaborators representing the diverse
resources
              required to mount a national dissemination effort.
