Title       : Student Learning through Virtual Archaeology: the "Like a Fishhook" Native
               American Village Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0127521

Award Number: 0127521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Slator  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Anthropology (81)
Archaeology is the discipline that provides humans with a
              conduit of sorts to the past: it is our way to travel through time. Although
              archaeologists can only dream of time travel as an ultimate check on their
              reasoning and interpretations, modern technology can make virtual time travel
              possible in virtual reality. In this project, by combining immersive role-based
              technology with the principles and data of archaeology, ethnography, and
              history, we are developing an environment for teaching generations of students
              about all of these disciplines. The project is creating a virtual archaeology
              site based on a real Indian village with a somewhat unusual history.
              "Like-a-Fishhook" was first established in the 1830s following a smallpox
              epidemic in the Dakota Territory which so depleted native Americans that the
              survivors of three tribes banded together to establish this village. The
              project is creating a virtual village as it existed in 1854 and then 100 years
              later in 1954, following an extensive archeological dig and documentation of
              this village. Immediately after this exploration, this the area was flooded
              following the construction of a dam. Evidence from research on earlier projects
              indicates that there are potential learning advantages to the approach
              developing and using synthetic environments in an active learning context. We
              believe that student learning of scientific knowledge and problem-solving
              skills in our virtual environment matches student learning from participation
              in a real archeological "dig." The objective of this project is to produce an
              educational software product for national distribution. The prospects for the
              success of this effort are being strengthened by evaluation research that we
              expect will support our belief that this instructional approach both enhances
              student learning of traditional curriculum and expands the scope of student
              learning through other curricular connections. This project is being undertaken
              through collaboration between the Department of Computer Science and the
              Department of Sociology and Anthropology at North Dakota State University, in
              cooperation with teachers at Minnesota State University - Moorhead (MSUM) and
              Jamestown College, a private four-year liberal arts college. 

