Title       : Classroom Experiments for Large Lecture Courses: A Wireless Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0127449

Award Number: 0127449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74632              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl B. Ball SBALL@VT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine C. Eckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Economics (82)
Economics students enrolled in large lecture-based introductory
              courses rarely have the
opportunity to interact with course content. Because
              of this they do not gain a deep
understanding of the material or the ability
              to analyze and interpret complex economic
events. Classroom experiments have
              been shown to be useful in aiding student
understanding of the material. In
              the past these exercises have been impractical in large
courses. This project
              is developing wireless classroom technology to allow students in
large classes
              to participate in classroom experiments during the class meeting times.
              We
have assembled a cross-disciplinary group that is creating a learning
              system that is making it 
possible to realize the benefits of classroom
              experiments in large classes. Our vision is of a
portable system composed of
              standard electronic handheld devices (such as PDAs) that
communicate with a
              laptop computer that will organize economics simulations such as
markets,
              public goods environments and economic games. While other researchers
              are
currently working on internet-based experiments, such systems do not
              translate to large
classes unless students complete the exercise
              asynchronously. The instructor has only
very limited ability to revise the
              game in response to student questions or suggestions.
Evaluation is a critical
              component of this project. We have designed a controlled
experiment to collect
              data on performance in a large lecture course. We are evaluating
to what
              extent this wireless system can improve student outcomes and reduce costs.
