Title       : A Research-based Laboratory to Investigate Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0127106

Award Number: 0127106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith M. Thorn jthorn@knox.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Research is an essential part of the Knox College
              biology curriculum, with inquiry-based exercises the norm. Developmental
              biology represents the junction of many different disciplines: anatomy and
              physiology (plant and animal), molecular biology, evolution and ethics. It is a
              dynamic, active area of research. This project establishes a research based
              advanced laboratory course in developmental biology at Knox, by adopting the
              curriculum and laboratory modules developed for undergraduates at Duke
              University and Macalester College (DUE 9950879). The end result is an active,
              student-driven learning experience. Students investigate major questions in
              developmental biology, including determination of cell fate, embryo patterning,
              gene regulation and the processes of forming specialized organs and tissues
              using classical embryology along with molecular techniques. The course is
              divided into two sections, classical embryology and developmental genetics,
              each with several different units. Students examine vertebrate (chick,
              Xenopus), invertebrate (sea urchin, Drosophila) and plant (Arabidopsis) model
              systems using techniques including micromanipulation, microinjection, in situ
              hybridization, immunofluorescence, analysis of transgenic organisms, and fate
              mapping. Students design and perform experiments. The research grade
              microscopes and video imaging systems give students the power to collect,
              store, and retrieve data with ease, allowing them to easily compare different
              stages of development, as well as the effects of perturbations. By allowing the
              students the opportunity to master sophisticated techniques, we advance the
              level of research in the course. These skills, as well as the research grade
              microscopes, provide students an excellent starting point for independent
              undergraduate research.
