Title       : National Computational Science Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0127488

Award Number: 0127488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2757944            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Panoff rpanoff@shodor.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Holly P. Hirst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Jakobsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis E. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shodor Educ Fdtn Inc
	      923 Broad Street
	      Durham, NC  277054141    919/286-1911

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This project builds upon the successful regional Shodor
              Computational Science Institute
(SCSI) to create a National Computational
              Science Institute (NCSI). Reaching more than
1000 undergraduate faculty per
              year for three years, NCSI offers a proven, modular set
of in-person,
              video-conferenced, and web-accessible workshops, seminars, and
              support
activities to introduce the hands-on use of computational science,
              numerical models and
data visualization tools across the undergraduate
              curriculum. This project represents a 
partnership with the Education,
              Outreach and Training Partnership for Advanced
Computational Infrastructure,
              the National Computational Science Education Consortium,
the Burroughs
              Wellcome Fund, and more than two dozen undergraduate institutions,
              high
performance computing centers and vendors. 

The target audience for
              NCSI is teams of faculty from predominantly undergraduate
institutions,
              minority serving institutions, and community colleges whose students
              are
either the next generation of scientists and engineers, the next
              generation of K-12 teachers,
or both. NCSI participants then assist other
              faculty on their own campuses and at neighboring
institutions to introduce
              computational science in their own classes. 

The main work of NCSI is
              accomplished through three synergistic but distinct efforts that
can be
              modeled as PULL, PUSH, and PERMEATE. Regionally distributed workshops PULL
              
faculty within a reasonable travel distance for a week of intense
              interdisciplinary training,
collaboration, and curriculum development in
              computational science. Participants explore
the use of modeling and
              visualization tools in existing courses, while stimulating creation
of new
              courses and promoting new modes of undergraduate research. NCSI staff
              and
participants proactively PUSH computational science education onto the
              agendas of
numerous annual meetings of professional and discipline-specific
              societies, by offering
workshops, conducting tutorials, presenting papers and
              posters, and serving on program
committees. To sustain these efforts, NCSI
              PERMEATEs on-going and proposed
undergraduate curriculum efforts providing
              interdisciplinary and discipline specific
web-accessible courses for faculty
              enhancement, and resources for interactive exploration
including curriculum,
              problem-based modeling modules, tools, and tutorials, leveraging
Shodor's
              award-winning Computational Science Education Reference Desk. 

