Title       : GPS Tools for Geographers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0127073

Award Number: 0127073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105693             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Myers myersmd@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Wikle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geography (88)
Increasing use of global positioning system (GPS) technology
              within agriculture, transportation, natural resource management, and other
              fields highlights the importance of understanding GPS principles as well as
              basic geographic concepts tied to location, direction, scale, and distance.
              This project is developing instructional modules that address theory,
              operation, and applications of GPS technology and its integration with other
              spatial technologies. Four modules are being designed for adaptation within
              undergraduate geography (or related) courses that emphasize basic
              navigation/positioning, spatial data capture, data management/ integration, or
              the analysis of geographic information. These modules contain three parts: 1) a
              web-based pre-lab exercise to be completed in advance of a class meeting, 2)
              presentation materials that can be used by instructors (topic outlines,
              photographs, diagrams, animations), and 3) hands-on exercises emphasizing field
              data capture and spatial data integration. These modules are undergoing a three
              tier evaluation. First, they are being critically examined by a curricula
              review team. Second, they are being tested within selected Oklahoma State
              University courses. Finally, they are being tested by faculty collaborators at
              six other campus sites. Nationwide dissemination of materials is being
              undertaken through the GPS Tools for Geographers web page. An important project
              goal is to update and revise project materials indefinitely and to attract a
              following that encourages contributions of new modules by faculty at other
              institutions.
