Title       : The Hidden Earth Curriculum - A Visual, Interactive Approach to College Geology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0127595

Award Number: 0127595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Reynolds sreynolds@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Piburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
We are developing interactive computer-based materials - unlike
              any that previously existed - to help students learn geology, improve their
              spatial visualization abilities, and engage in critical thinking. This proposal
              is to fully develop these innovative materials to create a lab-based
              curriculum, integrated with technology and focusing on the visual aspects of
              geology, such as visualizing geologic structures hidden beneath the Earth's
              surface. This project is placing these visual materials in a web-friendly
              framework and in the context of authentic, complex problems. We are using 3D
              programs to create arguably the next generation of interactive visual materials
              for introductory college geology courses. We are constructing QuickTime Virtual
              Reality (QTVR) movies that enable students to interactively rotate topographic
              and geologic terrains, slice into geologic blocks or reveal the internal
              geometry of layers, and erode the uplifted side of a fault block to see how
              this would be expressed on the land surface. We have piloted these movies in
              our introductory geology labs and upper-division geology courses, all to rave
              reviews. This curriculum contains integrated modules that can be used in
              introductory college courses and upper-level SMET courses, and by the general
              public. To evaluate the curriculum, students are pre-tested, selectively
              interviewed while training on the materials, and post-tested. Experimental
              methods include both experimental and quasi-experimental, and data are
              qualitative and quantitative. Proposed duration of the project is 36 months.
              Materials are being distributed via the Internet (http://reynolds.asu.edu) and
              via commercial publishers who already are interested.
