Title       : Implementation of Field Laboratory and Fieldwork Curriculum in Physical
               Geography and Geotechniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0127130

Award Number: 0127130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aondover Tarhule atarhule@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              May Yuan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Hoagland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Joachim Spaeth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geography (88)
Field experience is vital for the development of qualified and
              effective practitioners in all aspects of geography. Unfortunately, the
              availability and easy access to secondary data over the past two decades has
              resulted in the de-emphasis of fieldwork, which now threatens to produce a
              generation of geographers inadequately prepared to apply and teach field
              methods. This project is working to correct this deficiency through the
              development of a field laboratory dedicated to student-led, inquiry-driven
              instruction. Our premise is that students learn best by doing. Our goal is to
              provide students the opportunity to acquire hands-on experience in an
              intellectually exciting environment wherein problems are investigated that they
              themselves have formulated. This approach is a modification of the
              guided-inquiry, learning-by -doing approaches created and described by Barbara
              Tewksbury (see B. Tewksbury, editor, "Innovative and Effective Teaching in the
              Geosciences," National Association of Geoscience Teachers, 1997), developed and
              implemented with success at Hamilton College (Geology) and Dickinson College
              (Geology, Geophysics), and elsewhere in Europe (see M. Kent et al, "Fieldwork
              in Geography Teaching: A Critical Review of the Literature and Approaches,"
              Journal of Geography in Higher Education, Vol. 21, No. 3, 1997, pages 313-332).
              To facilitate experiential learning, we are working in a 14,200 acre field site
              belonging to the University of Oklahoma. Field activities throughout the
              geography curriculum are being planned for this field station. Students first
              become acquainted with the field lab in lower division courses, when they are
              introduced to fundamental field techniques and instruments. Upper division
              courses are building on these experiences, and we are implementing a course of
              guided autonomous investigation. Small teams of students are working with
              faculty and representatives from state and federal agencies. The role of
              faculty is to stimulate, encourage, and guide students through the research
              process and advise them on the merits and the suitability of chosen field
              methods. Scientists from state and federal agencies are being used to provide
              unique insights from practical local perspectives. The students are collecting
              original data, performing appropriate analyses, and reporting their results in
              departmental colloquia. Outstanding students are provided with support to
              present their results at national meetings and they are encouraged to publish
              in appropriate journals. By experiencing the complete spectrum of problem
              formulation, experimental design, data analysis, report writing and
              dissemination of results, students are developing skills in problem-solving,
              critical thinking, and research collaboration. All project activities are being
              placed on a web site created for the purpose and are freely accessible to
              everyone.
