Title       : Development of a 3-D Interactive Mineralogy Textbook
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0127191

Award Number: 0127191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda D. Dyar mddyar@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis L. Tasa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Odell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mickey E. Gunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
This project creates a Mineralogy textbook that is accessible and
              relevant to students by presenting the material in accord with modern learning
              theory. The chapters are integrated with a CD-ROM focused on active learning by
              students. Every text illustration is reproduced in color 3-D and includes
              animations, interactive exercises, and narration by the authors. A second
              accompanying CD-ROM provides an all-inclusive mineralogical database that can
              be used for mineral identification, movies of crystal structures, optical
              properties, etc. Sections of the text and its animations will be incorporated
              into DLESE, with metatags provided for direct searching and browsing of much of
              the material. The textbook reflects the experience of both authors' in industry
              and their years of teaching geoscience, science education, planetary science,
              and materials science. The textbook addresses a diversity of student
              perspectives ranging from science teachers to geologists, across the broader
              earth sciences, to connections with cognate disciplines like chemistry,
              physics, mathematics, and biology. This project involves collaboration among
              authors at Mount Holyoke College and the University of Idaho. Educators at the
              University of Idaho are performing evaluations. Tasa Graphic Arts, Inc. is
              producing the illustrations and the CD-ROMs. Support is requested to facilitate
              production of a low-cost textbook that incorporates state-of-the-art pedagogy
              and computer animation that may be used by students in the geosciences as well
              as science education programs. The textbook incorporates innovative methods
              (such as the use of spiral and inductive learning, as well as concept maps)
              that have the potential for improving the quality of science teacher
              preparation, adding diversity to the textbooks in this field, and providing for
              integration of technology into earth science and related curricula.
