Title       : Enhancement of Digital, Control, and Microelectronics Courses for a New
               Manufacturing Engineering Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0127085

Award Number: 0127085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl D. Stephan kdstephan@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vedaraman Sriraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
In Fall 2000, the Department of Technology at SWTSU
              was authorized to begin the first engineering program on campus, a curriculum
              leading to a B. S. in Manufacturing Engineering. Present courses in digital
              electronics, controls, and semiconductor manufacturing are suitable for a
              technology curriculum but need substantial upgrading and enhancement to support
              the new engineering program. The objective of this proposal is to provide
              hardware and software to implement a number of new educational initiatives in
              several courses which are going to support this new program. These initiatives
              are adapting ideas from institutions such as Texas A&M and Virginia Polytechnic
              Institute (VPI) to develop a curriculum suited to SWTSU environment, which
              draws heavily from rural, minority and female population pools in Central
              Texas.

The courses targeted for improvement are in Digital Electronics,
              Control Systems and Instrumentation, and Microelectronics Manufacturing (a
              two-semester sequence). The strengths of the hands-on teaching approach that is
              common in technology programs is being applied to develop laboratory-intensive
              course modules suitable for modern manufacturing engineers. Such a hands-on
              applications approach to engineering education is intended to cater to the
              learning styles of all students. The experience gained through faculty
              development and implementation of these changes helps to establish the
              manufacturing engineering program on a firm foundation, adding to the pool of
              skilled engineering personnel which are badly needed in this region.

