Title       : SBIR Phase I: OODLE: An Object-Oriented Design Learning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2001  
File        : a0127938

Award Number: 0127938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Domeshek domeshek@shai.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stottler Henke Assoc
	      1660 S. Amphlett Blvd
	      San Mateo, CA  944022520    650/655-7242

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,7256,7355,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
              and evaluate a software prototype to assess the technical and commercial
              feasibility of an Object-Oriented Design Learning Environment (OODLE) that will
              help software engineers acquire expert-level object-oriented design skills
              rapidly and economically.  Unlike earlier tutoring systems that help novices
              learn to write short programs that generate "merely" correct results, OODLE
              will help software engineers learn to design more complex software systems by
              appropriately balancing factors such as the importance of each functional
              requirement, time and space efficiency, simplicity, flexibility, clarity, and
              code modularity.  Because complex design problems have no single correct
              solution, the tutoring system will assess the strengths and weaknesses of each
              student's design and then "converse" with the student within a Socratic dialog
              to clarify understandings, intentions, and rationales, as well as point out
              additional facts, issues, and experiences that suggest design alternatives
              worth considering.  Although OODLE will teach object-oriented software design
              skills, many of the findings of this research may also apply to other
              engineering disciplines. Thus, this research would significantly advance our
              ability to create curriculum development and learning assessment tools that
              help student and professional engineers enhance their design
              skills.

Software engineers require better methods of acquiring the extensive
              experience and instructional feedback needed to become proficient designers.
              Ideally, the engineers would receive individualized instruction in one-on-one
              or small group mentoring situations.  In practice, however, mentored
              instruction can be difficult to achieve because expert mentors are an expensive
              resource that is infrequently available. To satisfy this market need, the
              company will develop an object-oriented design skills tutor that can be
              marketed to software vendors and IT organizations.  Initially, the OODLE
              technology will be packaged within semi-custom solutions sold directly by the
              firm to large end-user companies or indirectly via licensing or reseller
              arrangements with software training and consulting companies.
