Title       : Feedback Control of an Acid-Neutralization Reactor: An Integrated Learning and
               Student Assessment Module
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0127491

Award Number: 0127491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay B. Brockman jbb@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. McCready  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53)
Our work addresses the fundamental national needs
              of engineering student retention because it provides a project/inquiry -based
              experience for first year engineering students who have not yet committed to
              engineering. To address this need we have created a comprehensive,
              web-integrated, learning and student assessment module. This module is based on
              a feedback-controlled acid neutralization laboratory experiment. It has been
              designed for our first year engineering students and includes topics such as
              feedback control, which is of interest to many of the engineering disciplines.
              Our experiment also incorporates the use of mass conservation equations (of
              interest to chemical and environmental engineers) and modeling of engineering
              systems with computer - based simulation which is of interest to all engineers.
              A key part of our module was the development of a web-based student (Primary
              Trait Analysis) assessment tool. This assessment tool will be "wrapped around"
              the simulator so that instructors can "observe" and then provide feedback about
              how students go through the process of using a simulations tool to explore,
              understand, and interpret data from a physical experiment. From this,
              instructors would gain crucial insight into student learning pathways and thus
              determine both how, and how well students are learning. Further it endeavors to
              show how to integrate web-based information and the use of an engineering
              simulator to explore and understand a physical experiment. The details
              necessary to reproduce the experiment, the simulator, the web-based information
              and the assessment procedure are available for testing and implementation at
              other institutions. 

