Title       : A virtual tornadic thunderstorm to enable student-centered learning about
               complex storm-scale atmospheric dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0127465

Award Number: 0127465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74949              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Gallus wgallus@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cinzia Cervato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolina Cruz-Neira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric Sciences (41)
A visually-realistic virtual tornadic supercell
              thunderstorm is being developed with data probe capabilities, providing
              students from K-12 through graduate with opportunities to learn as scientists
              learn in a constructivist manner. The virtual storm is a proof-of-concept for
              later creation of other virtual geoscience systems. The virtual storm addresses
              the NSF goal of providing all students access to excellent undergraduate
              science education, with learning based upon direct experience with methods and
              processes of inquiry. This research is being built upon a simple prototype of
              the virtual storm, already developed with internal funds at Iowa State
              University. Although the prototype storm, lacking data probe capabilities, was
              developed in a fully-immersive virtual CAVE, a version has been disseminated to
              linux-based PCs, improving student access. We are creating a Windows-based
              version for wider dissemination. The numerous small-scale details within a
              super cell thunderstorm that reflect the wide range of important atmospheric
              processes occurring make the storm an especially useful model to serve as a
              proof-of-concept. An assessment of the impact the virtual storm has on science
              education is being made by comparing student answers to questions on the topic
              in a large-lecture introductory course in year 1 (no exposure to the virtual
              storm) to those from year 2 when students are exploring the virtual storm.
              Successful completion of the project should demonstrate that exciting
              laboratory-type experiences of phenomena previously off limits to students
              within classroom laboratories can be brought to students everywhere by virtual
              reality simulations.
