Title       : Using Live-Thru Case Histories to Motivate and Teach Software Engineering to
               Computer Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0127208

Award Number: 0127208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron D. Klappholz aklappho@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Bernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Software Engineering (34)

We have devised a novel pedagogic methodology,
              Live-Thru Case Histories, for motivating and teaching Software Engineering.
              

Computer Science students are often excited about learning technology
              (State of the Art), but uninterested in its critically-necessary adjunct,
              software development process (variously known as Software Engineering, State of
              the Practice, or Best Practice). Our methodology brings undergraduate Computer
              Science students to the realization that without an appropriate appreciation
              for and facility in using State of the Practice, they are likely to fail, not
              in their course work, but in the real-world software development projects to
              which they are planning to devote their careers. We have conducted a pilot
              study in a Senior Project/Software Engineering course, and have obtained, and
              published, encouraging results. 

A publisher who read our results has
              approached us, unsolicited, with a request to develop additional Live-Through
              Case History materials. Colleagues at Rutgers, New Jersey Institute of
              Technology, University of Michigan Dearborn and University of Maryland
              University College have agreed to use Live-Thru Case Histories. 

Members of
              our team include: a former Vice President of AT&T with thirty-five years of
              experience performing and managing industrial and governmental software
              development; a technology researcher with twenty-seven years experience
              teaching computer science and performing and supervising research sponsored by
              such organizations as NSF, DOE, and IBM Research; a psychologist whose
              specialty is the development and assessment of educational programs; and a
              political scientist whose specialties include web-based outcomes assessment and
              the design and analysis of surveys.
