Title       : Collaborative Chemistry Laboratory Model (CCLM): Integrating Microcomputer-Based
               Laboratory with Interactive Multimedia Computer Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0127583

Award Number: 0127583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moustapha Diack mdiack@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ella L. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry P. Suits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Delaney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern University
	      P O Box 9614
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708139614    504/771-4500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project is a joint effort between two Louisiana
              Universities, Southern University in Baton Rouge and McNeese State University
              in Lake Charles. We intend to integrate our resources and develop a
              Collaborative Chemistry Laboratory Model (CCLM) for undergraduate chemistry
              that can address some common problems. Specifically, poor student performance
              in the chemistry gatekeeper courses may be due to poor inquiry skills
              (methodology and reasoning) and poor conceptual understanding of chemistry
              topics. These problems, in turn, may adversely influence progress in future
              science courses. The model is based upon the integration of constructivist
              learning theory with three interactive modes of technology that are designed to
              enhance experiences with a phenomenon and its representations. Microcomputer
              Based Laboratory (MBL), i.e., the NSF-funded LabWorks, allows student design of
              experiments, simultaneous observation of a phenomenon and its representations,
              and graphical analysis of its data. Interactive Multimedia Computer Simulations
              (IMCS), the Chemistry Explorer computer modeling and simulation from Riverdeep,
              expands student decision-making opportunities and allows visualization at the
              particulate level. We are adapting and integrating the use of the MBL and IMCS
              systems so that students can emulate the mental world of chemists when they
              couple the enhanced methodology of MBL with the conceptually rich microworld of
              IMCS. Online cooperative/collaborative learning methods are providing
              opportunities for students to share their experiences and ideas between the two
              universities. The CCLM is being tested in freshman chemistry laboratory courses
              and later will be implemented in advanced courses. The project involves 800
              STEM students distributed within the two universities. Faculty development
              workshops are being used to share findings throughout the LS-LAMP network of 12
              universities. Other methods of dissemination include web publications and
              professional conferences.


