Title       : Integration of Inquiry-based Undergraduate Laboratory Modules throughout a Core
               Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0127167

Award Number: 0127167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merri L. Casem   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amybeth Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darren R. Sandquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Inquiry-based laboratories are an important means of
              providing students with the opportunity to learn through a process of
              exploration and discovery. Inclusion of inquiry-based laboratories is a
              critical feature of the curricular reform currently underway in the Department
              of Biological Science, California State University, Fullerton. This project
              involves the development and support of multiple inquiry-based laboratory
              modules integrated throughout a new four-semester series of foundational
              courses in the biology major. Eight modules are being developed using model
              organism systems drawn from the Research Link 2000 Institute. The courses
              served by these modules include: Biodiversity & Evolution, Cellular Basis of
              Life, Genetics & Molecular Biology, and Principles of Physiology & Ecology.
              Modules, using Aiptasia palladia (sea anemone) and Wisconsin Fast Plants,
              follow themes of symbiosis and stress responses, respectively, from the
              distinct perspective of each core course. The key innovation of this project is
              the creation of an iterative inquiry-based laboratory experience. Student
              laboratory experiences more closely resemble authentic science. We propose that
              students gain 1) confidence in the care and manipulation of the organisms, 2)
              facility in experimental design, 3) appreciation of the integrative nature of
              biology, and 4) a greater depth of knowledge. Student learning goals and
              preparation for upper-division course work, including independent research, are
              being evaluated.
