Title       : The Nanoscience Education Resource: Translating Current Research into
               Educational Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0127467

Award Number: 0127467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499313             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary H. Shann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Morton Z. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major goal of science curriculum standards is to provide students with an
              opportunity to understand macroscopic features in terms of the microscopic
              interactions that give rise to those features. Our cross-disciplinary project
              team has developed a set of instructional materials that help to achieve this
              goal. A key feature of these materials is the use of molecular dynamics, a
              technique developed in recent years that programs the motion of atoms and
              molecules based on the laws that govern their motion. Thus, a student can
              observe, in real time, the microscopic behavior and, using split-screen
              software programs, can simultaneously see the corresponding macroscopic
              behavior. By changing the conditions of the system (e.g., volume, pressure, or
              temperature), the student can better understand how both microscopic and
              macroscopic properties depend on these conditions. These interactive materials
              are being used across a continuum of intellectual depth, from the demonstration
              of qualitative concepts to a full-edged tool of exploration and self-discovery,
              and they are being used to teach a topics such as mathematics, chemistry,
              biology, and physics as well as applied topics in engineering and medicine.
              This project is enhancing existing materials by development of new
              multidisciplinary curriculum modules that integrate current nanoscience
              molecular modeling research with science education. Topics such as nanotubes
              and buckyballs, molecular motors and molecular machines, protein folding,
              aggregate formation and dissociation such as atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's
              disease, crystal growth, and designer membranes are being developed. Through
              existing research collaborations, the team is (1) developing new undergraduate
              science curriculum modules (curriculum and software tools) that focus on the
              treatment of nanoscale concepts that unite various scientific and engineering
              disciplines, (2) classroom-testing materials through laboratory-based
              extensions to existing SMET courses at Boston University, (3) fostering
              Web-based community-building and support, and (4) implementing a prototype
              teacher development program for faculty at 2- and 4-year undergraduate
              institutions. The project is being evaluated in terms of student learning,
              classroom practice, and impact on underrepresented populations.

