Title       : Using Physiology to Teach Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0127245

Award Number: 0127245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63017              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Brienza mbrienza@fair1.fairfield.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy M. Haegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olivia Harriott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairfield University
	      North Benson Road
	      Fairfield, CT  06824    203/255-5411

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Providing interesting and rigorous undergraduate physics
              instruction for biology and health science majors is a significant and
              challenging problem. An increasing body of physics education research
              literature supports the claim of McDermott and colleagues that "Teaching by
              telling is an ineffective mode of instruction for most students". This growing
              realization has placed renewed emphasis on active learning and laboratory
              components of physics instruction. 

Yet the laboratory experiences are often
              routine exercises in data taking on an apparatus designed to demonstrate a
              physical principle with little regard for life-experience relevance. There is
              limited motivation to acquire conceptual understanding and reasoning or
              opportunities to relate physics to life experiences. The objective of the
              project is to develop modules for the introductory level laboratory and lecture
              that address the need for physics experiments and lecture demonstrations
              performed in a physiological venue. Students rarely encounter frictionless
              inclines or force tables with pulleys. They routinely are aware, however, of
              their anatomy, blood pressure and respiration, hearing and vision.
              

Initially four modules are being developed and integrated into a yearlong
              laboratory sequence. Specific experiments include: 1) the study of force,
              torque and rotational equilibrium via the measurement of the vertical location
              of the center of mass of the entire human body and its dependence on the
              attitude of body parts; 2) the study of fluid mechanics via the measurement of
              variations in blood pressure with vertical location and the maximum expiration
              and inspiration pressures of the lungs; 3) the study of waves and sound via the
              measurement of the ability of a human listener to discern the direction of a
              sound source; and 4) the study of geometric optics via the measurement and
              correction of common imaging defects of the human eye. 

Interdisciplinary
              participation of the physics and biology departments is included throughout
              this project. This project is directed by both physics and biology faculty
              advisors working with a team of two to four students to design, fabricate and
              test the experiments and develop the laboratory modules. A significant benefit
              of this program is the opportunity for the funded research students who
              represent the "target community" to become a part of the "pedagogical process
              development." This opportunity should be especially valuable to aspiring
              educators. 

Assessment of the project includes pre- and post-laboratory
              testing and specific evaluation of laboratory report discussions of concepts
              and their application to related physiological applications. These experiments
              are of interest to a wider population and selected modules are being utilized
              in the University's "Upward Bound" program, a weekend/summer program in science
              for promising high school students from local, urban school districts.
              Additionally, the lecture demonstration derivatives are used in a non-science
              major core course entitled Physics of the Body. Finally, the modules are being
              disseminated to other universities and made available nationally by publication
              and web presentation of laboratory materials. The successful program outcome is
              a challenging, interdisciplinary and relevant physics learning experience for a
              large undergraduate student population.

