Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Child Temperament and Personality Across Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0127711

Award Number: 0127711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95391              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Victor james.victor@hamptonu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Child Temperament and Personality Across Contexts
James B.
              Victor,  Hampton University
Mary K. Rothbart, University of Oregon

This
              project will merge two previously independent strands of research in the study
              of child temperament and personality. During the project year, child
              personality and temperament research teams at Hampton University, a
              Historically Black University (HBCU) and the University of Oregon will develop
              a collaborative network to build capacity for multidisciplinary, cross-cultural
              research about the development of child temperament and personality across
              contexts (CTPC). Child development collaborators who study child development
              issues across a broad array of developmental contexts (family, child-care,
              school, community, culture and language) will participate in the project. The
              overall project goal will merge two previously independent strands of research
              in the study of temperament and personality. The project's three specific aims
              are related to three domains as follow. 
Aim 1: Domain 1: Biological, social
              and behavioral aspects of measuring temperament and personality in children. 
              We have chosen collaborators who will help us consider issues related to child
              temperament, child personality development (both the lexical approach and the
              NEO-PI Facet approach), and adult personality research.  This group of
              collaborators will consider conceptual and measurement issues in developing
              facets for common instruments across the biological, emotional, social, and
              behavioral aspects of temperament and personality.  In addition, collaborators
              will plan a multi-site study to validate the facet measures that have been
              developed. 
Aim 2: Domain 2: Risk identification and prevention in temperament
              and personality development.  We have chosen collaborators who represent a
              broad array of scientific interests in child development to assist in
              developing an integrative approach to studying temperament and personality
              development from a common perspective.  These collaborators will review the
              collected materials and analyses from Domain 1 activities.  They will provide
              input and recommendations from their research prospectives on the measurement
              issues presented to them.  In addition, they will plan collaborative studies
              using the common facets, based upon their programs of research. 
Aim 3: Domain
              3: Ethnic and cultural contexts in temperament and personality development. We
              have chosen collaborators to address important ethnic and cultural issues and
              provide research access to a broad spectrum of populations of American Children
              to include African American and Latino children. These collaborators will plan
              studies to confirm and validate the common temperament and personality facets
              across culture and language contexts. 
Work to complete the three aims will
              include a fall workshop at the University of Oregon on child temperament and
              implications for facilitating collaborators working groups. In the spring
              workshop at Hampton University collaborators will present plans to submit
              proposals, gain funding, and conduct individual investigator, small
              collaborations and large-scale projects to meet the objective of integrating
              child development research across traditional knowledge domains, cultural
              contexts, and levels of analysis. 


