Title       : Molecular Laboratory Experiments in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0127563

Award Number: 0127563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308511             (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Gelder jgelder@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Abraham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project addresses four perceived problems in instruction at
              the introductory level in Chemistry: a need for curriculum materials that will
              support an inquiry oriented instructional strategy; the difficulty students
              have linking macroscopic, microscopic and symbolic levels of understanding; a
              need for computer-based instructional materials that are simple, dynamic and
              interactive; a need to identify and address students' misconceptions. We are
              developing instructional materials that can be implemented as an integrated
              macroscopic (sensory)/microscopic/symbolic inquiry-oriented laboratory based
              instructional model. Specifically, we are developing eight Molecular Level
              Experiment (MoLE) Simulations: Gas Laws, Gas Phase Equilibrium, Kinetics,
              Atomic Structure and Periodicity, Acid-Base Chemistry, Calorimetry,
              Electrochemistry and Molecular and Solid State Structure. Each MoLE Simulation
              is a powerful, interactive, dynamic computer simulation, and is accompanied by
              a guided and open-inquiry laboratory activity. The materials help students link
              the macroscopic, microscopic and symbolic worlds together and allow them to
              develop a deeper understanding of these chemical phenomena. The materials also
              allow faculty and students to identify and address misconceptions students
              might have concerning the target concepts in each MoLE Simulation. Several
              different colleges and universities are testing and evaluating the proposed
              materials with their students under a number of additional instructional
              settings, including lecture, lecture supplements, homework assignment, computer
              laboratory, as either group or individual activities, and to introduce or
              verify concepts.
