Title       : Collaborative Research and Development of a Prototype Java-Based Learning
               Materials for the Environment of Undergraduate Electrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0127495

Award Number: 0127495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38568              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Schmidt kevin.schmidt@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project is developing and field testing a set of companion
              materials intended to provide visualization and numerical solutions
              illustrating problems and concepts in upper-level undergraduate courses in
              electricity and magnetism. The goal is determine how the use of a highly
              portable and cost-free implementation of computational and visual learning tool
              may be brought into wide acceptance. The subject of electrodynamics has been
              chosen for this proof-of-concept project because of the rich opportunity for
              visualization. This prototype project involves developing a selection of sample
              learning aides for undergraduate electrodynamics with a component of field
              testing in a classroom environment. The project materials consist of Java
              programs with numerical methods and a visualization interface and are
              accompanied by descriptive text. A key component of the prototype concept is
              the text and discussion materials that work with the Java visualization and
              computational tools. This accompanying material includes subject explanation
              and description of the use of the computational/visual tools. Though a
              significant quantity of learning materials and software are being produced in
              this prototype project, one of the major research question addressed is the
              design of materials to that they are actually used in the classroom. The design
              concept being tested seeks to remove many of the typical barriers to adapting
              new material for an existing class. Among the barriers being addressed are
              cost, relevance, software compatibility, and the important issue of time
              invested by teacher and student in getting started with the learning tools.
              Relevance and other design features are the subject of field tests included in
              the project design.
