Title       : Collaborative Project: Core Integration of the National SMETE Digital Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0127298

Award Number: 0127298
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2686731            (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Fulker fulker@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Allan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary R. Marlino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathryn A. Manduca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team of institutions is developing the technical capabilities and executing
              the organizational responsibilities of the core integration component of the
              National SMETE Digital Library program. Collaborators include: UCAR, Cornell
              University, Columbia University, the University of California at Santa Barbara,
              the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval at the University of
              Massachusetts, and the San Diego Supercomputing Center. The project is bringing
              together many efforts already underway, and engaging new efforts as well, in
              support of a comprehensive large-scale digital library that promises to enhance
              every aspect of education in science, mathematics, engineering and technology.
              The organizational and technical underpinnings of the proposed work fall into
              three categories of effort, each within the overall context of educational
              excellence: 1) engaging the community, 2) providing technology, and 3)
              operating core services. To promote the vision of a strong NSDL community that
              sees itself as owning the program and having major influence on the character
              of the library, the project team is working with all NSDL-funded projects,
              helping to integrate their work into the library. Additional partnering with
              efforts such as those funded by the NSF's Digital Library Initiative and by the
              Institute of Museum and Library Services, and independently developed
              collections and services, is also taking place. Development and support of
              models for intellectual property and digital rights management are being
              undertaken, as well as promotion of a library evaluation framework,
              administration of an NSDL program advisory group, and development of an overall
              governance mechanism for the NSDL. A robust, flexible information technological
              infrastructure is being implemented based on two themes: a spectrum of
              interoperability and "one library with many portals". Technical components
              include a flexible portal architecture, a central metadata repository, an open
              source tool kit for access to rich content, and a database for authentication
              and user profiles, all emphasizing openness and long-term evolution. Finally,
              support is provided for a very wide array of educational and library services,
              emphasizing in this initial phase: operation of the primary portal and
              specialized portals for the NSDL community and the NSDL partners, comprehensive
              information retrieval services to search for collections or individual items,
              and an optional service for user profiles and authentication. The other two
              awards in this collaborative project are 0127308 and 0127520.
