Title       : Using Technology to Transform Teaching and Learning: Data-Driven Inquiry and
               Collaborative Learning in Introductory Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0127577

Award Number: 0127577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Bothun nuts@bigmoo.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris Mihos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard McCray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Impey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) This project expands development of data-driven interactive
              exercises and
simulations for use in a collaborative learning environment to
              cover virtually all topic
areas in introductory Astronomy. The motivation is
              to a) use the naturally engaging
character of Astronomy as a vehicle to
              promote science literacy by integrating research
into the curriculum to
              transform the passive lecture mode into an active learning system
that
              emphasizes scientific process and methodology, b) explicitly create a
              collaborative
learning environment where student teams solve problems and
              analyze data and c) offer a
more engaging interface to science learning so
              that it becomes an effective recruiting tool
for future K-12 science teachers.
              These goals can be accomplished by the development of
robust software, based
              on real astronomical data sets, that runs in the Web browser
environment.
              Previous work by the team on this project has already produced some of these
              learning tools.
Assessment and evaluation of that effort shows that the
              methodology is sound.
New objectives will be accomplished via further software
              development and beta-testing
in local classes. This will involve approximately
              700 students
annually on four different campuses. The overall goals of this
              effort are for the students
to be exposed to science methodology by engaging
              them in the actual practice of science
and for them to develop excellent
              collaboration skills. These outcomes will serve the
students far better than
              the traditional mode of rote memorization of syllabus-driven
material that
              currently constitutes the pedagogy.
