Title       : Equipment for an Investigative Introductory Biology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0127089

Award Number: 0127089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42486              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Marcey marcey@clunet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Revie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth O. Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea L. Huvard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Lutheran Univ
	      60 West Olsen Road
	      Thousand Oaks, CA  913602700    805/492-2411

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Introductory Biology laboratories work best when
              students actively engage in genuine
scientific inquiry. We are following the
              precedent set by Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) and transforming the CLU's
              Introductory Biology lab course to one that emphasizes the major processes of
              science: the formation and testing of hypotheses, observation, interpretation,
              experimentation, analysis, and communication (both oral and written). We are
              purchasing four functional groups of equipment to develop a new course,
              Introduction to Biological Experimentation (IBE). IBE offers lab exercises that
              support an inquiry-based approach. Emphasis on investigative biology at the
              introductory level better prepares our science students for upper division
              courses and research experiences, and enhances their prospects for success in
              graduate programs, the health professions, and jobs in research, clinical, and
              business settings. Students enrolled in CLU's Science Educators program
              (conducted with CLU's School of Education) are receiving better training in the
              methods of science as a result of our new IBE course. This project is
              contributing to the important national goal of training more capable K-12
              science educators. The equipment of this project is also expanding the types of
              experiments that young minority students enrolled in our science Upward Bound
              summer program (High School minority students) can conduct. We are evaluating
              the new labs and disseminating successful experiments through print and
              electronic media.
