Title       : SGER: Toward a Unifying Taxonomy for Feature Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0127815

Award Number: 0127815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huan Liu hliu@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project is to
              establish a unifying taxonomy of features selection. Feature selection is used
              in used in various applications, including pattern recognition, machine
              learning, datamining or decision making, to choose the most appropriate subset
              of features among the available ones for the task. It can be viewed as an
              optimization problem of exponential time complexity along several dimensions.
              Many feature selection algorithms have been developed and deployed in
              real-world applications. However, there exists a distinct gap between what
              theory suggests and what practice reveals, and the proliferation of feature
              selection algorithms makes it very difficult to fully understand the various
              feature selection techniques and construct a general methodology for feature
              selection. It is time-critical that these issues are addressed and a unifying
              taxonomy is developed, to facilitate new research, development and tools in
              feature selection. This project explores the first step toward dealing with
              these issues. The task of establishing a unifying taxonomy for feature
              selection is accomplished in two steps: (1) defining a common platform to
              consider representative algorithms on the equal footing; and (2) building a
              unifying taxonomy to discover how the algorithms complement each other and what
              is missing. The approach includes collection of representative data and
              algorithms and conducting comparative experiments to determine the
              characteristics of the feature selection algorithms, their performance on
              different data and tasks. The expected results of this project include a
              contemporary survey, a unifying taxonomy of feature selection algorithms, and
              some potential solutions to the automatic selection problem -- being able to
              automatically choose the most suitable feature selection algorithm with given
              the problem conditions. The progress and updates of the project, and the
              resulting survey and unifying taxonomy will be available online.
