Title       : Flexible Process Control Laboratory Kits: Teaching Process Control Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0127231

Award Number: 0127231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74326              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Moor Moors@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Polly R. Piergiovanni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Engineering (32)
Traditional undergraduate instruction in process
              control focuses on abstract analysis and often does not prepare students for
              the industrially important task of synthesizing process control strategies and
              designs. The key goal of our project has been to bridge this chasm between
              academics and industry by developing and incorporating into the curriculum
              inexpensive and flexible process control lab kits that will allow students to
              design, implement and test their own control systems. The students will have
              the important tasks of determining the placement of sensors and control
              elements, and the nature of the control strategy. With our kits, students
              conduct several flow, level and temperature experiments, which illustrate
              concepts from simple draining tank dynamics through the implementation of
              advanced multi-loop control systems. In this project, the needed components, a
              software control system, and student instructions have been
              developed.

Because our kits are inherently safe and require only electrical
              power and water to run, they can be used for laboratories, classroom demos and
              exercises, independent activities, distance learning and for educational
              outreach to high school students. In the future, kits could be adapted to
              provide experiments for a range of engineering courses including Introduction
              to Engineering, Material and Energy Balances, Unit Operations and Reactor
              Design. Evaluation of the kits and materials developed have been conducted at
              Lafayette College. Rowan University and Manhattan College have completed
              additional testing.

