Title       : CCLI-EMD: Virtual Collaborative Engineering for the Freshman Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0127397

Award Number: 0127397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74778              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Dryer ddryer@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derya A. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Swart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
Our project involves the design, implementation, and
              assessment of a multidisciplinary freshman engineering course. Experience in
              distributed virtual collaborative engineering is becoming more and more
              important as the use of advanced communication and information technologies is
              transforming engineering companies. Our course incorporates e-engineering
              technologies that model a virtual collaborative engineering environment.
              Although such e-engineering technologies may be found at the corporate level,
              graduating students often lack skills and knowledge needed to take advantage of
              these technologies and this emerging environment. There exists a unique
              opportunity to create a virtual collaborative engineering course model which
              leverages on-going academic industry and government initiatives. The goal of
              our work has been to create a multidisciplinary, project-oriented freshman
              engineering course. Our course covers the fundamentals of project management,
              engineering team organization techniques, and problem solving, e-engineering
              technologies, and application of the above concepts and methodologies to a
              multidisciplinary project. This project will include design, rapid prototyping,
              and testing of a product, and is designed to challenge students to move beyond
              traditionally conceived engineering team toward a virtual collaborative
              engineering approach by employing the use of e-engineering technologies.

