Title       : The Mind Project Online Curriculum and Archive for the Cognitive & Learning
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0127561

Award Number: 0127561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553228             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Anderson dlanders@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Busey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Stufflebeam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Biological (71)
The Mind Project is developing a rich array of
              interactive, web-based curriculum modules in the cognitive and learning
              sciences. Each module is designed for students who have no prior knowledge of
              the cognitive and learning sciences. Given the interdisciplinary nature of the
              cognitive sciences, many modules are suitable for use in a variety of different
              subjects, even at the freshman level. This strategy of "cognitive science
              across the curriculum" is providing a way of introducing students to this
              exciting field early in their academic careers. When linked together in
              sufficient numbers, the growing number of completed modules can be used to
              create an entire introductory course to cognitive science.
One of the central
              design features of many of the modules is their capacity to introduce students
              to a particular research methodology and to provide interactive experiences
              that invite the student to employ that methodology first-hand. Rather than
              merely reading about what cognitive scientists do, students can actively engage
              in scientific inquiry, exploring the nature of mind and cognition with newly
              acquired methodological skills. Because the research expertise is built into
              the modules, a single instructor is able to teach an introduction to cognitive
              science with the kind of serious commitment to a variety of research
              methodologies that is typically found only in team-taught courses. 
The
              modules are being housed and maintained in The Mind Project Archive, the
              official repository for the Consortium on Cognitive Science Instruction CCSI).
              This archive uses a powerful server, allowing instructors to create
              customizable tables of contents (with the underlying materials) for use in
              specific courses. This project seeks to make it possible to integrate Mind
              Project modules and any other resources stored in the Archive.

