Title       : Visible Human Dissector - Undergraduate Edition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0127574

Award Number: 0127574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor M. Spitzer vic.spitzer@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The goal of the Visible Human Dissector (VHD) project
              is to provide a highly visual, interactive exploration tool to undergraduate
              instructors and their students that will enhance their ability to teach and
              learn human anatomy. The VHD, in its present prototype form, permits the user
              to 3-dimensionally display, highlight, dissect and identify structures and
              their properties and functions in the trunk of the National Library of
              Medicine's Visible Human Male. This project, through collaboration with nine
              undergraduate institutions in Colorado, is helping to develop and integrate
              this unique visual, interactive tool into anatomy and physiology courses
              offered by two-year and four-year undergraduate institutions. The students have
              the opportunity to perform a virtual cadaver dissection on photo-realistic
              anatomy in an interactive, self-directed manner, with testing and feedback
              options. This is made possible through the integration of technology,
              innovative software and this unique dataset. The existing prototype VHD was
              designed for medical student use as an adjunct to their human gross anatomy
              course. A goal of this project is to integrate this same technology into the
              undergraduate classroom. The nine schools were chosen to encompass a diverse
              population of undergraduate types. Formative and summative evaluation tools are
              designed to evaluate the VHD. Both an instructor and a student version of the
              Visible Human Dissector will be distributed nationally.
