Title       : Acquisition of a Supercritical Fluid System for Diverse Undergraduate Curricular
               Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0127118

Award Number: 0127118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29289              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Evans wevans@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley Fahlman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

Supercritical fluid (SCF) technology is being introduced into
              the undergraduate curriculum to complement many traditional topics already
              discussed and to enhance chemical education to prepare students for a variety
              of work environments. This environmentally-friendly medium is often mentioned
              only briefly in current undergraduate curricula, usually without any hands-on
              laboratory experience, even though the diversity of applications involving SCFs
              continue to mount in virtually every sector of the scientific workplace.

A
              SCF system is being introduced into five different undergraduate chemistry
              laboratory courses - two analytical, one inorganic, one physical, and one
              materials courses. Experiments are being adapted primarily from the research
              literature and implemented into these courses. Analytical experiments are
              utilizing the system for extraction of analytes from difficult matrices using
              environmentally-friendly solvents. Inorganic experiments are exploiting the
              properties of SCFs to isolate novel complexes possessing labile ligands, and
              other compounds that are traditionally difficult to synthesize/purify. Physical
              experiments are examining solubility and phase behavior of various
              co-solvents/SCF mixtures. In addition, thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for
              a variety of reactions are monitored around the critical point to determine the
              effects of such media. Semi-empirical and DFT calculations are being carried
              out to predict speciation within a SCF medium and to compare experimental
              results. Materials experiments are invoking this technology for polymerization,
              crystallization, nanoparticle deposition, and thin-film growth applications.

