Title       : A Novel Laboratory Based Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering for
               Sophomores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0127348

Award Number: 0127348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304643             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehmet C. Ozturk mco@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The reviewers found this project to be meritorious.  I have read the summary and
              individual reviews and concur with their assessment.  

This is a full
              development proposal that will develop, evaluate, and disseminate material for
              an alternative first-course in electrical engineering.  In addition to teaching
              some of the fundamental concepts, the course introduces the discipline and
              provides a set of experiments in various areas tied to real applications. The
              applicant has tested a pilot version of the course material with good results
              and asks for funds to continue their work.  The assessment plan is excellent
              and will address learning outcomes. The dissemination plan involves textbook
              publishers, letters to other departments,  on-line material, and a faculty
              workshop.  He also arranged to have the material tested at North Carolina A &
              T, a minority institution.

The reviewers rated this proposal very highly.
              They indicated that the existing parts of the new course and labs looked very
              good and were impressed by the institutional support in the initial
              development.  They noted that the breadth of the material provided an excellent
              overview and that the labs would be fun for the students.  The low cost of the
              lab modules, the objective nature of the assessment plan, and the quality of
              the assessment consultants impressed them. They listed the following minor
              weakness:  (1) The applicants should consider adding a minority or open
              enrollment institution to the project to pilot the material as a way of
              broadening the user population and increasing diversity in engineering. (2) A
              seminar or workshop could easily be added to the dissemination plan to
              facilitate adoption at other universities.  (3) A commercial educational
              equipment supplier should be approached concerning offering the experimental
              modules fabricated at a reasonable cost, but the publication of the
              documentation for do-it-your-selfers should not be sacrificed.  I contacted the
              PI and suggested that he consider modifying his project to include work with a
              minority institution, a faculty workshop, and a possible commercial supplier
              (see my email dated 10/12/01).  

The PI did followed through on each of the
              three suggestions as indicated in his email dated 11/27/01 and his FAX dated
              11/28/01.  He arranged to have North Carolina A & T participate by offering a
              version of the course in their EE program with a small increase in the budget
              to support this effort.  He added a faculty workshop, again with an increase in
              the budget to support the participants' travel and so on.  Finally, he made
              arrangements with TCI Works, a nonprofit agency that provides work oriented
              rehabilitation services for disabled and disadvantaged individuals by providing
              light, short run electronic assembly, to produce the modules.

This is a
              well-written proposal that addresses the nature of the first course in
              electrical engineering.  In place of a rigorous course on circuit theory, the
              applicants have developed and offered a course that provides an overview of the
              discipline and laboratory experiences related to several applications. 
              Evaluation results of several pilot offerings were very positive and they want
              to refine and expand the course material and develop a web-based virtual lab
              for off-campus use.  The evaluation study of the pilot offering was excellent
              and planned future assessment work is solid.   The dissemination plan will  be
              effective.

I recommend funding at the revised level. 

