Title       : Cohort and Problem-Based Learning in an Undergraduate Environmental Science and
               Policy Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0127017

Award Number: 0127017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91203              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Pennuto pennuto@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Sanford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Perritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samantha J. Langley-Turnbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This project supports the acquisition of an Inductively
              Coupled Plasma Emission Spectrophotometer (ICP), the centerpiece for
              establishing a five-course sequence that integrates problem-based learning, and
              faculty development for implementation of the integrated courses. The course
              sequence tracks majors through Environmental Communication and Problem-solving,
              Research and Analytical Methods, Environmental
Statistics, Environmental
              Impact Assessment, and Senior Seminar. The interdisciplinary environmental
              themes and a hierarchical course model are adapted from successful programs at
              Montclair State University (NSF-DUE 9952667), Middlebury College (NSF-DUE
              9980911) Evergreen State College (NSF-DUE 9972501), and Governor's State
              College (NSF-DUE 0088831). The Environmental Science and Policy Program at the
              University of Southern Maine is strengthening its curriculum by adding a new
              B.S. degree to the existing B.A. degree. The B.S. degree was approved in 2001
              and is being implemented during the 2002 academic year. The addition of a B.S.
              degree option modifies the current interdisciplinary curriculum model and
              requires revising and transforming two courses (Environmental Communication and
              Environmental Impact Assessment) and creating three new courses (Research and
              Analytical Methods, Environmental Statistics, and Senior Seminar) to form an
              integrated, cohesive course sequence. Students are first introduced to dominant
              environmental themes, their causes, and potential solutions while also
              developing a research proposal to guide their future activities. Next they gain
              hands-on training in data collection and generation in both the field and
              laboratory and are introduced to data quality objectives focusing on their
              selected theme. Students then use the data they generated in an environmental
              statistics course. Student teams next synthesize their prior studies through
              comprehensive impact assessment approaches. Lastly, students culminate their
              research through a professional presentation at either a college-wide research
              symposium, regional, or, if appropriate, national meeting. The collective
              outcomes from each course will result in a comprehensive and evaluative student
              research portfolio. Introducing students and faculty to a range of
              environmental themes across a sequenced course structure strengthens the
              interdisciplinary learning goals for the curriculum as a whole. In addition,
              the weave of a focus environmental theme across a five-course sequence engages
              and interests students while allowing them to build problem-solving skills,
              communication abilities, and analytical competence. In particular, this
              approach attracts and improves the science skills of a large non-traditional
              USM student body (predominately female, older, and part-time). Student outcomes
              are expected to improve understanding of environmental scientific knowledge,
              increase practical skills relating to communication, laboratory analysis, data
              collection, and research writing. This project is being implemented over a
              24-month period and the curriculum modifications are being evaluated at two
              levels: course-specific successes and overall sequence outcomes. The results
              are being disseminated to science peer groups within our institution, our
              region, and at national meetings and WWW provides access to our results through
              our Program homepage.
