Title       : Flux Syntheis and Properties of New Crystalline and Glassy Chalcogenides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0127644

Award Number: 0127644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mercouri G. Kanatzidis kanatzid@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to synthesize and characterize new solid-state
              materials in the metal thiophosphate and selenophosphate families. The metal
              thiophosphate and selenophosphates show a very rich chemistry that is based on
              anions that form in chalcophosphate fluxes by simple in-situ fusion, and these
              act as fundamental structural building blocks. Areas to be explored include
              alkali metal-free ternary metal-and rare-earth-metal- thiophosphates and
              selenophosphates, corresponding alkali metal quaternary derivatives and also
              glasses formed from the manipulation of these materials. Thioarsenate and
              selenoarsenate fluxes will also be explored to discover corresponding arsenic
              compounds. Characterization of the new materials will include structural
              determinations by single-crystal X-ray scattering methods and the measurement
              of physical properties such as optical absorption, thermal behavior and
              electrical conductivity. The structure of glasses will be probed with pair
              distribution function (PDF) analysis. The molten alkali poly-thiophosphate and
              poly-selenophosphate salts, which are the reactive solvents in this project,
              will be studied by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy in order to
              understand the identity, distribution, and chemistry of the anions that form in
              chalcophosphate fluxes. Eventually we wish to control the stabilization and
              incorporation of specified building blocks in synthetic target compounds. The
              ultimate goal of this research project is to enhance our knowledge of the
              chemistry of chalcogenides and render the 
chemistry more controllable and
              predictable so useful new materials can be designed. This project has a very
              strong education component that aims to educate students in the advanced
              subject of solid state synthesis including  non-oxide materials discovery and
              novel state-of the-art laboratory techniques.

The discovery of new classes
              of solid state materials with novel composition and structure, as well as an
              understanding of their chemical behavior and physical properties such as
              optical and electronic behavior are important to industry.  For example, the
              glass versions of the metal-thiophosphate and -selenophosphates show
              controllable amorphous to crystal phase changes and may have potential for
              memory storage applications.  Students trained in these areas are well poised
              to exploit current and future academic and industrial job opportunities.


              



