Title       : Quantum States of Atoms and Molecules: A Linked and Layered Resource for
               Collaborative, Technology-Based Learning in Physical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0127291

Award Number: 0127291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288645             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Hanson david.hanson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erica Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa J. Zielinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

We are developing a complete Linked and Layered Resource for
              Collaborative, Technology-Based Learning in Physical Chemistry. The resource,
              Quantum States of Atoms and Molecules, is grounded in progressive pedagogical
              methods, uses appropriate computer technology, and makes firm connections
              between fundamental principles, physical reality, physical models, and
              mathematical descriptions of reality and the models. The resource would be
              unconventional in both form and structure. It is designed to engage students in
              the process of learning and help them develop skills in information processing,
              critical thinking and problem solving. It also takes advantage of existing
              knowledge on how adults and young adults learn. The product would consist of
              two parts: an inexpensive soft-cover text and a comprehensive multimedia CD.
              The text would present the core concepts linked to spectroscopy in an easy to
              understand prose style. The entire text would be on the CD with active
              hyperlinks to web and computer-based activities that engage students in active
              learning. Some hyperlinks would point to animations and simulations to provide
              dramatic visualization of concepts, chemical processes, and molecular-level
              phenomena. Other links would connect to concept and math supplements to provide
              greater depth, detailed derivations, and review relevant math concepts within a
              chemistry context. Such linking should make it easy for students to review
              material on a need to know basis as they advance through the text without
              having pages and sections that interrupt the narrative. A final set of links
              would point to Mathcad symbolic math templates that will be used in both a
              guided-discovery mode and as a resource for students in building their own
              Mathcad documents for assigned problems and activities. An instructor's manual
              and sets of numerical solutions to exercises and problems are also being
              created for the project.

