Title       : Development of tutorial for an Introductory Course in Functional Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0127409

Award Number: 0127409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. McMahon cmcmahon@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Composto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57)
Based on knowledge and skills developed in
              a previous CCLI grant we intend to develop CD-ROM based tutorials on functional
              materials. These CD-ROM based tutorials are designed, using a blackboard
              analogy, to support important classes of functional materials that are
              currently missing from introductory material science curricula. The tutorials
              will be contained on CD-ROMs that will receive international distribution.
              They, along with an included interactive Glossary and an Animation/Video player
              will be available for
instructors who wish to use them to support traditional
              lecture courses. The tutorials, along with the textbook being written to
              accompany them, could be used in a number of other learning situations,
              including distance learning, continuing education, and courses at institutions
              that do not have an engineering curriculum. The topics covered will include
              dielectric, piezoelectric, ferroelectric, magnetostrictive, and optical
              properties of materials. In this project we plan to create a new set of
              interactive, self-paced, multimedia tutorials for a new sophomore engineering
              course being developed at the University of Pennsylvania. The subject matter
              will be structured using a case study approach. Our new tutorials are designed
              to enhance student learning before a lecture is given. The material in these
              tutorials will be used to introduce students to specific materials concepts
              that they will be tested on before the lecture. We plan to use these materials
              in conjunction with a textbook. Our long range goal is to create a collection
              of online instructional materials that serve as the core for a one semester
              freshman level course. 

