Title       : Development and Assessment of Interactive Online Homework for Introductory
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0127455

Award Number: 0127455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418536             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Yaron yaron@chem.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Freeland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While a large body of educational research advocates active learning, practical
              constraints hinder changes in large introductory courses. Online homework
              systems help bypass some of these constraints by integrating easily into common
              course structures, automatically grading of student assignments, and providing
              timely
feedback. However, the online assignments continue to be largely
              quantitative problems. This proposal is creating a variety of interactive
              online homework activities that is enhancing students' conceptual learning and
              increasing their interest in science. These problems pose goals more closely
              resembling the work of practicing chemists, focus on designing simple
              experiments, and put chemical concepts into meaningful, real-world contexts.
              This work is impacting students in introductory courses since homework serves
              as the primary means through which students practice applying new concepts.
              This project builds on previous NSF-funded work that has produced a Virtual
              Lab, now used by three universities and 500 students to date, and a set of
              authoring tools (CREATE) to facilitate interactive educational software
              development. We are developing 5-10 problems, varying in difficulty, for each
              of at least 10 chapters of introductory chemistry. The quality of these
              materials is being ensured through intensive assessment -- first by
              interviewing students to identify likely difficulties and later by including
              conceptual and attitude questions in the online homework system to compile
              ongoing data across universities. Dissemination through several course
              management systems, our own web site, a CD, and professional meetings are
              enabling instructors to browse the problems, their solutions, and their
              difficulty.

