Title       : Development of an Undergraduate Diffraction Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0127048

Award Number: 0127048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Kammler dkammler@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)
This project develops textual materials and related
              software for a diffraction course suitable for junior-senior level students
              from mathematics, physics, chemistry, materials science, and electrical
              engineering. The material was class tested at SIUC and a number of other
              colleges and universities. After introducing a bit of bivariate Fourier
              analysis (including Fourier transforms of the Fresnel kernel and of the comb,
              curry, and grid functions which generalize the univariate sampling function)
              the course presents the elements of Fourier optics (Fresnel diffraction, image
              formation, resolution, optical Fourier transforms, fractional Fourier
              transforms, etc.) and an analysis of the far field diffraction patterns
              associated with bivariate "crystals", i.e., doubly periodic functions on RXR .
              Software allows students to create PostScript files for greytone images that
              are printed on 35mm slides using a high-resolution film recorder. Passing a
              laser beam through these slides produces the corresponding diffraction
              patterns. Images from a digital camera, scanner, and the above mentioned
              PostScript files are processed on a PC to illustrate various phenomena studied
              during the course. The resulting synthesis of mathematics (Fourier analysis,
              operator theory, wallpaper groups, etc.), experimentation (done in a darkened
              mathematics classroom with an inexpensive laser), and simulation (using a fast
              PC and the FFT) provides a stimulating introduction to modern applied
              mathematics as well as deep insights into optics, X-ray crystallography, and
              digital image processing.
