Title       : Laboratory Course Integrating Synthetic and Biomacromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a0127255

Award Number: 0127255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haskell W. Beckham haskell.beckham@tfe.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Muzzy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon W. May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Ludovice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Michielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57)
Our recently developed undergraduate
              laboratory course has been designed to provide a balanced and integrated
              treatment of synthetic and biomacromolecules, while providing students with
              essential hands-on experience in their synthesis and analysis. Our course has
              relevance for undergraduate programs in polymer and materials science. In
              addition, such laboratory exercises also have value in either organic or
              physical chemistry lab courses, in which the integration of fundamental
              chemical concepts can be demonstrated using intrinsically interesting
              materials: macromolecules. 

Our pedagogical approach for the course is to
              convey the macromolecular concept, that the science and engineering of
              macromolecules can be presented as a set of general principles and
              fundamentals, regardless of source. We have achieved these objectives by
              creating a suite of new multicomponent laboratory experiments, each with a dual
              purpose: (1) introduce a particular macromolecular concept, and (2) introduce
              one or more particular laboratory techniques. Each of these laboratories will
              be developed around macromolecules derived from both synthetic and biosynthetic
              pathways. A special feature of the new course has been molecular modeling of
              macromolecules as an undergraduate laboratory exercise, thus providing students
              with an avenue for conducting experiments even if they find themselves without
              access to traditional laboratory facilities. If faculty wish to adopt our
              course we have created a laboratory manual textbook, complete with introductory
              material, detailed experimental procedures, and supporting reference materials
              as a comprehensive set of appendices. Through our laboratory course,
              undergraduates have built firm foundations for industrial practice, graduate
              education, and graduate research in macromolecular science and engineering.

