Title       : An Inquiry and Standards Based Earth System Science Course for Pre-service K-8
               Teachers and Others
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0127160

Award Number: 0127160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98121              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Dempsey ddempsey@sundog.sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Grove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Isabel Quita  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oswaldo Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40)
In this project we are adapting problem-based
              learning (PBL) and other inquiry-based approaches to a new integrated
              geoscience course for K-8 pre-service (preK-8) teachers. The motivation for
              this effort is to address the problem where our preK-8 pre-service teachers
              were taking a course that did not meet the content and pedagogy standards and
              that was not designed for them. With this new integrated geoscience course, we
              are trying to improve the students' attitudes toward science, understanding of
              science, ability to "do" science, understanding of science concepts, and
              ability to use instructional technology to learn about science. We also aim to
              increase the number of preK-8 teachers who choose to emphasize science,
              increase the diversity of science K-8 teachers, and provide university faculty
              and graduate student development to ensure high quality instruction. To
              accomplish these goals, we are creating an earth system science course that
              meets state and national educational standards for earth/space science content,
              science pedagogy, assessment and evaluation, and effective use of instructional
              technologies. The course is being designed around topical units that integrate
              multiple disciplines, that lend themselves to inquiry-based teaching and
              learning strategies, and that are socially relevant and interesting to
              students. The PBL approach is a student-centered approach that uses concrete,
              real-world problems to enhance student learning. In the course students
              investigate carefully framed geoscience problems via online explorations and
              visualizations of real-world data, small-group collaborations, and hands-on
              experiments. We are working with an elementary science educator to design
              effective assessment and evaluation methods.
