Title       : A Community to Develop Materials for an Engineering Learning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0127426

Award Number: 0127426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Tront jgtront@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Faculty members attempting to create materials for collections of engineering
              education
content in a digital library face several challenges. Lack of
              training in sound pedagogical
practices, a shortage of training in the
              effective use of educational technology, short
supply of required resources
              and time to produce completed and tested works, and a lack
of emphasis on
              improved teaching in the university faculty rewards systems are the
              major
obstacles to materials development. To remedy this situation, this
              project endeavors to
create an active, engaged, and sustained virtual
              community of engineering educators who
energetically contribute to and share
              materials from a common collection of courseware.
The virtual community is
              taking form as an incubator in which faculty are trained in
sound pedagogical
              practices e.g., developing learning goals and assessment techniques.
Next,
              participants are schooled in the effective use of technology in many
              different
teaching/learning situations including: classroom presentation,
              self-study, distance and
distributed learning, experiential learning, etc.
              Once trained, faculty then develop a
portion of a collection of courseware
              modules in their area of expertise. Guidelines are 
provided so that modules
              can be integrated with each other from both the standpoint
of technology mix
              as well as the pedagogical approach being used. Members of the
              virtual
community of contributors subsequently become the testers of the
              courseware modules,
with each of the contributors using a subset of modules to
              conduct courses at their
home campuses. As soon as a baseline collection in a
              topic area is established the project 
personnel will present national
              workshops on how to adopt and adapt the materials in the collection.
NEEDS
              will be used to catalog and make the collections available.

Keywords:
              Virtual community, NEEDS, digital library
