Title       : Symbiotic Approach to Teaching Process Control and Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0127013

Award Number: 0127013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Shull   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Rehg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Coffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Engineering Technology (58) 
This project is developing an
              interdisciplinary, team-taught block of courses to train engineering technology
              students in industrial-level process control equipment and associated systems
              integration. These courses are also instilling advanced communication skills
              necessary for quality performance in a technical and professional environment.
              Target Audience/Diversity consists of students coming from five counties
              designated by Congress as part of Appalachia, i.e. a population
              underrepresented among the college-going population. This population is largely
              comprised of first generation college students of whom about 20% are returning
              adult students.

The project is addressing the following problems:
a.
              Curriculum provides inadequate training on realistic industrial-level equipment
              due to
design limitations, dated technology, and the large learning curve.
b.
              Inadequate communication skills limit students in understanding, recording,
              and
referencing the hierarchical concepts needed to negotiate the equipment
              complexities.

In addressing these problems, a three-member faculty team (two
              engineering professors/one English professor) will adapt an interdisciplinary
              approach implemented by three institutions (Drexel University, Texas A&M
              University, and Arizona State University, all members of a NSF-funded
              coalition) to improve engineering education. The modified approach integrates
              four required and one optional course in engineering technology and English
              into a three-semester sequence, with courses collaboratively taught.

The
              objectives\outcomes of the project consist of:
a. Training engineering
              technology students in industrial-level equipment and systems
integration.
b.
              Using technical writing training to improve learning on technical
              equipment.
c. Cross-training faculty on the pedagogical models.
d.
              Disseminating resulting course plans and laboratory design materials via
              professional
journals, workshops\website, and conferences.
e. Providing an
              exemplary approach for writing-intensive courses in other disciplines.

