Title       : Inquiry Tools for Case-Based Courses in Human Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0127183

Award Number: 0127183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Merle S. Bruno mbruno@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil A. Stillings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project addresses the need to engage introductory
              biology students in critical thinking and problem solving and to make topics in
              biology more exciting and relevant for all students. The products from this
              project include 1) the Human Biology Case Library, an undergraduate interface
              to a powerful suite of medical school case studies and 2) a set of
              inquiry-based curricular materials based on the use of the cases. These
              products foster active learning experiences, promote collaborative learning and
              increase the inquiry-orientation of science education. We aim to make
              accessible a tremendous variety and quantity of cases that have been collected
              at Harvard Medical School and adapted for undergraduate education. The Human
              Biology Case Library brings the advanced computational infrastructure to any
              student with a web browser and provides a suite of interactive tools based on a
              number of human biology cases. This access to a multiplicity of human cases,
              source documents and analysis tools provides a rich environment for promoting
              student inquiry. Introductory biology classes serve a great number of college
              students, including non-majors
and many future teachers. Medical school cases
              in non-electronic form have been adapted for undergraduate classes for six
              years at Hampshire College. The software being developed will support inquiry
              activities in the original classroom and is being tested in additional
              classrooms. Three cases are being implemented as a proof of concept, and their
              effectiveness is being tested in a variety of post-secondary institutions
              (e.g., a community college and large university) and within a variety of
              teaching styles (e.g., traditional large lecture-based and small case-based
              classes). We are examining the difficulties of comparing student performance
              across institutions. Close communication with faculty is facilitating the use
              of the modules and testing their effectiveness through student and faculty
              outcome studies, interviews and evaluation of changes in attitude and content
              learning. Rigorous methodologies are being used among well-defined populations
              to analyze outcomes. This material will be submitted to and reviewed by
              BioQUEST.
