Title       : Proof-of-Concept: Integration of Process Safety into Chemical Engineering
               Curriculum Core Courses - Concepts, Procedures, and Educational Material
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0127307

Award Number: 0127307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Louvar jlouvar@che.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yinlun Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53)
The Center for Chemical Process (CCPS) of American
              Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) has established an industrial need to
              help Chemical Engineering Departments in the nation add an element of safety to
              the core courses in their curriculum. In addition our team has reviewed the
              accident history of the chemical process industry and has found that the number
              of major accidents continues to rise every year. The sad consequences for our
              society are deaths, injuries, and environmental damage. Unfortunately only a
              fraction of our practicing engineers have the appropriate safety culture and
              exposure to key safety concepts to impact this negative performance. To
              overcome these problems we have identified key ideas and effective pedagogical
              techniques to help professors teach a number of these. Our effort has been to
              overcome this lack of safety training in core course covering chemical
              processing. The courses we will address are Mass and Energy Balances, Kinetics,
              and Plant Design and Economics. We have created two one half hour lectures as
              well as exercises in a modular format for each course using different teaching
              methodologies. We have assessed the effectiveness of these materials and our
              approach and have made numerous changes. To help with dissemination of our
              course materials and modules we are working cooperatively with member of the
              Center for Chemical Process (CCPS) of the American Institute of Chemical
              Engineers (AIChE). We are also working with our publisher SACHE to present our
              materials in their newsletters, web site, and through their workshops. 

