Title       : Enchancing Spatial Reasoning and Visual Cognition for Early Science and
               Engineering Students with 'Hands-on' Interactive Tools and Exercises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0127579

Award Number: 0127579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi-Luen Ellen Do ellendo@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Many problems in science, engineering, and mathematics
              are inherently spatial in nature. 
Examples are understanding and reasoning
              about atoms in a molecule, the design of mechanical 
and electronic systems
              such as robots, the layout of an integrated circuit or
              microelectronic
mechanical chip, and the transmission of tension and
              compression forces in a structural
system. These problems all demand the
              ability to visualize and reason spatially.
Surprisingly, students of science
              and engineering are seldom taught these skills.
Visual thinking and the
              ability to reason spatially can be taught and learned: indeed, this
is a
              central component of architectural design education. We teach architects to
              manage
and manipulate complex configurations of physical elements in space,
              and architectural
educators have developed techniques for teaching this
              ability. In the past, the principal
means for teaching spatial and visual
              thinking has been drawing and three-dimensional
model-making. Today
              interactive media and software tools augment these traditional
methods. Based
              on experience with teaching visual skills to architectural designers we
              are
developing a series of exercises that, as part of a course on visual and
              spatial reasoning, 
can enhance science, mathematics, and engineering
              education for undergraduate students.
The exercises include drawing with
              pencil and paper as well as computational drawing
media, physical as well as
              computer-graphics based three dimensional modeling,
and techniques for
              shifting between computational and physical representations. We are
testing
              these exercises in a course taught to first-year college students and assessing
              the 
learning experience using both formative and summative evaluations.
