Title       : Web-Based Interactive Simulation of Landform Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0127424

Award Number: 0127424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Luo luo@geog.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk Duffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay A. Stravers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
Computer simulation is an ideal tool for understanding the complex
              effects of a variety of physical and geological processes that interact to
              influence landform evolution over extended periods of time (centuries,
              thousands of years, millions of years). Yet simulation models and the
              visualization of their results usually require specialized software that is not
              easily accessible to undergraduate education. This proof-of-concept
project is
              developing a web-based interactive landform simulation model that can be
              accessed anytime and anywhere via a standard web browser to improve
              undergraduate students' learning experience of landform evolution. This
              web-based interactive model is employing a cellular automata algorithm and is
              implemented using Java technology, which is designed to run on different
              computer hardware and operating systems. Students are able to interact with the
              model by selecting and manipulating different parameters (such as precipitation
              intensity, degree of surface runoff, rock erodibility, tectonic movement, etc.)
              through a Graphical User Interface and observe how different combinations of
              processes (parameters) influence the landform evolution. This project
              integrates the latest technology into undergraduate education to improve both
              teaching and learning. Because of its global potential in web based
              dissemination, it has the ability to reach a wide and diverse audience,
              including underrepresented populations in Science, Mathematics, Engineering,
              and Technology, non-traditional students, and students with learning
              disabilities. In addition, it enables the investigators themselves to refine
              their own skills in the new and promising area of 3D
visualization on the web,
              which is beneficial to their own teaching and research.
