Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Ground-Based Support of the Yohkoh Solar
               Mission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9218269

Award Number: 9218269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Lang klang@pearl.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh S. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5983,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a nine-month visit to Japan by a               
              U.S. investigator, Barry LaBonte of the University of Hawaii,                  
              working under the direction of the principal investigator,                     
              Kenneth Lang of Tufts University, to participate in ground-based               
              and theoretical support of the Japanese solar satellite, Yohkoh.               
              Dr. LaBonte will be working with three primary Japanese                        
              investigators:  Yutaka Uchida, Professor of Astronomy, Tokyo                   
              University; Professor Yoshiaki Ogawara, Institute of Space and                 
              Astronautical Science (ISAS); and Tadashi Hirayama, Professor and              
              Director of the Solar Physics Group at the National Astronomical               
              Observatory of Japan.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The Yohkoh satellite was launched in August, 1991 by ISAS.  It                 
              has an expected lifetime of more than three years.  The goals of               
              the Yohkoh mission are the study of energetic phenomena in solar               
              flares and the study of the thermal and magnetic structure of the              
              nonflare corona.  The X-ray imagers and spectrometers on the                   
              Yohkoh spacecraft provide uniquely detailed and complete                       
              information on the corona itself.  Observations from ground-based              
              instruments of the underlying photospheric magnetic field and                  
              chromospheric structure are also essential, however, for the most              
              comprehensive understanding of the critical science questions.                 
              Dr. LaBonte will work on three specific topics:  large scale                   
              events, flare emission spectrum, and heating of corona.  The data              
              from the satellite, currently the only solar observatory in                    
              space, will provide the basis for many solar research projects in              
              the United States and Japan.  It also provides an opportunity for              
              significant advances in our understanding of the physical                      
              processes that govern solar flares and the corona in general.                  
               //
