Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Geochemical Studies of Copper-Gold Skarn
               Deposits in the Ji Long District, Hubei Province, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9218924

Award Number: 9218924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20255              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Craig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9200,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A cooperative research program involving                                       
              scientists from the United States and China is                                 
              proposed to investigate the geochemical                                        
              characteristics of copper and gold-bearing                                     
              skarn deposits of the Ji Long Ores of the                                      
              Yangxin-Daye area of Hubei Province, China.                                    
              The goals of the proposed research are to                                      
              establish geochemical characteristics of the                                   
              ores and to determine the conditions of                                        
              formation.  Systematic field sampling in the Ji                                
              Long deposits using field and mine exposures                                   
              and an extensive drill core library will be                                    
              followed by detailed petrographic and electron                                 
              microprobe analyses of ore and gangue minerals.                                
              The data obtained will be used to define the                                   
              mineralogy and mineral chemistry within the                                    
              deposits and to establish paragenetic                                          
              sequences.  This information will be                                           
              complemented by detailed fluid inclusion                                       
              studies, including standard microthermometry                                   
              and laser Raman analyses, to define the                                        
              composition and physical state of the                                          
              mineralizing fluids.  The project provides an                                  
              excellent opportunity for cooperative research                                 
              between the American and Chinese scientists and                                
              builds upon their respective knowledge and                                     
              strengths of sulfide ore mineralogy and field                                  
              relationships of the ores.  Collaborative field                                
              sampling in China will be followed by detailed                                 
              mineralogical and analytical studies in the                                    
              United States.  The information derived will be                                
              employed to define the geochemical and physical                                
              conditions of ore formation and aid in                                         
              understanding where the skarn deposits form                                    
              around the intrusions of the district.
