Title       : "Fostering academic membership on JvNCnet among institutions of higher
               education..."
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1992  
File        : a9218633

Award Number: 9218633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira H. Fuchs fuch@tsar.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergio Heker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
                   Consistent with the mission of the JVNCnet which is to support            
              the Academic and Research networking communities in the Northeast              
              and to facilitate the provision of networking services to these                
              institutions, Princeton is requesting partial support for the                  
              addition of 15 predominantly undergraduate institutions to the                 
              NSFNET family of networks through the JVNCnet midlevel network.                
                   Each institution has separately included information regarding            
              their facility and their need to be a member of the NSFNET.  The               
              list of schools includes: St Joseph College - CT, County College of            
              Morris - NJ (2yrs), Essex County College - NJ (2yrs), Princeton                
              Theological Seminary - NJ, Raritan Valley College - NJ (2yrs),                 
              Union County College - NJ (2yr), Bucks County College - PA (2yr),              
              Lehigh County College - PA (2yr), York College - PA, Iona College -            
               NY, Ithaca College - NY, Mount Saint Mary - NY, Touro College -               
              NY.                                                                            
                   These fifteen institutions participating in this proposal                 
              represent the diversity of the educational system in the United                
              States.  Schools range from two-year to four-year institutions,                
              from primarily teaching facilities to research environments, and               
              from small to large student bodies.  All share the desire to gain              
              access to the resources and people made reachable through the                  
              NSFNET, with the goal of improving the quality of their educational            
              offerings and outreach to their communities.                                   
                   JVNCnet, now part of Princeton University, will act as a                  
              regional or mid-level agent to identify the networking needs and               
              assist the academic institutions in the Northeastern United States             
              to meet those needs by providing connectivity, education and                   
              training.  In addition, the JVNCnet is working towards achieving               
              financial self-sufficiency by increasing its membership.
