Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Spatial Patterning in the Courland River
               Valley, Tobago, W.I.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1992   
File        : a9218780

Award Number: 9218780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher O. Clement  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Peter Schmidt, Mr Christopher Clement               
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an            
              archaeological study of historic plantations located in the                    
              Courland River Valley of Tobago. Because very little recent                    
              development has taken place on this island, early historic                     
              structures remain relatively visible and intact; thus the selection            
              of this research location. The project includes three stages. First            
              Mr. Clement will conduct broad scale survey to locate plantations              
              and determine how they were distributed over the landscape.                    
              Secondly he will map their internal layout to examine the                      
              arrangement of slave, manufacturing and overseer arrangements.                 
              Finally he will survey and make surface collections from the slave             
              living areas.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              While much is known about the organization of cotton plantations in            
              the U.S. South, adaptations to sugar cane production are not well              
              understood. Because sugar cane must be processed quickly it is                 
              likely that the spatial arrangements and internal social dynamics              
              were different in such situations. New World slavery, because it               
              brought together very distinct cultural groups and placed them into            
              very specific and varying contexts provides an excellent basis to              
              study culture contact and change. Mr. Clement's project will                   
              contribute to this goal.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This grant will produce information of interest not only to                    
              historians but also to a broad range of anthropologists. In                    
              addition, it will assist in the training of a promising young                  
              scientist.
