Title       : Phase Transitions and Volume and Energy Band Gap Variation in the Multimegabar
               Regime
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9218249

Award Number: 9218249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. Ruoff ruoff@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Techniques for x-ray diffraction studies (using Cornell High Energy            
              Synchroton Service) and optical studies which will extend the                  
              static pressure range higher than the 560 GPa attained will be                 
              developed.  To do this requires further miniaturization of diamond             
              tips, of sample size and of x-ray apertures and optical beam                   
              diameters.  The crystal structure of oxygen and sulfur will be                 
              found ?materials which have previously been metallized (they have              
              60% reflectivity at the diamond sample interface at high pressure)!            
              since this should induce theorists to work on these materials.                 
              Superconductive bahavior will be looked for in them.  Hydrogen,                
              nitrogen (including high temperature) and LiH will be pressurized              
              to pressures in excess of 4 Mbars and higher with the intent of                
              reaching meatllization.  The metallization of alkali hydrides as an            
              analogous series with hydrogen hydride as the highest member of the            
              series will be studied.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Ultrapressures cause enormous changes in solids.  Solid xenon has              
              its volume decreased by 72% at 1.5 Mbars while silicon has its                 
              volume decreased by 34% at 2.5 Mbars (the pressure at the earth's              
              core is 3.6 Mbars and at the deepest spot in the ocean only 1kbar).            
              These enormous changes cause changes in crystal structure, and                 
              changes in electronic structure resulting in important changes in              
              physical properties.  Theorists, using quantum mechanics with                  
              approximatims (necessary to make the problem soluble) attempt to               
              calculate these structural changes.  Results provide an exacting               
              test of their theories and set the stage for doing computer based              
              solid state physics.  Interest is also in developing new materials             
              with possible exotic properties.  It has been predicted that                   
              hydrogen will become metallic at high pressure and that it will be             
              a high temperature superconductor.  Metallic xenon and metallic                
              oxygen have been made and work is being done to make metallic                  
              hydrogen to see if it indeed is a high temperature superconductor.             
              High pressure is viewed as a tool for making and processing new                
              materials with unusual properties.
