Title       : Molecular Organization of RNA Polymerase from Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9218217

Award Number: 9218217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Goldfarb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Public Health Res Inst
	      
	      New York, NY  10016    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1156,5939,
Abstract    :
              RNA polymerase is the principal enzyme of gene expression and the              
              target for genetic regulation.  Its basic structure-functional                 
              features are highly conserved among all living organisms.  The                 
              broad goal of this project is the understanding of the molecular               
              mechanism of RNA polymerase basic function.  To this end a combined            
              genetic and biochemical approach will be taken using as model the              
              RNA polymerase from Escherichia coli.  The collaboration takes                 
              advantages of the biochemical strength of the U.S. side and                    
              specifically, it is proposed to generate an exhaustive collection              
              of in-frame linker insertions and deletions in the cloned gene rpoB            
              which encodes the B subunit of core RNA polymerase.  The mutant RNA            
              polymerase holoenzyme (a2BBo) will then be prepared for biochemical            
              characterization by in vitro reconstitution from the individual                
              subunits.  The subunits will be obtained by overexpressing them                
              from plasmids carrying the three rpo genes under the control of                
              inducible promoter.  The malfunctioning of RNA caused by mutations             
              will be characterized using an arsenal of in vitro assays which                
              would allow to monitor and quantitate individual steps of the                  
              enzyme's functional cycle.                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This approach is anticipated to define and map the structural                  
              elements of the enzyme which carry out the multitude of RNA                    
              polymerase biochemical functions.
