Title       : Ion Transport in Single Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9218686

Award Number: 9218686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hyun D. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R.Gary Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The major goals of this research are: (1) to study the kinetics and            
              regulation of anion and cation transport in single erythroblastic              
              cells during differentiation and maturation using the technique of             
              x-ray microanalysis, and to investigate the effect of                          
              erythropoietic stimulating factors and cofactors in modulating                 
              these changes.  (2) to demonstrate the applicability of this                   
              technique in investigating transport of materials labelled with                
              identifiable elements such as platinum, iodine or bromine in a                 
              multi-compartment system. (3) to better understand and improve the             
              technique of cryosectioning for preparation of samples for x-ray               
              microanalysis.  Investigation of membrane transport of the                     
              erythroid cells in the bone marrow is complicated by the                       
              heterogeneity of the cell population.  Without physical separation             
              of the cells into distinct homogeneous populations conventional                
              radioisotopic tracer methods for measuring transport cannot be                 
              applied.  The techniques of cryomicrotomy and x-ray microanalysis              
              provide a solution to this problem.  Changes in sodium potassium               
              chloride as well as rubidium and bromide uptake in individual                  
              erythroid cells from sheep, dog and rabbit at various stages of                
              maturation will be studied.  The different species of animals                  
              selected have different gene expressions in their red cell membrane            
              transport properties.  Relationships among morphological changes,              
              membrane transport alteration and hemoglobin production during                 
              maturation will be studied.  Pump/leak, cotransport and counter                
              transport systems will be examined by multielemental analysis.  In             
              addition, the maturational transport characteristics of an                     
              erythroid progenitor cell type from the spleen of mice infected                
              with Friend's virus will be studied to examine the effect of                   
              erythropoietin on the changes in membrane transport function and               
              hemoglobin production.  These cells can be obtained inadequately               
              large quantity and can survive in culture to allow for transport               
              measurement using radioisotopic tracers as well as x-ray                       
              microanalysis.  Finally this project includes a section where we               
              will try to better understand the cryosectioning technique and                 
              extend the application of x-ray microanalysis to the study of                  
              uptake and intracellular distribution of larger labeled molecules              
              in bone marrow cells.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the fundamental properties of living cells is their ability             
              to control their internal salt content and composition by                      
              controlling the passage of inorganic ions across their membranes.              
              This is important because different salts play different                       
              physiological roles in different cells at different developmental              
              stages.  This research uses a sophisticated technique known as                 
              electron probe x-ray microanalysis to study the inorganic salt                 
              content of individual, identified cells as visualized by the                   
              electron microscope.  The cell type and its stage of maturity can              
              be determined and correlated with its salt content.  This                      
              information can be used to deduce the ion transport mechanisms at              
              work.  This research will contribute to the basic understanding of             
              biological ion transport processes.***//
