Title       : Milli-Electron Volt Energy Resolution Photoemission Studies of Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1994  
File        : a9218706

Award Number: 9218706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Jensen jensen@binah.cc.Brandeis.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Very high energy resolution (less than 5meV at count rates of 1kHz)            
              photoemission studies of solids at low temperatures will be                    
              undertaken on a recently built instrument.  These parameters are a             
              significant improvement over previously published work on solid                
              samples, and allows photoelectron spectroscopy to make contact with            
              other experimental methods that study excitations with energies of             
              order kT.  Several specific experiments are proposed:  Studies of              
              the effects of the electron-phonon interaction on Fermi edges in               
              angle integrated spectra, and on individual surface state                      
              dispersion at small binding energy in wide band metals such as                 
              copper will be undertaken; this will yield detailed information                
              about the interaction between electrons and phonons at and near                
              solid surfaces.  Studies of emission from phosphorus donor levels              
              in silicon for concentration ranges near the metal/insulator                   
              critical concentration will determine the one electron density of              
              states and aid in understanding the competition between correlation            
              and disorder in driving this transition.  Studies of emission (peak            
              dispersion and line shape) and of the band-gap in conventional and             
              high temperature superconductors will help to determine the                    
              mechanism of superconductivity in these materials.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The purpose of this research is to bring the power and                         
              discrimination of a newly developed high resolution photoelectron              
              spectrometer to bear on a number of current problems in materials              
              physics.  The improved resolution could impinge strongly on                    
              technological fields such as superconductivity and semiconductor               
              device operation, as well as in various related areas of more                  
              fundamental interest.  This research will extend the energy                    
              resolution of photoelectron spectroscopy by about an order of                  
              magnitude, permitting detailed studies of the electrons responsible            
              for device operation.  In particular, metal/insulator transitions              
              in semiconductors, the origin of the energy gap in high temperature            
              and conventional superconductors, and the interaction between                  
              electrons and atomic vibrations in more ordinary materials will be             
              investigated.
