Title       : Specific Interactions of the 'N' Antitermination Proteins of Lambdoid
               Bacteriophages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9218608

Award Number: 9218608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi C. Franklin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to learn that molecular basis for structure/function            
              of the lambdoid bacteriophage N proteins, essential for                        
              antitemination of transcription by RNA polymerase of their host,               
              Escherichia coli.  These small (ca. 100 amino acid), positively                
              charged proteins are already known by DNA (thence protein) sequence            
              and mutations.  N of phage has been shown by others to participate             
              in a transcription complex with host RNA polymerase and 4 host                 
              'Nus' proteins, a complex induced in response to the specific                  
              recognition of N both for NusA protein and for an RNA stem/loop                
              structure (boxB) in the transcript of affected operons.  N proteins            
              from different phages appear to have the same impact, although the             
              amino acid sequences of different N's seem unrelated except for an             
              arginine-rich region near the amino terminal of each; the Arg-rich             
              region proves critical to N interaction with boxB, but does not                
              account for the specificity of that interaction.  Directed mutation            
              of both boxB and N from different lambdoid phages, in conjunction              
              with available NusA variants, will be pursed in order to find the              
              basis, for observed functional specificity.  Furthermore, purified             
              segments of N protein, now available through cloning as fusions to             
              glutathione-S-transferase, will be tested for affinity to boxB RNA,            
              to NusA or both in combination.  Antibodies against those N                    
              segments will provide yet another specific reagent, testable                   
              against each affinity.  If segments affinities emerge, mutation                
              will be directed towards pinpointing the basis.                                
              The peculiar capacity of lambdoid bacteriophages to overcome the               
              ability of host RNA polymerase to terminate transcription thus                 
              becomes an opportunity to explore the molecular basis of                       
              specificity between proteins and RNA.  Such interactions are known             
              to be critical, example, to the functions of HIV viruses.  The                 
              simpler lambdoid components, have through cloning, all been made               
              accessible to directed mutagenesis and easy detection of mutational            
              impact. The major divergence of the lambdoid proteins is of further            
              interest for considerations both of protein structure/function as              
              well as of evolution.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Bacteria can be infected by viruses which take over control of the             
              replicative machinery of the bacterial host cell for replication of            
              the virus.  This proposal focuses one a central aspect of this                 
              take-over process: copying of the viral rather that host cell DNA              
              into messenger RNAs (which are then translated into viral                      
              proteins).  A single viral protein, after recognizing a specific               
              DNA sequence in the virus genome, complexes with host replicative              
              proteins, thereby recruiting them to copying of viral genes.  This             
              proposal examines in detail the molecular parameters governing the             
              protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions which result in virus             
              take-over of the cell.
