Title       : Relationship between a new Membrane Protein Kinase and Thylakoid Protein
               Translocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9218931

Award Number: 9218931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Kohorn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                A number of molecules have recently been described that effect               
              the correct transport and assembly of cytoplasmically synthesized              
              proteins to cellular membranes.  Few studies, however, have                    
              described factors involved in the post-translational insertion of              
              proteins into the chloroplast thylakoid membrane.  To identify                 
              proteins that bind or modify other proteins during the process of              
              membrane translocation, we developed a new yeast selection scheme              
              that employs the yeast transcriptional activator, GAL4.  This                  
              selection facilitates the isolation of cDNAs that encode binding               
              proteins, proteases, or post-translational modifiers specific for              
              known target peptide sequences.  With this selection scheme we                 
              isolated an Arabidopsis cDNA encoding a 596 amino acid polypeptide             
              (termed PRO25) that can genetically interact with the amino                    
              terminus of a light harvesting chlorophyll binding protein (LHCP),             
              a cytoplasmically synthesized protein that is post-translationally             
              inserted into the thylakoid membrane.  The Arabidopsis CDNA encodes            
              a protein with at least two functional domains, one with similarity            
              to the family of serine/threonine kinases and another that contains            
              an epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat, the latter of which has               
              not been previously reported in the plant kingdom.  Nucleic acid               
              hybridization and antibody staining indicate that this gene and its            
              product are present in other genera of higher plants.  The mRNA is             
              expressed in green leaves but not in other plant tissues or in                 
              etiolated plants.  Preliminary results with polyclonal antisera                
              indicate that the encoded protein may be present on both the plasma            
              membrane and thylakoid membrane of leaf cells, suggesting an                   
              intriguing interaction between the two compartments.  This proposal            
              addresses the following questions: 1, where in the cell is PRO25               
              localized?; 2, is the kinase or amino-terminal domain important for            
              interaction with LHCP?; and 3, what is the function of PRO25?   The            
              first question will be addressed using immunoelectron microscopy               
              and Western blotting.  These studies will include developmental                
              profiles of expression, and the use of control antisera to known               
              proteins of defined location.  It must also be determined whether              
              the antisera are specific to one protein or to a family whose                  
              members are in multiple locations.  The second will be addressed               
              using the yeast functional assay and expression in E. coli to                  
              dissect the two protein domains.  The third will be addressed by               
              expression and analysis of dominant mutations of PRO25 in                      
              transformed Arabidopsis, which should provide a phenotype that will            
              provide a clue to its biological role.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This project is the result of a totally unexpected finding.  As                
              such, it is highly speculative, and although it is likely that the             
              research will lead to something very interesting and important, it             
              is not yet possible to predict what that "something" will be.  The             
              investigator was studying the problem of how cytoplasmically-                  
              encoded plant proteins get imported and assembled into                         
              chloroplasts, and developed a clever genetic scheme which was                  
              intended to fish out genes and gene products which interacted with             
              a specific imported chloroplast protein, the Light Harvesting                  
              Chlorophyll a/b Binding Protein.  It was expected that this scheme             
              would identify LHCP-specific proteases responsible for LHCP                    
              maturation in the chloroplast.  Instead, the gene that was fished              
              out by the selection scheme had no resemblance to a protease, but              
              rather had two domains, one of which appears to be a                           
              serine/threonine kinase (i.e., an enzyme that adds phosphate                   
              residues to serine and threonine residues of proteins) and the                 
              other of which appears to be homologous to the epidermal growth                
              factor of animals (which had never been described in plants                    
              before).  Expression of this protein appears to be light-dependent,            
              suggesting a functional link to photosynthesis.  Homologous                    
              proteins have been found in other higher plants, suggesting a                  
              highly conserved function.  Protein phosphorylation is a major                 
              mechanism for cellular regulation of protein functions, and the                
              LHCP is known to get phosphorylated in the chloroplast.  The                   
              question is, what is the function of this curious, novel, plant                
              protein?  Depending on the answers to the questions addressed in               
              this research project, there is the potential to learn some very               
              unexpected and important things about how higher plants convert                
              sunlight into foodstuff.
