Title       : The Biology of Gelatinous Zooplankton: Investigations on the Trophic
               Relationships of Salpa thompsoni and Salpa gerlachei in the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9218850

Award Number: 9218850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291590             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Richard Harbison gharbison@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Two species of salps, Salpa thompsoni and S. gerlachei, occur in               
              the Southern Ocean near the Antarctic Peninsula.  Both are known               
              to form immense blooms that almost entirely dominate the biomass.              
              A knowledge of the biology of these species is essential to                    
              understand the trophic relationships and global processes that                 
              occur in the Southern Ocean.  This project will investigate the                
              feeding rates, defecation rates, assimilation efficiency, growth,              
              reproduction and metabolism of both species, in order to develop               
              an energy budget.  The behavior of salps will be studied in the                
              field, and laboratory experiments will incorporate these field                 
              observations.  Feeding rates will be measured both in the                      
              laboratory and in the field, and the results will be compared.                 
              Growth, reproduction and metabolism will be measured in the                    
              laboratory.  In addition, the hyperiid amphipod parasites of                   
              salps will be examined using a combination of field and                        
              laboratory methods.  The potential effect of these parasites on                
              the growth and reproduction of salps will also be considered.                  
              Several species of Antarctic fish will be observed in the                      
              laboratory to study predation on salps and other gelatinous                    
              zooplankton.  A number of fish that occur near Palmer Station                  
              feed heavily on salps.  Fish will be fed known quantities of                   
              gelatinous prey, and digestion rates will be determined.  These                
              studies will assess the ability to identify and quantify the                   
              remains of gelatinous organisms with gut content analyses.  These              
              studies will provide important data on the trophic position of                 
              salps in the Southern Ocean, both as consumers of phytoplankton                
              and as prey of other organisms.  These studies are an essential                
              prelude to further studies on recruitment and population                       
              structure in Southern Ocean planktonic communities.  In addition,              
              the research proposed herein will provide basic information on                 
              the ways in which oceanic zooplankton cope with the seasonally                 
              variable food resources of the Southern Ocean.
