Title       : A New Approach to Study Dolomitization Emphasizing Fluid Inclusions, Enewetak
               Atoll
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1992  
File        : a9218463

Award Number: 9218463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a study of dolomite from Enewetak Atoll that                      
              employs new fluid inclusion techniques and standard                            
              techniques to develop a new model for dolomitization and to                    
              better understand the geochemical triggers responsible for                     
              dolomitization.  Thorough study of Enewetak dolomite using                     
              traditional indirect techniques has proven less than                           
              adequate in constraining the model and geochemical triggers                    
              of dolomitization.  Alternatively, fluid inclusions provide                    
              a direct record of the chemical composition of ancient                         
              dolomitizing fluids.  Freezing techniques will be applied to                   
              the Enewetak fluid inclusions to determine the salinity of                     
              dolomitizing fluids.  Reconnaissance data indicate that the                    
              dolomite precipitated from a brine that was twice the                          
              salinity of dolomitizing fluids.  Reconnaissance data                          
              indicate that the dolomite precipitated from a brine that                      
              was twice the salinity of seawater.  Thus, a new model for                     
              dolomitization involving reflux of brines that have not                        
              precipitated evaporites is one of several hypotheses to be                     
              tested.  Laser Raman microprobe work will provide the first                    
              analyses of sulfate in an ancient fluid of low-temperature                     
              dolomitization.  Extracts from fluid inclusions will be                        
              analyzed for cations and ions by DCP and IC to further                         
              characterize fluids of dolomitization.  This new approach                      
              will provide new insight into fluid evolution and                              
              geochemical triggers of dolomitization.  Such information                      
              cannot be gleaned by standard techniques.  Lastly, the                         
              dolomite will be analyzed by standard carbon, oxygen, and                      
              strontium isotopic techniques to make the work directly                        
              comparable to other dolomite studies and to further evaluate                   
              conditions of dolomitization.
