Title       : Conference of U.S. Embassy Environment Science and Technology Officers,
               Washington, DC, September 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9218202

Award Number: 9218202
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Marion Flores                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Prochnik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Department of State
	      
	      Washington, DC  20520    /   -

NSF Program : 5951      COOPERATIVE SCIENCE,OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides partial support for a week-long conference of              
              U.S. Embassy Environment Science and Technology Officers in                    
              Washington in late September or early October this year.                       
                                                                                             
              The Environment, Science and Technology Counselors/Attaches are                
              key parts of Embassy country teams.  They work in support of USG               
              interests as the focal points in Embassies on topics including                 
              environmental, space, health, energy, nuclear non-proliferation,               
              economic competitiveness, oceans, population and other issues.                 
              They advise Ambassadors and report and make representations on                 
              these issues.  These officers also conduct and manage bilateral                
              science and technology agreements.  OES has held such conferences              
              not only in updating the Embassy representatives on current                    
              developments, but in providing Washington officers an opportunity              
              to debrief them directly.  The conferences have also enlisted                  
              much attention and participation from the Congress and technical               
              agencies.  The conference presents an important opportunity both               
              for NSF staff to consult directly with many of the officers with               
              whom they deal and for the Science Officers to improve their                   
              understanding of NSF concerns and priorities.
