Title       : Numerical Modeling of Mesoscale Airflow over Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9218376

Award Number: 9218376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale R. Durran durrand@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1525,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Accurate weather forecasting in the vicinity of major mountain            
              ranges is an extremely difficult meteorological problem.                       
              Interactions between large-scale weather systems and mountainous               
              regions often spawn complex mesoscale weather patterns.  Efforts to            
              forecast the development of these weather patterns are limited by              
              deficiencies in understanding of the physical processes governing              
              mesoscale circulations in complex terrain.  Additionally, mesoscale            
              orographic effects also influence the global circulation through               
              the action of gravity wave drag.  Errors in the parameterization of            
              gravity wave drag in global scale modes are believed to be a major             
              source of error in extended range forecasts.                                   
                   Under previously supported research on this topic the                     
              Principal Investigator has found that vertically propagating                   
              mountain waves appear to be not as sensitive to the asymmetry of               
              the underlying terrain as previously thought.  Using free slip                 
              conditions, he has found that maximum lee slope winds also are not             
              sensitive to asymmetry of the terrain.  When surface friction is               
              included, however, sensitivity to terrain is enhanced, but the                 
              primary regulator of maximum winds appears to be the steepness of              
              the lee slope.                                                                 
                   The Principal Investigator will continue this line of research            
              with the ultimate goal of improving weather forecasts for locations            
              in the vicinity of mountains and to improve extended range                     
              forecasts and climate models.  The major areas of concentration                
              are: investigation of airflow in complex three-dimensional                     
              topography with emphasis on mountain barriers with and without                 
              mountain gaps, and isolated mountain peaks; study of momentum                  
              fluxes in orographically forced gravity waves and the interactions             
              of these waves with the larger scale flow through gravity wave                 
              drag.
