Title       : Collaborative Research: Lithospheric Evolution to Triple Junction Migration:
               Seismic Images of the Mendocino Triple Junction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9218968

Award Number: 9218968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Levander alan@esci.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The coastal region of northern California from latitude of 38o            
              to 41oN represents a region in which the present tectonic regime               
              changes abruptly from subduction to transform motion at the                    
              Mendocino Triple Junction (MTJ).  Because the triple junction is               
              migrating north along the coast of North America, an understanding             
              of the crust and upper mantle structure in this region will provide            
              insights into the tectonic evolution of the entire U.S. west coast             
              continental margin as well as other convergent margins worldwide.              
              This project involves an integrated seismic experiment to image                
              the structure of the crust and upper mantle immediately before and             
              after passage of the MTJ.  This study represents an important part             
              of a long-term, multi-disciplinary effort on the part of many                  
              investigators to exploit this well defined system as an in-situ                
              laboratory to study physical and  chemical processes associated                
              with mantle upwelling, melt segregation and migration, tectonic                
              accretion, and crustal deformation in both transform and convergent            
              tectonic settings, and to evaluate the implications of these                   
              processes for continental growth and evolution.                                
                                                                                             
                   The study encompasses two field seasons.  One season involves             
              acquisition of eight multichannel seismic (MCS) profiles designed              
              to image deep crustal structure beneath:  1) Pt. Arena basin, San              
              Andreas fault, and extinct trench south of the MTJ; 2) the                     
              Mendocino Transform fault; and 3) the Eel River basin and Cascadia             
              subduction zone north of the MTJ.  The profiles intersect wells                
              both north and south of the MTJ to provide stratigraphic control.              
              The MCS profiles will also be recorded on ocean-bottom hydrophones             
              and seismographs and on REFTEK seismographs deployed onshore to                
              provide complementary large aperture data.  The other season                   
              involves acquisition of three onshore explosive-source refraction              
              profiles, two of which extend onshore/offshore transects shot north            
              and south of the MTF, in order to cross the fore-arc and slabless              
              window.  The third refraction profile will follow the trend of the             
              Franciscan terrane in order to cross the southern edge of the Gorda            
              plate, map possible along-strike variations in crustal structure               
              and tie together the two primary onshore-offshore profiles.  All               
              three land profiles will be densely instrumented with REFTEK and               
              SGR seismographs.
