Title       : Regulation of Proteolysis in Crustacean Muscles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1993       
File        : a9218337

Award Number: 9218337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Mykles don@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Skeletal muscle is not only important in animal locomotion, but                
              also constitutes a major metabolic store of  protein that can be               
              quickly mobilized when dietary intake is insufficient to meet an               
              animal's nutritional needs. In addition, muscle atrophy can be                 
              induced by disuse, nerve injury, and disease. In some disuse,                  
              such as muscular dystrophy, wasting is so severe that individual               
              dies.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The intracellular regulation of protein breakdown in any animal                
              poorly understood. The crustacean claw muscle  provides a                      
              favorable model system for elucidating proteolytic mechanisms.                 
              During each intermolt cycle, the claw muscle  undergoes a                      
              sequential atrophy and restoration, in which protein content                   
              decreases 40% during the premolt period and is resynthesized                   
              following molt. Atrophy apparently facilitates withdrawal of the               
              pair of large claws at the time the shell is shed. Protein                     
              degradation appears to be mediated by five enzymes: four calcium-              
              dependent proteinases (CDPs) and a multicatalytic proteinase                   
              (MCP). The enzymes are active a neutral pH and degrade the                     
              contractile proteins of muscle.                                                
                                                                                             
              This proposal examines the regulation of intracellular                         
              proteolysis in a muscle that resembles, both morphologically and               
              biochemically, vertebrate skeletal muscle. Biochemical and                     
              molecular biological techniques are used to isolate and                        
              characterize two proteinases. These studies will yield new and                 
              basic information on the regulation of proteolytic processes                   
              common to all animal cells.
