Title       : Foraging Ecology and Reproductive Energetics of Antarctic Petrels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9218536

Award Number: 9218536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley W. Weathers wwweathers@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The feeding ecology and energetics of two common surface-nesting               
              petrels that breed in the high Antarctic, the Cape Pigeon  and                 
              the Snow Petrel will be addressed through a variety of field and               
              laboratory techniques.  Both the diet and energy requirements of               
              adults and their offspring will be quantified.  By conducting                  
              measurements over three consecutive breeding seasons, interannual              
              variation in feeding ecology and reproductive performance will be              
              assessed.  The field metabolic rate of adult petrels will be                   
              determined during the incubation and chick-rearing stages of the               
              breeding cycle using the doubly labeled water technique.  Basal                
              metabolic rates of adults will be determined from laboratory                   
              measurements of oxygen consumption and their reproductive effort               
              expressed as the ratio of field metabolic rate to basal                        
              metabolism.  Foraging trip length of adults will be partitioned                
              into time spent resting on water and in flight and foraging                    
              energy cost will be estimated.  Nestling growth will be assessed               
              from measurements of body mass, size and composition as functions              
              of nestling age and nestling energy budgets will be constructed.               
              Diet of nestlings and their parents will be determined from                    
              parental food deliveries and stable isotope analysis of prey and               
              feces.  Diet information combined with doubly labeled water                    
              measurements will allow calculation of rates of food consumption,              
              and, hence, the trophic impact of these breeding fulmarine                     
              petrels on the surrounding marine ecosystem.
