Title       : High Pressure Denaturation of Staphylococcal Nuclease
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9218461

Award Number: 9218461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexter B. Northrop dbnorthrop@pharmacy.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Royer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Royer will use a combination of steady-state and time-resolved             
              fluorescence spectroscopy in order to study the effect of amino                
              acid substitution on the high pressure denaturation and native and             
              denatured state dynamics of staphylococcal nuclease (Snase).  Dr.              
              Royer will characterize the contributions of the exposure of                   
              hydrophobic surface area in the denatured state and internal                   
              cavities and proline cis/trans isomerization in the native state to            
              the pressure stability, internal dynamics and function of the                  
              protein.  Three categories of mutant Snases will be investigated;              
              1) mutants which exhibit large changes in the cooperativity of                 
              unfolding by guanidine hydrochloride; 2) cavity mutants, in which              
              large hydrophobic residues have been replaced by alanine or                    
              glycine; and 3) mutants in which the native stat cis/trans                     
              isomerization about the peptide bond preceding proline 117 has been            
              altered or mutants in which the number of proline residues has been            
              altered.  For the third class of mutants Dr. Royer will perform                
              kinetic studies of the pressure denaturation/renaturation                      
              reactions.  Finally, she will use time-resolved and steady-state               
              fluorescence intensity, energy and anisotropy measurements to                  
              characterize the native and denatured states of all three classes              
              of mutants.  These results will be correlated to the enzymatic                 
              activity of these proteins.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Proteins are increasingly being used in many areas of                          
              biotechnology.  It has become apparent for a number of reasons that            
              the industrial uses of proteins would benefit from a better                    
              understanding of the structural and dynamic factors affecting the              
              stability and function of the protein.  For example, it would be of            
              interest to be able to design proteins which were more heat and                
              pressure stable, yet with similar or even enhanced functional                  
              properties.  It is the object of the research in the present                   
              proposal to study three categories of single amino acid mutants of             
              SNase, a small well-characterized enzyme which catalyzes the                   
              hydrolysis of ribo and deoxyribonucleotides.  Its three dimensional            
              structure is known from X-ray crystallographic studies.  By                    
              examining the high pressure equilibrium and kinetic denaturation               
              profiles of three classes of mutant SNase proteins Dr. Royer will              
              be able to identify any correlations between the three dimensional             
              packing of the native proteins, the characteristics of their                   
              unfolding states, their dynamic properties, their stability and                
              their enzymatic activity.  It is hoped that determining the effect             
              of amino-acid substitution on these properties of the protein will             
              help to develop guidelines for engineering more efficient and                  
              effective proteins for a large number of biotechnological                      
              applications.
