Title       : Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative: Interdisciplinary Undergraduate
               Program in Materials Synthesis and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9218104

Award Number: 9218104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mayer james.mayer@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicole Herbots  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Petuskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lester E. Hendrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9161,9246,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Arizona State University will undertake a three year program to                
              develop, implement and evaluate four core courses on Materials                 
              Synthesis and Processing.  These courses are distinguished by an               
              interdisciplinary approach, involving students and faculty in                  
              Engineering, Physics, and Chemistry.  The courses will be                      
              integrated into academic programs at Arizona State University as a             
              Materials Science option in the degree programs in Engineering,                
              Physics and Chemistry.  They will have a direct impact on the                  
              integration of programs in Materials Science and Engineering within            
              ASU and will complement and strengthen the graduate program in the             
              Science and Engineering of Materials.  The four proposed courses               
              are: 1) A sequence of two lecture courses in advanced material                 
              synthesis and processing with emphasis on thin films of electronic             
              materials; and 2) Two laboratory courses consisting of 3 projects              
              each semester chosen from a wide range of 20 topics that emphasize             
              synthesis and processing, followed by characterization and property            
              evaluation of advanced materials.  The majority of the projects                
              will be carried out in a new laboratory specially dedicated to                 
              these courses.  Novel features of the courses include the use of               
              case studies in lectures and videotaping of student presentations              
              in laboratory projects.  The courses will be evaluated by faculty,             
              students and an external advisory committee.  It is planned to                 
              publish a text on the lecture courses, and the experiments for the             
              laboratory course will be available in manual form.  It is also                
              planned to publish descriptions of the courses in the Materials                
              Research Society Bulletin.
