Title       : The Dynamics and Evolution of a Coastal Water-Table Aquifer Under a Regime of
               Slowly Rising Sea Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1995      
File        : a9218972

Award Number: 9218972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard R. Gardner gardner@epoch.geol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard W. Reeves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project addresses the problem of the dynamics and evolution               
              of the freshwater - saltwater interface in ground water along the              
              forest - marsh boundary in South Carolina.  The position and                   
              expression (i.e. clarity versus diffuseness) of this interface is              
              governed by short-term forcings (diurnal tides, daily ET cycles and            
              rain events), episodic storm surges and long-term sea level rise.              
              Prediction of the fate of contaminants released on land and their              
              impact on adjacent marshes depends on a clear and quantitative                 
              understanding of the movement of ground water at and near this                 
              interface.  Because of the complex forcings and boundary                       
              conditions, presently available models for coastal aquifers are too            
              simple to adequately simulate such systems.  In addition, adequate             
              field measurements of head and salinity are not available to test              
              complex numerical models that might be used.                                   
              As a remedy to this problem, the objectives of this project are to             
              collect long-term measurements of head and salinity along transects            
              across the forest-marsh boundary and to use the data to develop,               
              calibrate and validate a numerical model of the system.  A                     
              spatially dense network of piezometer along each transect will be              
              equipped with recording pressure transducers (assembled in house)              
              that will gather data on the effects of short-term forcing.  Based             
              on geomorphic and stratigraphic criteria and C-14 dating of tree               
              roots found in high marsh soils, transects will be selected to                 
              represent stages in the conversion of a forested, pleistocene beach            
              ridge terrain into a Holocene salt marsh under a regime of rising              
              sea level.  This will provide a unique opportunity to test our                 
              numerical model against truly long-term data.  The results of this             
              project could be used by regulatory agencies for environmental                 
              impact assessment and planning and by ecologists interested in                 
              interactions between forest and marsh ecosystems.
