Title       : Dissertation Research: Human Impacts on Prehistoric Faunas: A Zooarchaeological
               Analysis of San Francisco Bay Shell- mounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1992   
File        : a9218417

Award Number: 9218417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9261               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. Broughton  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Donald Grayson, Mr Jack Broughton will              
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze                    
              faunal materials from archaeological sites in the San Francisco                
              Bay region of California and use this information to reconstruct               
              patterns of changing environment and human subsistence over an                 
              approximately 4,000 year period. Since the beginning of this                   
              century archaeologists have directed attention to the numerous                 
              shellmound sites located in the Bay region. Many of these mounds               
              were of tremendous size, measuring up to 100 x 300 meters across               
              and as much as 9.8 meters in depth. Excavations of them have                   
              documented thousands of years of human prehistory and because of               
              the abundant mammal remains it is possible to examine how human                
              diet changed over time. Mr Broughton will study faunal materials               
              from a number of sites. In addition to identifying bones by                    
              species, he will measure then to reconstruct body size. In this                
              way he will be able to determine the effect of human predation on              
              prey populations. Using ideas derived from optimum foraging                    
              theory he has predicted how degree of predation should be                      
              reflected in these remains.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is of significance for several reasons. First it                 
              will increase our understanding of how prehistoric U.S.                        
              populations subsisted and adapted to environmental conditions                  
              over thousands of years. Of equal importance is what it may                    
              reveal about the population dynamics of animals such as sea                    
              otter, deer and elk. It appears that at some times in the past -               
              such as when the first Spanish explorers entered the region -                  
              herds of deer and elk were enormous. At other times in the more                
              distant past such species appear to be less common and Mr.                     
              Broughton wishes to determine the extent to which human predation              
              was responsible. This research should not only increase our                    
              understanding of the past but also suggest optimum game                        
              management strategies. It will also assist in the training of a                
              promising young scientist.
