Title       : Regulatory Processes Involved in the Transition from Growth to Development in
               Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9218784

Award Number: 9218784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Singleton singleck@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A fundamental principle of many developing systems is the mutually             
              exclusive nature of cell growth and cellular differentiation.                  
              Dictyostelium discoideum provides a model for investigating this               
              reciprocal relationship in that in the vegetative state the amoebae            
              have an unlimited capacity for self renewal through growth and                 
              mitotic divisions while initiation of the developmental program                
              results in a cessation of growth and division and leads to cellular            
              differentiation. During the past granting period, the regulatory               
              mechanisms underlying the switch from growth to development have               
              been investigated primarily be examining the resulting differential            
              expression of a variety of genes. It is proposed to continue this              
              approach by investigating the molecular mechanisms bringing about              
              the deactivation of transcription of one of these genes, V4, in                
              response to cessation of growth and activation of the developmental            
              program. This will be done by examining the protein factors                    
              involved in the expression of the V4 gene, and how the activity of             
              these factors is coupled to the transition from growth to                      
              development. V4 gene expression is highly sensitive to levels and              
              types of nutrients present in the environment. In addition, the                
              encoded product of the V4 gene has been shown to be required for               
              the transition from growth to development, and it is involved in               
              the deactivation of expression of all growth specific genes                    
              examined and in the induction of expression of most "early                     
              developmental specific" genes. The role of this gene product in                
              bringing about a cessation of growth and in initiating the                     
              developmental program and how it is involved in regulating the                 
              expression of the above mentioned genes will be examined. This will            
              require production and purification of the encoded protein,                    
              examining any activity associated with it, and determining its                 
              cellular location, its modification state(s), and identifying other            
              proteins which may interact with it. The possible interplay between            
              the V4 gene product and several other factors postulated to be                 
              involved in the early regulatory events of the developmental                   
              program will be investigated.
