Title       : Stability and Structure of Nucleic Acid Triple Helices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9218687

Award Number: 9218687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Shafer shafer@cgl.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal focusses on the structure and stability of DNA, RNA,             
              and mixed DNA/RNA triple helices.  These novel DNA structures are              
              of great current interest due to the large number of possible                  
              applications of targeting duplex DNA with a third strand as well as            
              the possible in vivo role of such structure in, for example, gene              
              regulation.  The long-term goals of this work include understanding            
              the role of nucleotide sequence and composition, cation and ionic              
              strength in determining the stability of both pyrimidine-purine-               
              pyrimidine and purine-purine-pyrimidine triplexes and establishing             
              a high resolution model for the molecular structure of                         
              intermolecular triplexes.  In particular, we propose to determine              
              the sequence and composition requirements for formation of purine-             
              purine-pyrimidine triplexes using capillary and slab gel                       
              electrophoresis, along with circular dichroism and imino proton                
              NMR.  Evaluation of the thermodynamic stability of triplexes will              
              be carried out both by UV melting analysis and by calorimetry,                 
              thereby permitting assessment of the validity of the all-or-none               
              model for triplex formation.  Additional stability studies will                
              consider the effects of RNA strands, mismatches and base                       
              modification on triplex stability.  Finally, high resolution 2D and            
              3D NMR methods will be applied to the problem of determining the               
              structure of triplexes at a molecular level.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              These studies will provide fundamental data on the stability and               
              structure of nucleic acid triplexes, which will be of importance in            
              a large number of potential applications of this unusual nucleic               
              acid structure.
