Title       : Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative: Development and Implementation of
               a New Materials Synthesis and Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9218128

Award Number: 9218128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merton C. Flemings   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Rubner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9246,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to create a new unified upper level                
              synthesis and processing laboratory that will integrate the                    
              synthesis and processing of all of the various materials classes.              
              The experience provided by this new laboratory will complement and             
              enhance the core curriculum, which was established at MIT a decade             
              ago with the specific goal of exposing students to the fundamental             
              unifying concepts of materials science and engineering.  With the              
              introduction of this new synthesis and processing laboratory,                  
              students for the first time will have the opportunity to                       
              experimentally explore porcessing-structure property relationships             
              in a wide variety of different materials, including composites.                
              Emphasis will be placed on design-oriented projects in which                   
              students will work in teams with well-defined goals and project                
              missions.  Laboratories will be designed to expose students to the             
              importance of computers in modern processing, in process design and            
              simulation, in data acquisition, and in process control.  The                  
              program will be evaluated through student entrance and exit                    
              evaluations, recommendations of a Visiting Committee, and an ad hoc            
              industrial panel.  In addition to the development and                          
              implementation of the new laboratory, comprehensive student                    
              workbooks and instructor's guides will be generated for use by                 
              other institutions, and educational symposia will be held at                   
              professional society meetings.
