Title       : The Role of G Protein Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9218823

Award Number: 9218823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Gundersen gundersn@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9218823  Gundersen    Recent reports describing in vivo phosphorylation of the
              guanine  nucleotide-binding regulatory protein (G protein) alpha subunits,  G
              alpha-i in hepatocytes, G alpha-z in platelets, and G alpha-2 in  Dictyostelium
              suggest that alpha subunit phosphorylation is an  important mechanism of G
              protein function.  The significance of  alpha subunit phosphorylation however
              remains unknown.   Dictyostelium offers a powerful system for analyzing this
              question  through the use of molecular biology and biochemical methodologies.  
              The goal of this research is to examine the role of G alpha-2  phosphorylation
              in Dictyostelium.  The site(s) of phosphorylation,  which occurs on serine in G
              alpha-2. will be identified using  peptide mapping, alpha subunit chimeral, and
              site-directed  mutagenesis.  The function of G alpha-2 phosphorylation will be 
              determined by transforming G alpha-2 sequences that can not be  phosphorylated
              into a cell line lacking the G alpha-2 gene.   Chemotaxis and differentiation
              in the transformants will be  compared to wild-type.  The G alpha-2 effectors
              adenylyl cyclase,  guanylyl cyclase and phospholipase C will be assayed to
              identify  changes resulting from the loss of G alpha-2 phosphorylation.  
              Phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated G alpha-2 will be purified to  compare GTP
              binding affinity and GTPase.  Purified G alpha-2 will  also be used to produce
              a polyclonal antiserum.  The kinase that  phosphorylates G alpha-2 will be
              characterized by developing an in  vitro assay and purified using standard
              chromatographic approaches.   %%%  Guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory
              proteins (G proteins) play an  essential role in the signal transducing
              pathways of numerous  extracellular stimuli which include hormones,
              neurotransmitters,  growth factors, odorants, and light.  Recent research has 
              identified a number of stimulus-response pathways in which G  proteins play a
              role, and a number of types of G protein subunits  have been identified.  Thus,
              the system for signal  transduction in  cells is very complex.  In fact, most
              stimuli probably do not  activate a single biochemical response pathway, but
              instead  activate a network of response pathways.  A key question is, how to 
              cells coordinate and regulate these diverse networks of responses  to come out
              with an appropriate response to an environmental or  internal stimulus?  G
              proteins play a key role in signal  transduction pathways and are likely to be
              important sites for  modulation.  The goal of this research is to understand
              the  mechanisms that modify G proteins by covalent attachment of  phosphate
              groups (phosphorylation) under some physiological  conditions.  The system to
              be used is the slime mold,  Dictyostelium.  This relatively simple organism
              offers important  experimental advantages for these studies.  The results of
              this  research should provide important new insights into the molecular 
              mechanisms that regulate the responses of cells to environmental  and internal
              signals.  ***
