Title       : Interactions of Particles and Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9218167

Award Number: 9218167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Boris Kayser                            
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3311595            (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Georgi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cumrun Vafa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney R. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Sheldon L. Glashow  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1245      THEORETICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research in theoretical elementary particle physics will                  
              extend the understanding of the particles produced at present                  
              and planned accelerators, including the photon, W and Z                        
              particles, the electron,  and . and their neutrinos, and                      
              quarks and gluons.  It will concentrate on the physics                         
              responsible for the masses of many of these particles.  This                   
              is the principal unsolved mystery in the standard model of the                 
              basic forces.  The research will also deepen our understanding                 
              of quantum field theory, which provides the most useful                        
              mathematical language for the study of this physics.  This                     
              language is important in other fields (condensed matter                        
              physics, for example) as well as in particle physics.  This                    
              project also will focus on aspects of string theory.  Specific                 
              areas of inquiry in string theory will include quantum                         
              gravity, aspects of strings propagating in a space (in                         
              particular, the study of strings in the context of cosmology                   
              and black holes), and topological field theories.  String                      
              theory has been perhaps the most active area of research in                    
              high energy physics in the past seven years.  Research in                      
              string theory is very important since string theory is the                     
              only known fundamental theory which reconciles quantum theory                  
              with Einstein's theory of gravity.  This project will play an                  
              important role in the advancement of this subject by studying,                 
              classifying and unifying various solutions to string theory.                   
              Finally, the project will investigate the relations of                         
              elementary particles to objects and processes that cannot be                   
              directly studied at accelerators, such as the dark matter in                   
              the universe, black holes produced by gravitational collapse,                  
              grand unified theories and baryon number production in the                     
              early history of the universe.
