Title       : Collections Improvement of Vertebrate Fossils at the Denver Museum of Natural
               History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9218177

Award Number: 9218177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Stucky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Logan D. Ivy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The collection of vertebrate fossils (VF) at the                          
              Denver Museum of Natural History (DMNH) is an important                        
              resource for research on the history of life in the                            
              Western Interior region.  There are approximately                              
              37,000 specimens in the collection, including 52                               
              holotypes and a number of scientifically important                             
              assemblages from the Cenozoic and Mesozoic.  Highlights                        
              include fossil dinosaur and mammal skeletons, the                              
              original Folsom Bison and Dent mammoth remains from                            
              early human sites in North America, Oligocene and                              
              Miocene collections from the Great Plains, and growing                         
              Jurassic, Paleogene, and Pleistocene collections.  Most                        
              of the collection was amassed prior to 1947, but field                         
              work over the past three years has added about 5,500                           
              specimens.                                                                     
                   In 1989, the Department of Earth Sciences (DES) at                        
              DMNH began efforts to improve the condition of the                             
              collection and increase its availability for scientific                        
              research.  In the past three years, part of the                                
              collection has been placed in new steel cabinets, 5,000                        
              new specimens have been cataloged, and approximately                           
              3,000 specimens have been entered into a computerized                          
              data base.  In addition, DMNH has purchased new                                
              research and collection management equipment and                               
              supplies, increased the number of permanent staff                              
              dedicated to paleontology from 0.33 FTE in 1988 to 4.25                        
              FTE, constructed a new laboratory, and more than                               
              doubled the storage space for the VF collections.                              
                   Although recent DMNH support has improved the                             
              condition of the collections considerably,                                     
              approximately three-fourths remain in poor condition.                          
              The bulk of the older collections have not been                                
              properly curated.  Approximately 80% of them have never                        
              been cataloged or inventoried and 70% are housed in                            
              overcrowded conditions within wooden cabinetry or                              
              unstable steel shelving.  Almost all of the older                              
              collections still have original field labels and                               
              miscellaneous notes associated with them.  Although                            
              most of the collection has been prepared, many                                 
              specimens are broken and in need of repair and                                 
              conservation.                                                                  
                   This DMNH project will catalog, computerize and                           
              restore the older collections to make them more                                
              available for research and allow for continued growth.                         
              Primary needs are for space efficient cabinets and                             
              compactors, computer hardware, an hand-operated                                
              forklift, and additional personnel to curate and                               
              computerize specimens over two years to bring the                              
              entire vertebrate fossil collection up to modern                               
              standards.
