Title       : Problems in Anisotropic Nonlinear Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9500642

Award Number: 9500642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Warne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500642 Polignone  This work is supported by a Research Planning  Grant for
              Women  Scientists and Engineers Award. Preliminary work  on problems  involving
              nonlinearly elastic deformations of  anisotropic materials  will be conducted.
              Several areas of  research will be considered. The  first concerns the 
              determination of instabilities describing non- radially symmetric  deformations
              (of both isotropic and anisotropic)  solids under  symmetric loading
              conditions. Mathematically, boundary  value  problems for nonlinear ordinary
              and partial differential   equations governing equilibrium will be studied. A
              second related   issue is to examine the effects of loading perturbations on 
              bifurcation  solutions describing radially symmetric cavitation  instabilities
              (void  nucleation and growth in solids). The third  focus will be on the 
              determination of (i) generalized elastic  moduli for nonlinear  anisotropic
              materials, (ii) their  connection to the corresponding linear  moduli, and
              (iii)  constitutive inequalities to describe physically  reasonable  response
              of hyperelastic materials. Finally, problems in  which  the direction of
              anisotropy (transverse isotropy) is non-  constant will be considered, with
              interest toward potential   applications in biomechanics, such as modeling of
              the heart.    The National Science Foundations mandate to ensure the vitality 
              of  the Nations scientific enterprise includes concern for the  quality, 
              composition, distribution and effectiveness of the  human resource  base in
              science and engineering.  Within this  context, the Foundation  is committed to
              enhancing the current  rate of participation of women  in science and
              engineering  careers, in general, and as active  participants in all of its 
              programs.  Research Planning Grant awards  are made: (1) to help  increase the
              number mf new women  investigators participating in  NSFs research programs;
              and, (2) to  facilitate preliminary  studies and other activities related to
              the  development of  competitive research p rojects and proposals by  women who
              have  not previously had independent Federal research  funding.   Research
              Planning Grants are one-time awards that may be  used  for preliminary work to
              determine the feasibility of a proposed   line of inquiry, and/or for other
              activities that will facilitate  proposal  development.
