Title       : Mathematical Sciences: p-adic Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9500941

Award Number: 9500941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy T. Teitelbaum Jeremy@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the study of p-adic symmetric spaces, the  arithmetic of
              modular forms, and a number of computational and  algorithmic questions in
              number theory and algebraic geometry. In  the general area of p-adic
              automorphic forms, known results about  the relationship between analytic
              functions and measures on the  p-adic upper half plane and measures on its
              boundary are  generalized to Drinfeld's higher dimensional p-adic upper half 
              spaces. Such results have implications for the geometry of  algebraic varieties
              which are uniformized by the Drinfeld spaces,  including certain Shimura
              varieties and Drinfeld modular  varieties. They also have important
              consequences for the p-adic  representation theory of the general linear group.
              In the area of  modular forms, the principal investigator is continuing to
              study  questions relating to the "exceptional zero conjecture". Finally, 
              earlier work on algorithms for computing Picard-Fuchs  differential equations
              and the Gauss-Manin connection are  extended.      The research in this project
              lies in the general areas of  arithmetic geometry and automorphic forms.
              Algebraic geometry is  one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics. In the
              past ten  years, it has blossomed to the point where it has solved problems 
              that have stood for centuries. Originally, it treated figures in  the plane
              defined by the simplest of equations, namely  polynomials. Today, the field
              utilizes methods not only from  algebra, but also from analysis and topology;
              conversely, it is  extensively used in those fields. Moreover, it has proved
              itself  useful in fields as diverse as physics, theoretical computer  science,
              cryptography, coding theory and robotics. Automorphic  forms arose out of
              non-Euclidean geometry in the middle of the  nineteenth century. Both
              mathematicians and physicists have thus  long realized that many objects of
              fundamental importance are  non-Euclidean in their basic nature. This field is
              principally  concerned with questions about the whole numbe rs, but in its use 
              of geometry and analysis, it retains connection to its historical  roots and
              thus to problems in areas as diverse as gauge theory in  theoretical physics
              and coding theory in information theory.    This research involves the study of
              p-adic symmetric spaces, the  arithmetic of modular forms, and a number of
              computational and  algorithmic questions in number theory and algebraic
              geometry. In  the general area of p-adic automorphic forms, known results about
               the relationship between analytic functions and measures on the  p-adic upper
              half plane and measures on its boundary are  generalized to Drinfeld's higher
              dimensional p-adic upper half  spaces. Such results hate implications for the
              geometry of  algebraic varieties which are uniformized by the Drinfeld spaces, 
              including certain Shimura varieties and Drinfeld modular  varieties. They also
              have important consequences for the p-adic  representation theory of the
              general linear group. In the area of  modular forms, the principal investigator
              is continuing to study  questions relating to the "exceptional zero
              conjecture". Finally,  earlier work on algorithms for computing Picard-Fuchs 
              differential equations and the Gauss-Manin connection are  extended.      The
              research in this project lies in the general areas of  arithmetic geometry and
              automorphic forms. Algebraic geometry is  one of the oldest parts of modern
              mathematics. In the past ten  years, it has blossomed to the point where it has
              solved problems  that have stood for centuries. Originally, it treated figures
              in  the plane defined by the simplest of equations, namely  polynomials. Today,
              the field utilizes methods not only from  algebra, but also from analysis and
              topology; conversely, it is  extensively used in those fields. Moreover, it has
              proved itself  useful in fields as diverse as physics, theoretical computer 
              science, cryptography, coding theory and robotics. Automorphic  forms arose out
              of non-Euclidean geometry in the middle of the  nineteenth century. B oth
              mathematicians and physicists have thus  long realized that many objects of
              fundamental importance are  non-Euclidean in their basic nature. This field is
              principally  concerned with questions about the whole numbers, but in its use 
              of geometry and analysis, it retains connection to its historical  roots and
              thus to problems in areas as diverse as gauge theory in  theoretical physics
              and coding theory in information theory.
