Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves, Nonlinear Materials and Chaotic Mixing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9500568

Award Number: 9500568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Grove   (Principal Investigator current)
              James Glimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Qiang Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley J. Plohr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9216,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500568  Grove    This project seeks to develop a fundamental approach to the
              study  of mixing   layers, nonlinear materials, and fluid chaos. Nonlinear
              waves in  hyperbolic   conservation laws commonly display sensitive dependence
              to the  problem   formulation and to numerical solution algorithms. A completed
               theory of a   hyperbolic wave should contain the following ingredients: (1) 
              jump   conditions describing the influence of the wave on the flow in  which it
              is   embedded, (2) the width or growth rate of the layer, (3) a  complete
              theory of   the internal structure, and (4) a systematic unfolding of all 
              possible sensitive   dependencies for the wave. The mathematical tools and
              theories  used in the   analysis are varied, and include: partial differential
              equations  (hyperbolic   conservation laws), random fields, perturbation theory
              (ordinary  and   renormalized), renormalization group methods, traveling wave 
              analysis,   bifurcation theory, and the geometric theory of ordinary 
              differential   equations.    A representative mixing layer problem is
              acceleration driven  layers, arising   in instabilities of a fluid interface. 
              Such mixing layers arise  in many areas   of basic science and technology,
              including supernovae, inertial  confinement   fusion, and injection jets in
              carburetors for internal combustion  engines.   Detailed mathematical modeling
              and analysis will seek to modify  and refine   the defining mathematical
              equations describing such flows and  develop an   improved understanding of the
              structure of these equations.  This  analysis   will in turn be used to develop
              high resolution numerical methods  for the   solution of these equations. The
              nonlinear material wave patterns  we study   describe important metal forming
              processes such as punching and  cutting   (shear bands) and flow instabilities
              in forming plastic  components by   injection molding (viscoelastic materials).
              The analysis of waves  in   nonlinear materials uses a similar integrated
              approach: modeling,   theor y,   computations, and applications. Interactions
              with collaborators  will allow   transfer of this technology to appropriate
              applied physics and  engineering   communities.
