Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regularity of Solutions to Schrodinger Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9500917

Award Number: 9500917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiaping Zhong jpzhongz@math.UTexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Zhong  DMS-9500917      This project treats the almost everywhere behavior
              and the local smoothing   property of the solutions of the Cauchy problem of
              the time-dependent   Schrodinger equation with the initial value in a Sobolev
              space.To study   the almost everywhere behavior of the solutions, by the
              Stein-Nikishin   theory, it suffices to study the mapping properties of the
              associated  maximal operators. By the Kolmogrov-Seliverstov-Plessner method, it
              suffices   to study the mapping properties of the corresponding linearized
              operators.   The local smoothing properties of the solutions are also the
              mapping   properties of some linear operators.  To study the mapping properties
              of the associated linear operators,  the main idea of our approach is to
              estimate the kernel functions first   and then apply classical Fourier analysis
              theories   such as the Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev theorem for fractional
              integrals,   the Sobolev embedding theorem, the Calderon-Zygmund singular
              integral   theory, and Stein's complex interpolation theorem for an analytic
              family   of linear operators. The Tomas-Stein restriction theorem for the  
              Fourier transform is related to these mapping properties. For certain   special
              case, the orthogonality method plays an important role.   The main difficulty
              is in estimating the kernel functions. Some oscillatory   integral estimates,
              such as van der Corput type lemma, can be applied.  The ideas of Carleson,
              Kenig and Ruiz, Sjolin, Vega, Ruiz and Vega seem   to be important here.    The
              Schrodinger equation is the basic equation of motion in Quantum Mechanics,  
              which is an important branch of modern Physics.   The results about the
              existence and the regularity of the solutions of   the Schrodinger equation can
              be used to explain some phenomena in Physics.   In January, 1926, Schrodinger 
              invented the Schrodinger equation, which describes the discrete states of   an
              atom. Since then, the existence and the regularity of the solutions of   the
              Schrodinger equation have been i mportant research topics in Mathematics   and
              Physics. In this project, we employ some important techniques in modern  
              Mathematics to study the regularity of the solutions of the Schrodinger  
              equation. The complete understanding of these problems will   have some
              important applications in the areas such as  Fourier Analysis, Partial
              Differential Equations and Mathematical Physics.
