Title       : Analytical Application of Infrared Nonlinear Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1997   
File        : a9500392

Award Number: 9500392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wright wright@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              involves the extension of nonlinear multiresonant four  wave mixing (MFWM)
              spectroscopy to the selected excitation of  multiple vibrational transitions in
              the infrared spectral range.  Professor John C. Wright and his students at the
              University of  Wisconsin at Madison will use multiple infrared lasers to target
               selected transitions within a molecule and induce unique excitation  responses
              reflective of the sum or difference of individual  resonances. The unparalleled
              selectivity afforded by this technique  is attributed to the wealth of infrared
              vibrational resonances that  are coupled to chemical functional group
              interactions, and the  concomitant capability for elimination of matrix,
              spectral and/or  solvent interferences using the four-wave mixing approach. In 
              addition, the inherent sharpness of vibrational transitions will  allow the
              generation of well resolved spectra at room temperatures.  Professor Wright
              will also extend this technique to the fingerprint  region of the infrared
              which will allow a more detailed assessment  of analyte molecular structure. 
              Multiresonant four wave mixing nonlinear spectroscopy involves the  use of
              multiple infrared lasers to enable the judicious selection  of excitation
              wavelengths related to specific components in complex  mixtures, chemical
              functionalities in biological and polymeric  macromolecules, and/or
              conformational distinctions in well ordered  systems. This technique allows
              both qualitative and quantitative  chemical differentiation with unparalleled
              selectivity. This  project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program,  is at a stage where its success will require the interdisciplinary 
              efforts of physical and analytical spectroscopists, and its mature  development
              will benefit the characterization of advanced materials  and biomacromolecules.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
