Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Application of Interval Analysis in Statistical Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1995       
File        : a9500831

Award Number: 9500831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Kennedy wjk@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9500831 Kennedy  Abstract    The IEEE proposed standard for binary
              floating-point computer  arithmetic has been adopted by most computer
              manufacturers.  Included among the features of this floating-point number 
              system is programmer selectable rounding mode. Two rounding modes, round to
              plus or minus infinity, give hardware support for implementations of interval
              analysis computations. Substantive areas outside statistics are employing
              interval analysis and interval computations to good advantage in research. 
              Research workers in statistical computing have been slow to recognize or
              evaluate the potential utility of interval analysis.  The overall objective of
              this research is to identify areas in  statistical computing where interval
              analysis can be used to good advantage, and to develop needed methods and
              algorithms in these areas. Specifically, a library of routines for self-
              validating approximation of cdf and inverse cdf for most of  the usual
              univariate continuous probability distributions, and selected multivariate
              distributions will be developed. Accuracy  essentially to machine precision
              over very broad areas of the variable/parameter space will be the goal. 
              Self-validating computational methods for certain kinds of global optimization
              problems will also be developed.   Scientific computations are usually done
              using a digital computer. Computers are not, however, capable of expressing
              exactly most numbers that constitute intermediate and final results for  a
              computing problem. A part of the inexactness inherent in computer arithmetic is
              due to the need to round to a specific number of numeric digits after each
              arithmetic operation.  Therefore answers produced by a computer for difficult
              computing  tasks are often only rough approximations to the unknown true
              answers which would be obtained if exact computations could be performed. The
              objective of this research project is to develop  alternative computational
              methods that yield more accurate answers in difficult statistical computing ap
              plications. The  price of increased accuracy is that substantially more
              computer resources are consumed to produce answers. However, today there are
              enough computer resources available to support this very computationally
              intensive approach. The main motivation for  the research is that it is best to
              spend extra time and effort to insure good answers, instead of settling for
              poor answers that are obtained quickly.
