Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multiple Scales for Interacting Particle Systems:
               Mesoscopic and Macroscopic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9500717

Award Number: 9500717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Markos A. Katsoulakis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                            PARAGRAPH 1      In the context of Nonequilibrium
              Statistical Mechanics, the evolution of   physical systems is modelled at a
              microscopic level by Interacting Particle   Systems. Such processes  involve a
              large number of components (particles) with   either  deterministic or
              stochastic dynamics, governed by local laws of   interaction. It appears that 
              large groups of particles, which in principle   evolve  in an unorderly manner,
              tend to organize themselves in a coherent   pattern at some larger space or
              time scale. In particular, these rescaled,   possibly stochastic,  microscopic
              models are expected to give rise to   deterministic Nonlinear Partial
              Differential Equations  describing the evolution  of   macroscopic  quantities.
                  One of the problems  addressed here, is the rigorous derivation of
              nonlinear   partial differential equations  from interacting particle systems .
              Proceeding   a step further,  one would hope that for   finer scales of the
              particle systems,  the local random fluctuations are preserved in the
              macroscopic equation, while   microscopic details still remain hidden. In this
              framework, we propose  to study  (i) Interacting Particle Systems with long
              range interactions and weakly   propagating interfaces, and (ii) Stochastic
              discrete velocity models and fluid   dynamics systems of equations. We are
              particularly interested in understanding   the convergence of particle systems
              to weak solutions of the macroscopic   equations, past the formation of shocks 
              for the fluids equations and past all   possible geometric singularities of the
               propagating interfaces. The proposed   techniques are drawn from Nonlinear
              Partial Differential Equations, as well as,   Probability Theory and Stochastic
              Processes. A crucial part in the analysis of   the interacting particle
              systems, lies in the interplay of the different   space-time rescaling regimes
              present, each one with its own limiting   deterministic partial differential
              equation.                                PARAGRAPH 2      This research project
              is concerned with the mathematical analysis of microscopic  and macroscopic
              models of non-equilibrium phenomena arising in material science,  biology and
              fluid mechanics. The first part of the proposal is concerned with   the
              derivation of transport properties for materials undergoing phase   transitions
              (for example alloys changing crystallographic structure). Similar   techniques
              will hopefully prove useful in the prediction of nonequilibrium   behavior in
              biological processes. The mathematical tools employed here, are   expected to
              provide  new detailed quantitative information about our physical   systems,
              going one step beyond phenomenology. In the second part of the project,  we
              study the convergence of discrete random models, to gas and fluid dynamics  
              equations. In addition to the issues proposed in the first part, here we hope  
              that such discrete models may yield robust algorithms for the numerical  
              computation of gas dynamics flow, particularly in the presence of  shock waves.
