Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Their
               Applications to Evolving Surfaces, Phase Transitions and Stochastic Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9500940

Award Number: 9500940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Halil M. Soner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500940  Soner    This is a proposal to National Science Foundation to work on
              the  applications of nonlinear partial   differential equations to phase
              transitions, evolving surfaces  and  stochastic control. The proposed studies
              in evolutionary phase  transitions and evolving surfaces concern the
              development of the  asymptotic analysis of  systems of reaction-diffusion
              equations  (including the phase-field, Cahn-Hilliard, and the vector valued 
              Ginzburg-Landau equations), the further study of the interface  propagation
              with three or more phases, the analysis of the  dynamics of  surfaces with it
              arbitrary codimension, and the development of a  level  set approach for these
              surfaces. The proposed studies in  stochastic  control concern the analysis of
              mathematical financial models and  the  approximation of complex, controlled
              systems  by simpler and more  tractable continuum models.  The theory of
              viscosity solutions  have been  very successful in establishing  the connection
              between various  approximate and the original models.  Proposed here is to 
              continue this  research when the continuum models are singularly controlled.   
              In  mathematical finance, partial differential equations have been an 
              efficient tool not only in the analysis but also in numerical   computations. 
              Option pricing provides a good example of this.   The  principal investigator
              proposes to use the theory of viscosity  solutions  in the analysis of models
              with transaction  costs.  %%%    Research on the phase transitions and evolving
              surfaces is  related to  several models in  materials science modeling the
              dynamics of grain boundaries,  interfaces  between different phases and
              defects.  Understanding the  propagation of  defects and interfaces is of
              fundamental importance not only for  its  intrinsic interest but also for its
              technological importance.   Research  on stochastic control is related to
              problems in manufacturing,  communications and mathematical finance.  In
              mathematical  finance,  Black-Scholes type option  pricing problems will be
              investigated  in the  presence of transaction costs.  ***
