Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Infinite-Dimensional Banach Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9500874

Award Number: 9500874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haskell P. Rosenthal rosenthl@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Odell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500874  Rosenthal      The proposers intend to work on several fundamental
              problems in   the structure theory of infinite dimensional Banach spaces.  
              Specifically, Odell will study whether there are Banach spaces   of bounded
              distortion, or of arbitrary distortion but not biorthogonal   distortion. These
              questions are strongly motivated by Odell's recent joint   discovery with
              Schlumprecht, that Hilbert space is distortable in the strongest   sense. He
              also intends to study whether certain almost isometric asymptotic   assumptions
               on a Banach space insure that it contains one of the classical   spaces   lp  
              for    1  < or =  p  <  infinity  or c subscript 0. Odell will   also
              investigate whether the Huff criterion characterizes spaces isomorphic   to
              those with the uniform Kadec-Klee property, and whether the Point of  
              Continuity Property is basically determined. Rosenthal will study further  
              possible characterizations of spaces containing c subscript 0, related to   his
              recent characterization that a non-reflexive space contains   c subscript 0  
              provided all its subspaces have weakly sequentially complete duals. For  
              example, he will study the question of whether an script L infinity saturated  
              space contains   c subscript 0, and whether a Banach subspace   X   of   C(K)  
              contains   c subscript 0  provided the complement of X in X** contains  
              functions whose   alpha-th  oscillation is bounded, for all countable ordinals 
               alpha. Rosenthal also wises to investigate Banach spaces with separable duals,
                for example the problem of whether such spaces are isomorphic to subspaces of
                quotients of  C(alpha)  (for   alpha  a countable ordinal), with particular  
              attention given to the Hilbert space case. Rosenthal will also study the  
              long-standing open problem of whether  complemented subspaces of  C(K)  spaces 
               are again isomorphic to a  C(K)-space.       The study of structural
              properties of infinite-dimensional Banach spaces   is one of the most profound,
              fundamental research areas i n modern analysis.   These spaces underlie  the
              mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics,   and understanding and
              penetrating their structure is basic for modern research   in functional
              analysis and its applications to physics.  Recently there have   been
              spectacular advances in this area.  Deep long standing open problems have  
              been solved, and both proposers have been heavily involved in these advances.  
               Of course there are many more fundamental open problems remaining and the  
              proposers intend to tackle some of these basic questions.   ***
