Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computability and Mathematical Definability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1996       
File        : a9500878

Award Number: 9500878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore A. Slaman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500878  Slaman       Slaman intends to study computability and mathematical
              definability.  This research will contribute to developing a complete
              understanding of   the degree-theoretic structures associated with relative
              definability,  such as the global structures of the Turing degrees D and the
              Turing   degrees of the recursively enumerable sets R.  Missing ingredients  
              necessary to this understanding include determining whether the  
              universal-existential theory of R is decidable, characterizing when a  
              relation on R or D is definable within that structure, and  calculating the
              automorphism groups of these structures.  Secondly,   Slaman plans
              contributions to the proof-theoretic understanding of   second-order
              arithmetic.  In that context, one considers formal axiom   systems which
              postulate that the universe (of sets or of reals) is   closed under definable
              operations.  For example, one considers the   collection of axioms that states
              that the reals are closed under   relative computation of arithmetic
              definability.  Slaman plans   systematically to study the combinatorial
              set-theoretic properties of the   continuum in this context.  He is
              particularly interested in   conservation questions: When do closure properties
              of the continuum   have nontrivial consequences for first-order number theory? 
                   The algebraic structure of definability is well represented by the  Turing
              degrees, a classification of sets of integers in which two sets   that can be
              computed from each other are considered equivalent.  Slaman   will study the
              Turing degrees in several settings, to address fundamental   questions about
              their critical features.  The necessity of noneffective   means, such as the
              existence of sets which are not computable, can also be   demonstrated
              proof-theoretically; this motivates Slaman's program for the   systematic
              investigation of the combinatorial set-theoretic properties of   the continuum
              (i.e., of an infinite set of size equal to that of all real   numbers).  He is
              particularl y interested in questions which relate the set   theory of the
              continuum to other important sets.  When do certain properties   of the
              continuum have bearing on elementary properties of the integers?  ***
