Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theory of Finite Dimensional Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9500453

Award Number: 9500453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Birge Huisgen-Zimmermann birge@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports work on the representation theory of finite dimensional
              algebras.  The principal investigator intends to investigate certain classes of
              representations from a structure-theoretic point of view.  This will require a
              closer understanding of the geometry of families of uniserial modules and
              modules with uniserial building blocks.  The principal investigator will also
              explore contravariant finiteness of subcategories of categories of finitely
              generated modules and, in particular, will develop concrete criteria for the
              presence of this finiteness property. She will also examine contravariantly
              finite closures of a given modules category obtained by passing through a
              sequence of one-point extensions of the underlying algebra.     This research
              is in the general area of ring theory.  A ring is an algebraic object having
              both an addition and a multiplication defined on it.  Although the additive
              operation satisfies the commutative law, the multiplicative operation is not
              required to do so.  An example of a ring for which multiplication in not
              commutative is the collection of nxn matrices over the integers.  The study of
              noncommutative rings has become an important part of algebra because of its
              increasing significance to other branches of mathematics and physics.
