Title       : Mathematical Sciences: New Results in Sampling and Wavelet Applications in
               Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9500909

Award Number: 9500909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47919              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Walnut dwalnut@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500909  Walnut    The project consists of two parts.  First,  the investigator 
              proposes to apply   new results in sampling theory to do high-resolution signal
               processing by   combining several low-resolution versions of a given signal.
              It  was   observed by Berenstein and others that a mathematical model of  this 
               problem (called multisensor deconvolution) is uniquely solvable  but ill- 
              posed, and difficult to solve numerically. The investigator has  found  
              Shannon-type sampling formulas on unions of regular lattices with   
              incommensurate densities, which provide simple solutions to the   multichannel
              deconvolution problem in special cases.   The  following   applications are
              envisioned: 1) Sharpening measurements taken by  CT   scanners by combining
              measurements from several low-resolution   detectors.  This could ultimately
              lead to inexpensive measuring  devices with   resolution comparable to
              expensive high-resolution machines. 2) A  recently   proposed scheme to
              increase resolution in an industrial  tomography   problem involves sampling on
              unions of regular grids of  incommensurate   size.  The investigator's sampling
              results could lead to a  complete solution   to this problem. 3) New techniques
              are required to do  "superresolution" in    electronic imaging since the
              theoretical limit of pixel  resolution is rapidly   being reached. 
              Deconvolution at high-resolution of several  low-resolution   images is a
              natural approach to this problem.  Second, the  investigator and   others have
              successfully shown that wavelets are a natural tool  for   recovering edge
              features of an image from local Radon transform  data.  The   investigator
              proposes to develop these local algorithms with the  following   goals
              envisioned: 1) Find ways to recover locally density as well  as edge   features
              of an image, and develop an algorithm competitive with  existing   local
              tomography algorithms and 2) Identify the wavefront set of  an image   using
              wavelets, and ultimately apply the techniques to the   at tenuated Radon  
              transform.    The first part of the project is concerned with increasing the 
              resolution of   remote sensing devices such as electronic cameras.  Suppose,
              for  example,   that a CCD camera has a resolution of 1 millimeter, that is, it
               can   distinguish features of a scene that are at least 1 mm on a side.  
              Features   smaller than that are blurred into their surroundings. Berenstein 
              and others   observed that some classical mathematics led to a possible way to 
              increase   resolution without designing an expensive high-resolution device.  
              If one   took several images of the scene with cameras identical to the  first
              but   which had slightly poorer resolutions than the first (this could  also be
                achieved by repositioning the same camera), then in theory one  could  
              recover features of the original scene to arbitrary resolution.   In practice, 
               arbitrary resolution is not possible, but it seems that real  increases in  
              resolution can be achieved.  The investigator has formulated an  approach to  
              this problem from the point of view of sampling theory.  Using  this  
              approach, the investigator has been able to produce numerically  stable  
              twenty-fold increases in resolution in a one-dimensional model  problem.   More
              work is required, but the following applications are  envisioned: 1)  
              Producing high-resolution measurements from CT scanners by  combining   the
              measurements from several low-resolution scanners and 2)  Increasing   the
              resolution in a specific industrial tomography problem by a  direct  
              application of the investigator's new sampling results.  The  second part of  
              the project is concerned with "local" CT scans.  In existing CT  scanners, an  
              entire slice of a patient's body must be exposed to radiation  even if the  
              doctor is interested in looking at only a small region. The  investigator  
              proposes to use a new and powerful signal processing technique  called  
              wavelets to find efficient algorithms for obtaining an image of a  small area  
              of a patient's  body while only exposing the area of interest to  radiation. It
              is   hoped that these techniques will be competitive with existing  so-called
              local   tomography algorithms.
