Title       : Edge Detection and Surface Recognition, U.S.-Turkey Collaborative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9500652

Award Number: 9500652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil K. Jain sdass@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports collaboration by Dr. Anil K. Jain,
              Department of Computer Science, Michigan state University, East Lansing, and
              Dr. Muhittin Gokmen, Department of Computer Science, Istanbul Technical
              University, Istanbul, Turkey.   The research deals with the area of image
              representation, edge detection, and surface reconstruction using regularization
              theory.  Regularization is a general framework to solve ill-posed early vision
              problems.  The Lambda-Tau (L-T) representation of images or surfaces obtained
              by means of regularization provides additional advantages over the scale-space
              representation which is widely used to solve vision problems.  The L-T
              representation, derived from a hybrid energy functional, samples an image in
              both scale-space and Sobolev space of continuous functions.  Edges and surfaces
              represented in this space have different levels of smoothness and continuity,
              controlled by parameters L and T, respectively.  The main focus of the research
               will be on the following topics: the analysis of the L-T representation, and
              its use in solving early vision problems; the development of a generalized 
              edge detector which can encompass most of the existing edge operators under a
              unified framework; and reconstruction of surfaces represented in the L-T space.
               Scope:   This project brings together two teams with excellent capabilities in
              research in the field, and with complementary expertise to collaborate in an
              important area.  Dr. Jain's Pattern Recognition and Image Processing (PRIP)
              Laboratory at MSU has  published extensively on topics dealing with range data,
              surface reconstruction, and 3-D object recognition.  Dr. Gokmen's research
              group has substantial expertise in regularization theory, edge detection,
              surface reconstruction and object recognition.  The collaboration is expected
              to be beneficial to the two groups.  This project meets the objectives of the
              Division of International Programs.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
