Title       : Mathematical Sciences: High Order Methods for Time Dependent Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9500814

Award Number: 9500814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169755             (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Gottlieb dig@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 "High Order Methods for Time Dependent Equations"  The project entails
              research in long term integrations of genuinely time dependent partial
              differential equations. It involves the development and application of high
              order finite differences and finite element schemes as well as Spectral
              methods. The methods to be developed and applied are suitable for problems in
              several space dimensions with complicated geometries. A major consideration in
              developing and assessing high order methods for long term integrations is their
              scalability. Based on the experience gained already in parallelizing ENO codes,
              a further effort to parallelize spectral and finite element based ENO codes is
              proposed. The research has two components, theory and applications, those
              components are linked together.  The theory is motivated by the type of
              applications under investigation and the applications use the theoretical
              developments.  It has been shown that in order to numerically simulate
              complicated flows that change in time, high order methods are necessary.
              However those methods, because of their high accuracy, are less robust. The
              proposed research deals with the issue of the successful implementations of
              high order methods.  This involved theoretical issues (as solving the 100 years
              old Gibbs Phenomenon) as well as more applied issues. On the applied side, the
              problem of mixing enhancement by interactions of Shock waves and hydrogen jets
              will be studied. This entails the simulation of an air shock passing through an
              hydrogen jet in high Mach numbers. High order methods are mandatory here since
              the process of interest is the mixing and combustion inside the jets. The
              current codes, Spectral and ENO are to be modified to handle more general
              cases.  Parallel versions of ENO and spectral methods are being applied now and
              will be further modified.
