Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Analysis of Kinetic Quantum Transport Models
               for Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9500852

Award Number: 9500852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim Douglas douglas@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anton Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9500852 Arnold  The object of the proposed research is the  mathematical and
              numerical analysis of quantum kinetic equations  in solid state physics. We
              will first investigate relaxation-time  Wigner-Poisson models (quantum
              Boltzmann equation). The existence  and uniqueness analysis will be based on
              the reformulation of  this nonlinear evolution equation in terms of the density
              matrix  operator. The analysis of the large time behavior and the steady 
              states in thermodynamic equilibrium will be based on compactness  methods and a
              quantum entropy functional. Absorbing boundary  conditions for the 1D Wigner
              equation will be extended to 2D  situations, the coupled Wigner-Poisson and
              relaxation-time  models. The well- posedness analysis will be based on
              considering  the Wigner equation as a limit of finite dimensional hyperbolic 
              systems.   The models of quantum mechanical transport equations  have become
              the most important basis for accurate simulations of  novel, ultra-integrated
              semiconductor devices (quantum devices,  electron wave guides). A sound
              mathematical understanding of the  evolution equation will form the basis for
              numerical  implementations. The numerical simulation of hypersonic gas flows 
              around rigid objects (e.g., space shuttles in the high altitude  phase of their
              re-entry into the atmosphere) is usually  accomplished by numerically coupling
              two different transport  models . A refined coupling strategy is proposed here,
              which will  be equally relevant for gas dynamics applications, and for 
              efficient simulations of ultra-integrated semiconductor devices.  We will
              numerically compare it to existing coupling strategies  and investigate its
              stability.
