Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematial Modeling and Dynamics of Premixed Flames as
               Hydrodynamic Discontinuities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9500810

Award Number: 9500810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Bechtold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9188,EGCH,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9400810  Bechtold    The investigator proposes to study several fundamental
              aspects of premixed   flame propagation.  Of primary concern will be flames
              whose characteristic   dimension is much larger than their thermal thickness so
              that the flame can   be viewed as a hydrodynamic discontinuity.  Such flames
              have taken on   new significance in recent years due to their role in modeling
              turbulent   combustion.  In one phase of the project, hydrodynamic flame models
              will   be used to study the dynamics and extinction characteristics of premixed
                flames in unsteady environments. The investigator also proposes to extend  
              existing flame models that have employed one-step-chemistry   approximations by
              considering a two-step mechanism that better captures   the
              branching-recombination nature of flames.  The methods that will be   used
              include asymptotic and perturbation techniques together with   numerical
              computations. This work will provide a better understanding of   flame-flow
              interactions which are an important feature of turbulent   combustion.   
              Nearly all combustion devices of practical importance operate in a turbulent  
              combustion regime.  This includes spark-ignition engines, incinerators,  
              rockets, forest fires, etc.  The complexities inherent in each of these systems
                have prevented a deep understanding of turbulent combustion.  However, a  
              partial understanding of this topic can be achieved by first comprehending  
              various fundamental aspects that are common in many of these systems.    For
              example, a turbulent flow field is characterized by random spatial and  
              temporal variations, and a flame situated in such a flow will get stretched  
              and distorted.  In addition, the heat released by the combustion process will  
              affect the flow field.  In this work the investigator proposes to study these  
              interactions theoretically. There are two main themes: (i) to examine flame  
              response in unsteady (time-dependent) flows; and (ii) to extend existing  
              flame models to include additional eff ects due to chemical reaction.  This  
              work will provide a better understanding of flame-flow interactions which   are
              an important feature of turbulent combustion.
