Title       : Multilayer Josephson Junction Digital Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9500279

Award Number: 9500279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319845             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ketterson j-ketterson@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne Lomatch  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9102,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9500279  Lomatch  The objectives of this grant are to study conventional and
              novel superconducting digital flux quantum devices employing the relatively
              young technology of multilayer Josephson junctions with n
              superconductor-insulator (SI) layers.  The work involves the extensive
              numerical modeling of multilayer junction and device behavior.  This program
              will draw from the results of previous computational and experimental studies,
              which took place during the period covered by an NSF Research Planning Grant.  
               A primary focus of the proposed research will be the numerical simulation of
              flux quantum circuitry in which multilayer junctions both serve as nonlinear
              kinetic inductors (passive devices) to increase circuit integration density,
              and as single trilayer junction replacements (active devices) to allow for new
              logic/voltage thresholds, novel device designs, device fault tolerance, and
              resistance to thermal noise.  The goal will be to optimize circuit designs to
              maximize parameter variation tolerances, and to include realistic
              considerations such as crosstalk and parasitic capacitance's and inductances so
              that one may produce lithographic masks suitable for the fabrication of test
              prototypes.    Conventional digital devices, such as select logic and memory
              circuitry, will be considered for optimum geometry and performance.  the unique
              operational features offered by flux quantum circuitry due to the natural
              integration of local memory and processing are further exploited by multilayer
              junction technology, so several novel devices will be analyzed, particularly in
              the area of neural-based computing and semiconductor interfacing.    If
              superconducting digital circuitry is to achieve the integration density that
              its low power dissipation allows, and if it is to compete with room temperature
              semiconducting digital circuitry in more than a few small niche applications,
              then work such as the proposed here must be pursued.  ***
