Title       : Theoretical Foundations of Mechanical Tolerancing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1997     
File        : a9500140

Award Number: 9500140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soren Bisgaard bisgaard@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Spencer Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500140  Bisgaard  This grant provides funding to develop a theoretical
              foundation for the tolerancing of mechanical and electro-mechanical products. 
              This foundation will be based on modern statistical theory and decision theory.
               It will provide a framework that unifies technical as well as economic aspects
              of the problem.  Specifically the approach will take into account the inherent
              variability in maunfactured products coming from raw materials, maufacturing
              processes and measurement errors.  In addition it will incorporate information
              about the cost of functional losses coming from deviating from target
              specifications, manufacturing, and inspection.  It will integrate several
              previous attempts to provide a foundation, including that of the Japanese
              engineer Dr. Taguchi.  The research plan is to build up a unified theory
              starting with simple problems and increase the complexity as the ideas are
              tested on practical applications in collaboration with industry.   If 
              successful, this research will lead to a more concise language for engineering
              communication of tolerance information that will avoid current ambiguities; the
              economic design, manufacturing, and us of products that perform the desired
              function in a safe, reliable, and predictable manner depend on clear and
              unambiguous tolerance information.  Moreover, the successful completion of this
              research will provide engineers with scientific and mathematical tools not
              currently available for the design and evaluation of the performance of
              tolerances.  The current trend toward computerization of engineering
              information and in particular the use of computer aided design (CAD) and
              computer aided manufacturing (CAM) tools necessitate a theoretical and
              mathematical foundation.  If this research is successful many problems with
              current CAD/CAM tools will be alleviated.
