Title       : The Geometry of Shock Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9500694

Award Number: 9500694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Temple temple@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9500694 Temple  This proposal addresses the problem of  constructing,
              analyzing and numerically computing shock-wave  solutions of systems of
              nonlinear, hyperbolic conservation laws,  with emphasis on the compressible
              Euler equations of gas  dynamics. Shock-waves are modeled by discontinuous
              solutions in  inviscid equations, and shock-waves are what introduce 
              time-irreversibility, decay, loss of information, dissipation and  increase of
              entropy into the dynamics of solutions. The author's  recent construction of a
              shock wave solution of the Einstein  equations takes advantage of the fact that
              the gravitational  metric is continuous across a shock, even though the fluid 
              variables are discontinuous. This allows for solutions that are  weaker than
              shock wave, and the proposal explores the organizing  effect that the
              gravitational metric has on the geometry of shock  wave propagation. In the
              nonlinear theory of sound waves, the  authors address the open problem of
              explaining the stability of  periodic solutions. Their idea is to treat Lie
              bracket errors in  wave interactions as virtual waves, and thereby they can
              identify  and study a nonlinear cancellation mechanism that explains why  the
              dissipation due to increasing entropy defeats the  amplification of waves due
              to nonlinear interaction in the long  time.  The proposal involves the analysis
              and interpretation of  the author's recent construction of a new shock wave
              solution of  the Einstein equations of general relativity. This exact solution 
              resolves a problem that was first posed in a famous 1939 paper by  J. Robert
              Oppenheimer and his student H. Snyder. The new shock  wave solution of the
              Einstein equations of general relativity  provides a model in which the
              universe begins with a shock wave  explosion instead of the well established
              ``Big Bang'' scenario  (in which the entire universe burst from a single
              point). The  proposal explores the possible application of this construction 
              to modeling the dynamics of stars.
