Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modeling of Pattern Formation by Cellular Tractions on in
               vitro Extracellular Matrix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9500766

Award Number: 9500766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Murray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon R. Lubkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Murray       Traction forces are a crucial mechanism of pattern formation  in
              morphogenesis.  Cells of many types, when seeded on Matrigel,  form aggregates
              due solely to traction forces.  The traction  mechanically deforms the gel,
              creating fiber tracks between  aggregates.  The fiber tracks induce cells to
              elongate and migrate  along them by contact guidance.  The pattern formation
              occurs  sufficiently quickly that there are no complications of cell 
              proliferation or secretion or degradation of the matrix, affording  a unique
              opportunity to study pattern formation by traction forces  in isolation.  The
              investigator and his colleague develop and  analyze a mathematical model of the
              cellular tractions and the  resultant mechanical response of the Matrigel,
              incorporating a  description of the essential material and behavioral
              anisotropy  which develops in response to traction.  Analysis consists of 
              linear bifurcation analysis, nonlinear analysis where appropriate,  and a
              strong component of numerical analysis.  The latter entails  development of
              algorithms to simulate the nonlinear conservation  and evolution equations in
              two spatial dimensions.  The study aims  at a deeper understanding of
              biological traction and the mechanics  of extracellular matrix, and ultimately
              to a greater understanding  of morphogenesis and remodeling in general.      
              The investigators develop and analyze a mathematical model of  a particular
              case of cellular pattern formation with the aim of a  better, more fundamental
              understanding of (1) the mechanical  interaction by traction forces between
              cells and their growth  medium (natural or artificial), (2) the subtle
              anisotropic  mechanics of the extracellular matrix that forms a large part of 
              the human body, (3) later restructuring such as wound healing and  tumor
              growth, (4) human embryonic development, and (5) biological  pattern formation
              in general.  The technique of mathematical  modeling allows a logical
              construction of biological theories to  test, and a method o f testing those
              theories with "mathematical  experiments." Furthermore, the analysis of the
              mathematical model  leads to predictions which may then be confirmed or refuted
              by  appropriate laboratory experiments.  It is by a close communication 
              between experiment and theory that understanding is gained.  The  project
              addresses fundamental biological questions using  mathematical and
              computational techniques, in close collaboration  with experimentalists.
