Title       : RUI: Genetic and Molecular Characterization of a Novel Transcription Unit in
               Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1994   
File        : a9500398

Award Number: 9500398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leticia M. Marquez-Magana marquez@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1227,1228,9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9500398  Marquez  The primary objectives of this starter grant are to 1)
              identify, and characterize the pattern of expression from the promoter sequence
              that initiates transcription of the sigD operon, and 2) obtain the genetic
              sequence that forms the 3' end of this transcription unit.  The sigmaD factor
              of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis is encoded by the sigD structural gene, and
              is required for the transcription of flagellin, motility, and chemotaxis genes.
               Interestingly, sigD is the last complete open reading from in a very large
              operon (>26 kb), containing genes which encode structural proteins that form
              the hook-basal body complex, the multi-subunit structure that tethers the
              flagellum to the bacterial cell, as well as regulatory proteins required for
              chemotaxis.  Transcription of this operon is initiated, at least in part, by a
              promoter element about 24 kilobases upstream of the structural gene for sigmaD.
               This promoter element has been cloned as part of a 5.7 kb insert in the
              plasmid pAZ210 and is known to reside within a 3 kb restriction fragment.  The
              sequence of this fragment is being obtained in order to identify candidate
              promoter elements based on their homology to known promoter consensus sequences
              in B. subtilis.  The information obtained will allow for the synthesis of the
              appropriate primer extension probes.  These probes will be used in a primer
              extension reaction to determine which of the candidate promoter sequences is
              utilized in vivo to initiate transcription of the sigD operon.  Primer
              extension analysis will also be used to generate an accurate representation of
              how expression from this promoter element is regulated throughout development. 
              The pattern of expression obtained may provide clues as to the molecular
              mechanisms involved in regulating transcription of the sigD operon.  In
              parallel studies the 3' end of the sigD transcription unit is being obtained
              and characterized.  As indicated above, sigD is the last complete open reading
              frame in the region of DNA that h as been cloned and sequenced.  There are no
              sequences within this region which are characteristic of transcriptional
              terminators, and a partial open reading frame has been identified immediately
              downstream of the translational stop for sigD, suggesting that this
              transcription unit is greater than 26 kb in length.  In order to obtain the 3'
              end of this transcription unit, a B. subtilis genomic library will be probed
              with a restriction fragment from the 3' end of the sigD gene.  The resultant
              clone(s) will be sequenced in order to identify potential transcription
              terminators and any additional open reading frames.  Utilizing this information
              an S1 probe will be prepared to map the 3' end of the sigD operon by S1
              analysis and in this way verify that the 3' end of sigD transcription unit has
              been obtained.  %%%  The information generated by this study will provide basic
              information as to the genetic organization and regulation of a very large and
              important group of bacterial genes.  ***
