Title       : Bubbles, Ions, and Vortices in Cryogenic Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1998   
File        : a9500653

Award Number: 9500653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Williams gaw@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9500653  Williams  This  project  is devoted to the study of cryogenic  fluids. 
              The  major  project  is  interdisciplinary  and  involves  aspects  of 
              physics,  chemistry and optical science. The research deals  with  the new
              phenomena of sonoluminescence; particularly single bubble  sonoluminescence. A
              vapor bubble, trapped at the center of  fluid  contained  in an acoustic
              resonator, radiates bright  flashes  of  light  that  are  easily seen by the
              naked eye. In  the  process,  energy  densities  can  increase by a factor  of 
              1012,  and  50-  picosecond light pulses are synchronized with the acoustic 
              cycle  to a few parts in 1011. This project extends the sonoluminescence 
              experiments  to  low temperatures by employing  cryogenic  fluids  (nitrogen, 
              argon,  neon, and helium). Initial  experiments  with  nitrogen have revealed a
              spectacular increase in luminosity  over  prior   room  temperature  work 
              involving  aqueous  media.   The  mechanism of the sonoluminescence in not
              known, and this  project  will obtain information that may allow a mechanism
              and theory  of  the sonoluminescence to be developed. Additional subprojects
              deal  with helium films adsorbed in porous materials, sound propagation  in 
              these  fluids, and a theoretical study of the nature  of  the  superfluid
              transition in helium.  %%%  This  project  is devoted to the study of cryogenic
               fluids.  The  major  project  is  interdisciplinary  and  involves  aspects 
              of  physics,  chemistry and optical science. The research deals  with  the new
              phenomena of sonoluminescence; particularly single bubble  sonoluminescence. A
              vapor bubble, trapped at the center of  fluid  contained  in an acoustic
              resonator, radiates bright  flashes  of  light that are easily seen by the
              naked eye. This project extends  the sonoluminescence experiments to low
              temperatures by employing  cryogenic  fluids  (nitrogen, argon, neon, and 
              helium).  Initial  experiments with nitrogen have revealed a spectacular
              increase in  luminosity  over  prior room  temperature work  involving  aqueous
               media.  The  mechanism of the sonoluminescence in not known,  and  this 
              project will obtain information that may allow a  mechanism  and  theory  of
              the sonoluminescence to be developed.  Additional  subprojects deal with helium
              films adsorbed in porous  materials,  sound propagation in these fluids, and a
              theoretical study of the  nature of the superfluid transition in helium.  ***
