Title       : Implicitly Modeled Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1995  
File        : a9500589

Award Number: 9500589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Campbell slc@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500589  Campbell    A differential algebraic equation (DAE) is an implicit
              ordinary  differential equation.  DAEs arise, for example, in a variety of 
              control problems in flight control, robotics, chemical process  control, and
              contact or constrained problems in mechanics.  In  addition, differential
              algebraic equations occur in the solution  of partial differential equations by
              the method of lines and in  many circuit models.  DAEs are sometimes also
              called singular or  descriptor systems.      The last decade has seen
              considerable progress both in the  analytical understanding of DAEs and in the
              development of  numerical methods for DAEs.  Most of this work has been in 
              numerical analysis and has frequently involved complex nonlinear  systems. 
              Independently there has been considerable advancement  in the development of
              theoretical results and methods for the  control of nonlinear systems.  With
              the exception of classical  work based on time invariant linearizations most of
              this work in  nonlinear control has dealt with comparatively smaller nonlinear 
              systems.  Many of this control development has been independent  of the work on
              DAEs.  As noted, many computer generated models  are most naturally modeled in
              the form of DAEs.  The move to the  consideration of increasingly complex
              systems not only leads to  DAE models but systems for which the more
              traditional nonlinear  control methodologies are sometimes difficult to
              implement.           This project will study implicity modeled control systems.
                The goal will not only be to extend existing techniques to the  implicit
              setting but also to use the DAE technology from other  areas such as numerical
              analysis to develop new and more  efficient algorithms for computing control
              theoretic information  from complex systems.    ***
