Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Sweep Differential Equations to Automated
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9500808

Award Number: 9500808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis Blackmore deblac@m.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming C. Leu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500808  Blackmore        The objectives of the project are: 1) to further
              develop the  sweep   differential equation (SDE) approach so as to enhance its 
              applicability to the   analysis and representation of swept volumes; and 2) to
              translate  the   improvements of the SDE method into algorithms and software
              tools  for   solving motion verification and planning problems in automated  
              manufacturing. In the SDE method, the surface of the region  traversed by an  
              object moving through space (the swept volume of the object) is   characterized
              in terms of a differential equation (the SDE). A  major goal of   the project
              is to obtain a generalization of the SDE -  incorporating the   geometry of the
              object - that has the property that its  trajectories foliate   most of the
              boundary of the swept volume. This leads to a  reduction of one   dimension in
              the set that generates the swept volume, and it  promises to   yield an order
              of magnitude decrease in the computational  complexity of   algorithms based on
              this new method. Algorithms based on this new  method   shall be developed, and
              the unique features of the approach shall  be   exploited to obtain 
              approximate numerical and graphical  representations of   swept volumes. In
              particular, the foliation of the boundary  surface shall be   incorporated into
              new interpolation procedures, and a natural  functional   criterion for
              trimming (or excluding) points not belonging to the  swept   volume boundary
              shall be employed. The algorithms shall be used  to   develop computer programs
              for automatic verification and  generation of   numerically  controlled (NC)
              machining programs and robot motion   planning problems.    The project
              represents an interdisciplinary collaboration between  an applied  
              mathematician and a mechanical engineer aimed at developing new  theory   that
              is to be implemented for practical manufacturing related  problems,   thereby
              advancing the state-of-the-art in advanced manufacturing.  A   primary
              objective is to develop new tech niques that enable one to    characterize
              swept volumes essentially by a curve on the boundary  surface   of an object in
              its initial position - with the swept volume  being generated   by solutions of
              a differential equation. This innovation is to be  used to   develop accurate
              computer-aided methods for obtaining numerical  and   graphical representations
              of configurations swept out by objects  moving   through space. The algorithms
              based upon this theoretical   framework have   the potential to reduce the
              computations of existing algorithms  by at least an   order of magnitude. As
              swept volume plays an important role in  such   diverse areas of automated
              manufacturing as NC machining, robot  motion   planning and computer-aided
              design, the applications of the  research in this   project should have a
              significant impact on modern manufacturing  theory   and practice.
