Title       : Collaborative Research: JGOFS: Bacterial Cycling of Dissolved and Particulate
               Carbon in the Oligotrophic and Eutrophic Production Regimes of the Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9500601

Award Number: 9500601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow duck@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9500601  Ducklow         This is a joint research project by Drs. F Azam H. 
              Ducklow to perform quantitative studies on the significance  of bacteria in
              mediating and regulating biogeochemical  fluxes of carbon and nitrogen in the
              Arabian Sea, as a  component of the USJGOFS Arabian Sea Process Study.  These 
              scientists will make core measurements used by bacteria to  respond to dramatic
              changes in primary production that  occurs regularly due to monsoonal reversals
              in the Arabian  Sea. The JGOFS core measurement s will include bacterial 
              abundance and biomass, bacteria production (by both 3H  thymidine and 3H
              leucine incorporation methods), DOC, POC  and PON.  The research is designed to
              address two key  questions concerning microbial heterotrophic processes 
              identified by US JGOFS: 1)  How do the community structures  which occur during
              the oligotrophic vs. eutrophic periods  differentially impact carbon storage
              and export fluxes? and  2)  Does the decomposition of sinking particles slow
              down in  the suboxic zone and result in enhanced vertical flux  through this
              layer?  The investigators hypothesize that  sequential occurrence of highly
              eutrophic and oligotrophic  productivity regimes creates a uniquely robust
              microbial  loop during the oligotrophic period at the expense of slow- 
              to-degrade DOM which accumulates during the eutrophic  period.  They predict
              that the strong dominance of the  microbial loop renders the oligotrophic
              period net-  heterotrophic and this has implications for spatial and  temporal
              patterns of carbon oxidation and exchange.  The  'stored' DOC may also support
              high bacterial carbon demand  (higher than would be supported by particle flux)
              below the  mixed layer following shoaling of the pycnocline.  A second 
              hypothesis they wish to test is that sinking particles in  the surface waters
              are rapidly solubilized by hydrolytic  exoenzymes of colonizing bacteria but
              the enzymatic  solubilization is greatly reduced in the suboxic layer 
              resulting in much slower depth dissipat ion of POC.
