Title       : Fuzzy Optimization for Order and Production Scheduling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1997     
File        : a9500037

Award Number: 9500037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Luh Luh@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lakshman S. Thakur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500037  Luh   This research addresses the problem of integrating scheduling
              decisions on order.s deliveries and job scheduling in a manufacturing
              enterprise.  The problem of scheduling order deliveries is focused on when
              materials and supplies are to be delivered at a manufacturing site to support
              the manufacturing function.  Job scheduling is focused on the problem of
              determining the sequence in which jobs are to be processed on machines and when
              to start and complete each job so as to meet some objective.  In most
              operations, these two forms of scheduling decision are independently made from
              one another even though decision in one area affects the other.  Because of
              this relationship, this research aims to develop decision procedures to
              integrate them.  The multiple objectives pursued in the research include: (1)
              development of optimization models and near-optimal solution methodologies for
              the integrated problem for job shops, flow shops, and hybrid shops in a
              deterministic setting by using Lagragian relaxation, (2) extension of the
              different shop models to handle uncertainty by using fuzzy set theory, and
              develop fuzzy optimization techniques within the Lagrangian relaxation
              framework, and (3) development of algorithms for the unconstrained optimization
              of nonsmooth functions with a large number of variables, which arise in one of
              the steps of the Lagrangian relaxation approach.   Given the traditional
              scheduling problems are known to be notoriously hard to solve, the integrated
              problem will pose additional challenges to solve.  However, given the critical
              nature of the problem, attempts to characterize the problem to provide some
              insight will be beneficial to the research and the practitioners community. 
              Industries stand to benefit economically if a successful solution to the
              problem is developed.
