Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Semigroup of Endomorphisms of Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9500291

Award Number: 9500291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Arveson arveson@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500291  Arveson       The research proposed here addresses problems related to
              the structure and classification of semigroups of automorphisms of operator
              algebras and their relationship to several areas of modern analysis, quantum
              physics, and probability theory. A principal component of the project is to
              establish a connection between certain semigroups and continuous tensor
              products of Hilbert spaces. more precisely, the classification of
              E_0-semigroups up to cocycle conjugacy was shown to be equivalent to the
              problem of classifying these continuous tensor product systems. In turn, the
              latter structures give rise to computable invariants of various types:
              numerical (an index invariant), topological (a non-commutative topological
              space, the spectral C*-algebra). Moreover, such continuous tensor products
              occur naturally in probability theory; for example, they can be associated with
              random distributions having stationary independent increments, and with other
              martingale-type processes as well. A secondary project is to continue the
              proposer's recent work on the role of operator algebras in the problem of
              computing the spectra of infinite dimensional self-adjoint operators.       The
              general area of mathematics of this project has its basis in the theory of
              algebras of operators on Hilbert space. Operators can be thought of as finite
              or infinite matrices of complex numbers. Special types of operators are often
              put together in an algebra, naturally called an operator algebra. These
              seemingly abstract objects have a surprising variety of applications. For
              example, they play a key role in knot theory, which in turn is currently being
              used to study the structure of DNA.  ***
