Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Topis in Interpolation and System Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9500912

Award Number: 9500912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Ball ball@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will explore some basic new directions in systems theory.  It has
              been known for some time that the standard problem of H-infinity control can be
              converted to a Nevanlinna- Pick interpolation problem.  Recent work has
              illuminated a far-reaching analogue of point evaluation and a whole theory for
              associated analogues of Nevanlinna-Pick  interpolation for time-varying
              systems. This investigation will pursue further elaboration of these ideas, in
              particular, the parametrization of a system in terms of zero and pole data for
              the time-variant case, and the connections of Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for
              time-variant systems with Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for time-invariant
              systems having  infinite -dimensional input-output and state spaces.  In
              addition, the PI will continue work on nonlinear systems and nonlinear
              H-infinity control. In particular, the construction of an inner-outer
              factorization for a nonlinear plant is a basic requirement in a number of
              important applications but is well-understood only in special situations. 
              Finally, work on various interpolation problems involving meromorphic matrix
              functions on closed Riemann surfaces will be carried out.  Zero-pole
              interpolation problems are closely related to classical Riemann-Hilbert
              problems and Wiener-Hopf factorization as well as to the classification of
              holomorphic vector bundles over the surface. In addition, such zero-pole
              interpolation ideas provide a new tool for completely understanding of work
              done in the 1970's on Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for functions analytic on a
              finitely connected planar domain. A basic tool is the realization theory for
              meromorphic bundle maps on an algebraic curve with determinantal representation
              as the transfer function of a 2-dimensional linear system.   A basic paradigm
              in control theory is what is now called H-infinity control.  This approach
              provides a way to formulate control objectives mathematically in a way which
              guarantees reliable results when the mathematical model of the physical system
              under  consideration is not a completely accurate representation of the true
              system. The discrepancies may be  caused by uncertainty in certain physical
              parameters, or  the effect of outside disturbances not taken  into account in
              the mathematical model.  One of the earliest solution procedures for the
              simplest H-  infinity control problems was through the classical mathematical
              theory of Nevanlinna-Pick  interpolation.  Spurred by the needs of the emerging
              H-infinity theory, various researchers improved,  extended and made this
              classical theory computationally practical.  The PI has been instrumental in 
              extending this approach to time-variant systems and nonlinear systems (where
              the basic physical law s  no longer satisfy a superposition principle). 
              Although it has now known how to unify time-variant  theory conceptually with
              the time-invariant case, further work is needed to obtain a better 
              understanding of decomposability and robust stability properties for eventually
              time-invariant linear  systems and for nonlinear systems.  Applications to
              which this research is expected to contribute  include airplane flight control,
              improvements in automobile suspension systems and compact disk  players, and
              chemical process control, to mention just a few.   Research on interpolation
              problems for  functions defined on topologically more complicated surfaces
              called Riemann surfaces will also be  carried out.  This work is expected be
              useful in applications to control systems involving transfer  functions having
              algebraic singularities.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
