Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Multiple Decision Theory and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9500062

Award Number: 9500062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Re:  DMS 95-00061, "Conference on Multiple Decision Theory and Related
              Topics"  PI:  James Berger    Abstract:   During June 8-12, 1995, a conference
              on Multiple Decision Theory and related topics will be held at Purdue
              University. The conference will consist of two parts, a traditional conference
              of invited and contributed talks in multiple decision theory, and an intensive
              workshop on the recent approach to  multiple model selection called "intrinsic
              Bayes factors." The traditional part of the conference will consist of 27
              invited talks by leaders in the field, including talks aimed at assessing the
              current status of research in the area and assessing future needs. The workshop
              phase will involve approximately 20 active  researchers in development of
              intrinsic Bayes factors, a very recent and promising methodology which is
              applicable to virtually any model selection problem, nested or nonnested,
              without requiring asymptotics. The workshop phase will adopt a non-traditional
              framework that encourages discussion of unsolved  problems, rather than solely
              emphasizing presentation of recent research.      Multiple decision theory is
              concerned with situations in which there are two or more populations, and it is
              desired to select the "better" populations, rank order the populations, or make
              other decisions involving the comparison of populations. This type of scenario
              is common to a huge variety of applied problems in virtually all areas of
              statistical application. The area has seen a great deal of activity in recent
              years, and a conference on the subject involving the leaders in the field is
              very timely. The workshop phase of the conference will bring together a smaller
              group of researchers to study optimal ways to select among multiple statistical
              models. Model selection is typically the most important phase of a statistical
              analysis, and the new methodology that is to be discussed is extremely
              promising in terms of its ability to automatically select the best models.     
              Level of Effort:   The  level of effort in the conference is being increased,
              by inclusion of the intensive workshop on intrinsic Bayes factors. The
              possibility of adding this workshop arose when it was realized that many of the
              active researchers on intrinsic Bayes factors would be at the Multiple Decision
              Theory conference; extending the conference for two days to incorporate this
              workshop thus seemed scientifically and financially wise.      Budget
              Explanation:   The request for $10,000 from NSF is not being changed.
              Approximately $5000 will, however, be used for the expenses of those attending
              the intensive workshop. (These individuals will, of course, also be
              participating in the earlier portion of the conference.) Additional expenses
              incurred by the increased level of effort will be met by Purdue University.
