Title       : Investigations of a Statistically Complete Sample of Galaxy Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9500515

Award Number: 9500515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan M. Simkin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200106             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Patrick Henry henry@galileo.ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 95-00515  PI: J. Patrick Henry    The study of rich clusters of galaxies
              provides much information of cosmological importance. They were the first
              places where dark matter was found. Their brightest member galaxies have been
              used as standard candles from the inception of modern investigations into the
              age and fate of the Universe. Despite their extreme importance, there has never
              been a catalog of clusters at high redshifts that could be used for objective
              statistical studies because most clusters are found from visual inspection of
              optical plates.    Clusters of galaxies are also very luminous X-ray emitters,
              hence they are found in X-ray surveys of the sky. Further, finding clusters by
              their X-ray emission properties greatly reduces biases inherent in selecting
              them in the visible band while simultaneously providing a catalog with
              quantifiable characteristics suitable for statistical analysis. The most
              sensitive X-ray survey of an appreciable region of the sky is that performed by
              the German satellite ROSAT around the North Ecliptic Pole (NEP). Work already
              performed under an existing NSF grant shows that the number of clusters at high
              redshifts in the X-ray data is as expected, and will in fact provide a sample
              of about the same size as that accumulated after decades of effort using
              optical techniques. This investigation will optically follow-up studies of the
              ROSAT NEP X-ray cluster sample with particular emphasis on the initial
              identifications of the clusters and later investigations of evolution of X-ray
              and optical properties, large scale structure, and the infrared
              magnitude-redshift diagram. The depth and completeness properties of the ROSAT
              sample will enable significant improvements to be made in these areas compared
              to previous studies.  ***
