Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Topology and Geometry of Intrinsically Bent DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9500660

Award Number: 9500660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              White       The investigator studies the structure of closed circular  DNA.  The
              theoretical approach employs displacement based Finite  Element Analysis (FEA),
              a well-established technique for obtaining  solutions to engineering problems
              in nonlinear solid mechanics.  FEA is used to describe closed DNAs containing
              multiple coplanar  bends that are in-phase; containing bends that do not lie in
              the  same plane; and containing bends are distributed both  symmetrically and
              asymmetrically.  It is predicted that the twist  distribution is uniform
              throughout the regions between the bends;  that the fraction of the linking
              number change (DLk) converted  into writhe increases with the number of bends;
              and that the  regional contribution to the writhe increases if the bends are 
              clustered in that region.  Methods are devised for solving the  problem of
              avoidance of passage of the DNA strand through itself  as DLk becomes greater
              than 12.  This includes a novel approach,  the use of special contact elements
              (gap elements).  These have the  property that when the gap distance reduces to
              some specified  value, nodal motion constraints are relaxed if the nodes 
              subsequently tend to separate.  Finally, methods are developed for  decomposing
              changes in DLk into changes in writhe and twist.  Biologically, closed circular
              DNA is one of the most important  structural forms of DNA.  This includes not
              only free DNA  molecules, such as the plasmids used in all genetic engineering 
              experiments, but chromatin as well, which is now known to be  divided into
              domains of supercoiling.  Bent regions in DNA appear  to be significant in
              regulating the initiating of transcription.  This project provides the physical
              basis for understanding the  combined effects of these two structures.      
              DNA is not only a repository for genetic information but also  is involved in
              many aspects of the expression of this information.  For example, it is often
              necessary to bring together portions of  the DNA molecule that lie at
              considerable  distances from each  other along the DNA contour.  This
              juxtaposition of distant genetic  elements makes possible the expression of
              biological information  that is not otherwise possible.  This process is
              accomplished by  forming a loop, in which the two elements that are to be
              brought  together interact at the site of loop closure.  The bringing  together
              of these distant genes depends in a sensitive way upon  the length of the DNA
              piece that separates them and upon the  helical periodicity.  This project
              shows how the presence of  internal bends in DNA within the loop fundamentally
              changes how  distant segments are brought together.  The distribution of these 
              internal bends can thus have profound biological consequences.
