Title       : Subdivision Methods for Computer-Aided Design and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9500572

Award Number: 9500572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe Warren jwarren@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Representing curved shape is a fundamental problem in  geometric modeling and
              design.  A variety of approaches  currently exist for  modeling curved shape,
              by far the most  popular of which is a boundary  representation (B-rep) whose 
              surfaces are trimmed NURBS (non-uniform rational  B-splines).  Unfortunately,
              building a modeler based on trimmed NURBS is  exceedingly difficult for at
              least two reasons.  First,  trimming two NURBS  patches to agree along a common
              edge  usually involves complex surface/surface  intersection  algorithms and
              substantial approximation.  Second, even in  the  absence of sharp edges,
              patching is often required since  a single NURBS patch  is capable of modeling
              only surfaces  topologically equivalent to planes,  cylinders, and tori. 
              Modeling surfaces of other topological types (even those  as  simple as a
              sphere) require the surface be decomposed into  a quiltwork of  individual
              NURBS patches.  Complicated  continually conditions must then be  imposed to
              guarantee  that adjacent patches join smoothly.    Subdivision  provides a
              promising alternative to NURBS.  Using subdivision, a polyhedron is  mapped to
              a sequence of  denser polyhedra whose limit is a curved object.  Each  new 
              polyhedron is derived from the previous polyhedron by  splitting each of  its
              faces into four new faces and  positioning its new vertices using a fixed 
              averaging mask.  Different masks yield surface features such as corners, 
              curved  edges, or smooth faces in the limit object.  The  method is simple,
              requiring  only polyhedral modeling.  The  method is general, producing objects
              with smooth  faces and  sharp curved edges without trimming or patching.
              Finally,  subdivision provides a hierarchical representation that  allows the
              design of  efficient multi-resolution processing  algorithms.    This research
              addresses a  combination of theoretical and  applied problems whose solution is
              essential if  subdivision  is to be of use as a practical method for modeling
              curved  shape.  Specifically it develops:          Curvature continuous
              subdivision methods;    Subdivision methods for local refinement and 
              introduction of shapes and  edges;  Functional subdivision methods over
              irregular  triangulations  (necessary for FEA)  and algorithms for: Conversion
              to and from other  representations such as  NURBS,          Editing and display
              of subdividion  surfaces,    Finite element analysis over subdivision surfaces,
                Computing the intersection, union, or difference of  subdivision surfaces.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
