Title       : Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Unsteady-State Material-Laser
               Interactions with Application to Laser Cutting Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9500181

Award Number: 9500181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Lawrence Yao yly1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500181  Yao   This project is aimed at advancing knowledge of material-laser
              interactions under unsteady state conditions.  The laser cutting process has
              been chosen for investigation because the effects of unsteady state conditions
              on material-laser interactions are more pronounced in the laser cutting process
              than other similar processes like laser welding.  Specific objectives are (1)
              advance knowledge of geometric effects on material-laser interactions, (2)
              understand the mechanism of using variable process parameters to offset the
              detrimental effects of unsteady-state material-laser interactions, (3) explore
              the nature of oscillatory phenomena in general and striation formation in
              particular in the laser cutting process, (4) expand the technology base
              necessary for improving process reproducibility, eliminating the needs for
              trial-and-error, and optimizing the process under unsteady state conditions. 
              The project will develop a transient three-dimensional model embracing the
              coupled continuity, momentum and energy equations for the molten liquid layer,
              solid workpiece and gas jet.  The liquid/solid will be modeled as a single
              domain with an enthalpy-porosity formulation for the phase change.  A
              control-volume based finite-difference algorithm with power-law scheme for
              convective terms and pressure correction algorithm will be used to solve the
              equations.  Instability of the molten layer will be numerically studied by
              introducing perturbations.  The model can accurately predict the kerf geometry,
              energy transport and melt flow.  The model will be used to investigate various
              unsteady state phenomena as mentioned above, the effects of Computer Numerical
              Control (CNC) interpolations, and optimization strategies under unsteady state
              conditions.  Oxygen assist carbon dioxide laser cutting of mild steel will be
              the focus.  Experimental investigation under various unsteady state conditions
              will be undertaken, including boundary encroachment, cornering, contour cuts
              and variable process parameters.   Experimental techniques to be used include
              high speed filming to investigate cutting front mobility and striation
              formation; close focus pyrometer and thermocouples to investigate cutting front
              temperature and workpiece temperature distribution under unsteady state
              conditions.   Focused heat delivery capability of lasers makes it ideal for
              modifying materials in a very selected local zones.  Delivery of such high
              energy concentration also poses difficulties in continuously controlling the
              unsteady process.  Successful demonstration of controlled laser cutting as a
              result of the predictive model developed in this project will significantly
              impact the use of lasers in materials processing industries.
