Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research: Brain Organization in Primitive Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9500863

Award Number: 9500863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87766              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon H. Kaas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500863  Kaas      This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award  supports
              travel expenses, expendable research supplies and  services, related to the
              visits of  Drs. J. Kaas, the P.I.  and his co-P.I.s, all from Vanderbilt
              University,  Tennessee, to the lab of  Dr. C. E. Rocha Miranda, Univ.  Federal
              de Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  The purpose of the  research is to develop a model
              of how simple, primitive  mammalian brains are organized, in terms of
              functionally  significant areas, nuclei and modules that are  interconnected 
              within cooperative systems.  This model  can be compared to those based on
              complex, advanced  brains, such as those of higher primates,  to determine 
              changes associated with complexity and enhanced  performance. The model will be
              based on  data obtained  from experimental studies on North and South American 
              opossums.  The brains of these Metatherian mammals have  changed little in
              external appearance, judging from the  brain endocasts of early mammals, since
              the major  radiation of mammals some 65 mya, and they provide the  clear
              advantage of availability near both the U.S.A. and  Brazilian laboratories.
              Previous comparative studies  provide direct evidence that the basic brain
              organization  of opossums is less complex and more primitive than that  of 
              most extant mammals, and that further studies using a  powerful range of modern
              techniques could provide valuable  additional insights.    The research will
              involve studies of the visual, auditory  and somatosensory systems that involve
              the majority of  neurons in neocortex, and address critical issues of motor 
              system organization, where Metatherian mammals may be less  complex than
              Eutherian mammals.  Microelectrode recordings  will be used to identify
              systematic representations of  sensory surfaces in the brain and
              microstimulation methods  will reveal movement centers.  Brain subdivisions, 
              identified with microelectrodes, will be further examined  for histochemical,
              architectonic, and molecular  distinctions, intern al microorder and patterns
              of  connection with other systems.    The research plan takes advantage of the
              extensive  previous experience of researchers in the Brazilian  laboratory in
              studies of the brains of opossums, and their  unique experience in
              characterizing the response  properties of neurons in sensory systems of
              opossums.  The  researchers in the U.S.A. laboratory also have relevant 
              experience in brain studies in opossums, as well as an  extensive background in
              comparative studies of brain  organization.  Investigators in the two
              laboratories have  both overlapping and complementary experience with  research
              procedures and techniques, and a joint interest  in understanding brain
              organization in opossums.  A merger  of efforts will  allow for greater
              progress in the field.      ***
