Title       : Satellite Magnetic Fields Data Analysis: Magnetospheric/Ionospheric Currents and
               Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9500244

Award Number: 9500244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Erlandson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Zanetti  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas A. Potemra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a request for the continuation of NSF support for  analysis of
              magnetic field observations acquired by APL-developed  satellite experiments. 
              The proposed research will make substantial  contributions to NSF initiatives
              such as GEM, CEDAR, and Space  Weather.  Satellite magnetic field data from
              Freja and Viking,  HILAT, DMSP-F7, TRIAD, AMPTE/CCE, MAGSAT, and UARS will be
              used in  studies of large and small scale current systems and magnetic wave 
              phenomena associated with the magnetospheric boundaries and current  source
              regions.  The intent is also to disseminate data and  information by way of
              scientific journal publications,  presentations, and collaborative efforts with
              individual scientists  and agency programs.  The proposal includes the Freja
              data  processing and analysis effort.  The following areas will be 
              investigated:  (1) Multiple data sets will be used to characterize  the
              distribution and source regions of the large scale currents and  their
              variation with the phase of geomagnetic storms, including  theoretical
              investigation of the current disruption process.  (2)  Identify and analyze
              simultaneous observations of large scale  currents to thoroughly characterize
              the local time and altitude  structure of the current systems.  (3) Conduct
              pilot studies of  Poynting flux using the Freja electric and magnetic field
              data,  concentrating on small and intermediate scales.  (4) Investigate  the
              detailed correlation of magnetic fluctuations with field  aligned currents and
              particle precipitation regions to put the use  of AC Fluctuations on a firm
              scientific footing.  (5) Refine  empirical models of the auroral oval shape and
              size to allow a more  reliable extrapolation of the auroral position in local
              time.  This  will involve inter-comparison of real-time predicted auroral 
              dynamics with Geomagnetic Induced Currents to quantitatively test  the model
              and forecasting system.  (6) The usefulness of the Freja  data and its
              importance to other programs motivates the developme nt  of an efficient means
              of rapidly disseminating these data to the  scientific community.  (7) Continue
              studies of wave phenomena.   Freja data cover a previously unexplored frequency
              range, and the  availability of simultaneous electric field and high time 
              resolution 3-D particle measurements assures that study of these  phenomena
              will yield important results concerning the dynamics of  the Birkeland current
              flow regions.  Also pursued, will be the  fluctuations inherent to the
              magnetopause current layer paying  particular attention to the correlation of
              these fluctuations with  theoretical predictions of current layer turbulence.
