Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Linear Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9500924

Award Number: 9500924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leiba Rodman lxrodm@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugo J. Woerdeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9218,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  PROPOSAL NO.: DMS - 9500924    PROPOSAL TITLE: Problems in Linear Analysis  
               PI/PD: Leiba Rodman    CO-PI/PD: Hugo J. Woerdeman      ABSTRACT    The
              principal investigators plan to study a variety of interconnected   problems in
              a highly active area of research in Mathematical Sciences that   involves
              operator theory, matrix analysis,  and their applications in   science and
              technology, using also closely related areas of pure and applied   mathematics:
              function theory, Fourier analysis. In addition to continuing   work on other
              topics,  specific problems are outlined in the following   subjects which are
              the main focus of the research: 1.   Interpolation problems for matrix and
              operator valued functions; 2.   Completions of finite and infinite matrices and
              operators; 3. Riccati   equations; 4. Krein space operators; 5.Applications.
              The principal   investigators strive to develop new results that can be proved
              in an   abstract mathematical context (e. g., in terms of *-algebras), and that
              at   the same time yield new and useful information in various more specific  
              settings.    The principal investigators plan to relate the newly obtained
              abstract   results to the original areas of application. Applications that are 
               emphasized in the proposal include Advanced Manufacturing (engineering  
              control systems) and High Performance Computing and Communications  
              (tomography), which have been identified as two of the strategic areas with  
              impact on national need.  Other areas of relevant application are:  
              engineering control systems, optics of polarized light, kinetic energy  
              minimization in quantum chemistry, diffraction of waves, signal processing,  
              and pattern recognition.  Interactions with many researchers in different  
              fields (mathematics, computer science, engineering),  various countries  
              besides the U. S. (Canada, The Netherlands, Italy, Israel, Norway, France,  
              United Kingdom), and scientists in industry and government (the National  
              Institute of Health, NEC Research Institute)  are planned and form an  
              integral part of this project.
