Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Earth's Field Nuclear Magnetic
               Resonance Study of Antarctic Sea Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9500445

Award Number: 9500445
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Seymour   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9500445  Seymour      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twelve months of research abroad at  research centers of proven excellence. The
              program's awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of 
              unique or complementary facilities, expertise and  experimental conditions
              abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit
              by Dr. Joseph D. Seymour to work with Dr. Paul T.  Callaghan at Massey
              University.    The investigator proposes to use nuclear magnetic resonance 
              (NMR) experimental techniques to noninvasively probe the  structure of sea ice.
               Laboratory manufactured sea ice will  be analyzed using NMR imaging and
              diffusion measurements of  protons in the entrapped brine of the sea ice. 
              Images and  measurements of anisotropic and restricted diffusion will  provide
              data on laboratory sea ice morphology.  The  Antarctic work will be conducted
              using an NMR system to  measure magnetization relaxation parameters of sea ice
              core  samples.  Use of the earth's field NMR system is an  important dimension
              of this project because of possible  applications of the technique, ranging
              from on site sensors  to underground environmental hazard detection.  The study
              is  part of the New Zealand Sea Ice Project, a collaboration  involving four
              universities and a Crown Research Institute,  in which physical and mechanical
              measurements on sea ice are  made to advance understanding of sea ice physical 
              properties. ***
