Title       : SGER: Cloning of G Protein-Coupled Steroid Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1997   
File        : a9500239

Award Number: 9500239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin J. Kelly   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Grandy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oline K. Ronnekleiv  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Martin J. Kelly  IBN-9500239    Steroid hormones play central roles in many
              bodily functions  including neural development, reproduction, salt and water 
              homeostasis, response to environmental stressors, skeletal  maintenance and
              grmwth, and blood pressure to mention a few.  It is  generally agreed that the
              actions of these powerful hormones are  exerted by binding to intracellular
              receptors which subsequently  dimerize and bind to nuclear DNA where they act
              to facilitate or  inhibit gene transcription.  These actions usually take hours
              to  days to be manifested.  However, several electrophysiological and 
              behavioral studies have reported very rapid effects of these  hormones, in the
              seconds to minutes time frame.  The rapid action  of the hormones suggest that
              a nuclear site of action is highly  unlikely and is more consistent with the
              existence of membrane  bound G-protein-coupled receptors.  Dr. Kelly has
              assembled a team  of skilled investigators, experienced in molecular biology, 
              behavior and electrophysiology to isolate and clone these novel  steroid
              receptors for estrogen and glucocorticoid hormones.  Using  the latest in
              expression cloning strategies, this group proposes to  isolate and characterize
              G-protein coupled receptors for  glucocorticoids and estrogen, to study the
              physiological role of  these novel receptors in cellular metabolism, to
              identify their  natural ligands and begin to design agonists and antagonists
              for  future study.  This proposal is appropriate for a SGER award  because
              these studies are novel and highly exciting.  Moreover, if  successful, the
              outcome will revolutionize our understanding of the  mechanism of steroid
              hormones action and have major impacts in the  fields of neuroscience,
              endocrinology and behavior.
