Title       : Towards a New Generation of Robust Interrogation Methods in Computer-Aided
               Design and Computer-Aided Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9500394

Award Number: 9500394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas M. Patrikalakis nmp@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jaime Peraire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Takashi Maekawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500394  Patrikalakis   The objective of this project is to construct
              numerically robust and topologically reliable unstructured triangular meshes of
              surfaces which are the faces of complex solid models for computational fluid
              dynamics.  The project builds on fundamental work completed earlier by these
              investigators in interval solid modeling to address basic robustness problems
              in interrogation methods for solid models.  The research plan involves first
              the conversion of older legacy designs to interval solid models to maximize
              impact of the method in large-scale industrial rather than only academic
              problems.  The research will also explore some of the essential elements of
              piecewise linear and topologically reliable approximation of planar contours,
              followed by three dimensional contours that can represent space interval
              non-uniform rational B-spline curves of arbitrary complexity.  This will be
              extended to explore features of surface triangularization of surface patches
              and entire solids, followed by three dimensional domain tetrahedrization.  This
              sequence of problems, where the solution of an earlier problem assists in the
              solution of a more complex problem, is expected to allow the development of a
              reliable and efficient overall algorithm for solving such problems.  An
              industrial advisory committee will follow the work and assure its relevance to
              long-term industrial interests.    This work seeks to advance the state of
              knowledge in robustly interrogating the geometry of complex objects using
              imprecise or discrete computer arithmetic and developing the necessary theory
              and relevant algorithms which can form the intellectual basis for
              computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) systems of the
              future.  It could significantly decrease the time required during product
              design and hence decrease production cost.  It could also decrease the rate of
              failure of design processes.  It provides a sound and flexible basis for future
              CAD/CAM systems because these will need to includ e precise simulation of
              kinematics, fluid, structural and dynamical process on complex objects during
              the design, manufacturing and operational period of the object.  The knowledge
              and experience gained through this research will be integrated into the
              teaching curriculum of two graduate courses at MIT.
