Title       : Collaborative Research: Mesozoic to Present-Day Tectonics of Northeast Russia: A
               Cooperative Research Program with the Yakut Science Center and NEISRI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9500241

Award Number: 9500241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Layer   (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    This award provides supports to continue a cooperative research 
              program between the University of Alaska Fairbanks, Michigan  State University,
              the Yakut Science Center (YSC, Yakutsk,  Russia), and the Northeast
              Interdisciplinary Scientific Research  Institute (NEISRI, Magadan, Russia)
              which was initiated in 1990.  The research program is interdisciplinary, using
              paleomagnetism,  geochronology, geochemistry, seismology and structural geology
              to  study the Mesozoic to Cenozoic tectonic history of noptheastern  Russia
              from the edge of the Siberian platform up to, and  including, the
              Okhotsk-Chukotka volcanic belt (OCVB).  The study  area includes the zone of
              Mesozoic accretion of terranes of both  Arctic and Pacific origins and the
              present-day plate boundary  between North America (NA) and Eurasia (EU).  So
              far, this  cooperative project has detected an age progression among  Mesozoic
              granites, identified a widespread paleomagnetic  overprint in the northwestern
              Kolyma Structural Loop (KSL), and  obtained previously published paleomagnetic
              data for the region.  Earthquake focal mechanisms, based on regional and
              teleseismic  data, reveal that crustal shortening in the region, driven by the 
              opening of the Arctic Ocean is being relieved by the extrusion of  the Okhotsk
              (OK) plate to the southeast.   To expand  understanding of the KSL, this
              project will focus on its  southeastern end, where formations similar to those
              studied in  the northeastern part of the loop turn from a southeasterly  strike
              to a northeasterly one.  This region also lies along the  NA-OK plate boundary
              and fault traces and seismically generated  features are visible in low
              resolution satellite images.  The  next phase of work will involve two
              transects by NEISRI and the  YSC along the Kolyma and Indigirka Rivers, and
              analysis the  samples collected.  These transects cross the Kular-Nera slate 
              belt, the Omulevka composite terrane, the Il'in-Tas formation, or  their
              along-strike equivalents.  These units represent,  according  to one model, the
              Late Jurassic forearc, arc, and back-arc  deposits of the Uyandina-Yasachnaya
              island arc which was located  on or near the edge of the Kolyma-Omolon
              superterrane (K-OS);  this model, however, is still open to considerable
              debate,  especially relating to the polarity of subduction.  The primary 
              objectives here are to determine the age and polarity of the  Uyandina arc, the
              relationship between the K-OS and the Viliga  shelf terrane, the extent of the
              paleomagnetic overprint, whether  oroclinal bending occurs, the age and
              paleolatitude of the Late  Cretaceous OCVB, the detailed tectonics and location
              of the NA-OK  plate boundary, and the crustal structure of the region. 
              Resolution of these problems will aid in constraining the  tectonic evolution
              of northeast Russia, which has implications  for the tectonics of the North
              Pacific and the Arctic Ocean.  In  particular, this work will aid in
              determining the timing and  methodology of the isolation of the Arctic basin
              which has impact  on paleoclimatology.  The seismic studies will help in 
              constraining the amount of crustal thickening resulting from  compression and
              aid in wave propagation studies and nuclear test-  ban monitoring.
