Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Orthogonal Multiwavelet Constructions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9500905

Award Number: 9500905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas P. Hardin hardin@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Hardin  DMS-9500905          Work supported by this award focuses on the
              mathematical  development of wavelet analysis and its applications.  This is a 
              branch of harmonic analysis closely allied with applications to  many areas of
              science.  The underlying goals of wavelet analysis  are (i) to determine
              functions whose integer translates and  dyadic dilates form orthogonal (or
              biorthogonal) bases for  square-integrable functions (ii) to ensure that the
              basis  elements localize both time and frequency and (iii) that they  have the
              requisite smoothness dictated by the problem.  Normally,  wavelets are also
              expected to have compact support.  This project will focus on construction of
              compactly supported and orthogonal wavelets in two and higher dimensions, new
              filter-bank constructions, and application to image processing and numerical
              methods for differential equations.          The theory of wavelets, as it has
              become known, is actually  a body of ideas which has developed dramatically
              over the past  decade, following several important discoveries by physicists, 
              computer scientists and engineers concerned with signal  processing and data
              compression.  It evolved into a synthesis of  many existing techniques into a
              framework which offers  possibilities for improved applications and challenging
               mathematical ideas which will require years to reach what might  be considered
              a mature stage.  Many areas of science are now  adapting wavelet constructs to
              important problems currently under  investigation.  These included
              statisticians looking for patterns  in large data sets, compression of
              fingerprint data, edge  reconstruction of images and the generation of fractal
              sets with  prescribed characteristics.
