Title       : REG: In-situ Joining of Thermoplastics and Their Composites to Metals in
               Net-Shape Processes, Hot-Melt, Filament Winding, Injection Molding, and Shrink
               Fitting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9500232

Award Number: 9500232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karthik Ramani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500232  Ramani   This is an Engineering  Research Equipment Grant to purchase
              an injection molding machine and induction heating unit.  The equipment will be
              used in several projects, including thermoplastic polymer structural bonding,
              in-situ joining of thermoplastics and their composites to metals in net-shape
              processes, that includes injection molding, filament winding and shrink
              fitting, and incorporation of induction heating to increase process speeds. 
              The primary objective of this research is to develop in-situ processes to join
              thermoplastic composites to metals in net-shape processes.  The residual
              stresses will be modeled as a function of the process parameters.  The surface
              preparation, contact pressure during consolidation, heating and cooling rates,
              hold times at melt and recrystallization temperature, effect of bond line
              thickness and uniformity, and anodization to increase durability will be
              included in the process development cycle.  Induction heating will be used to
              transiently and preferentially heat the metal surface for bonding.  The results
              will be applied to filament winding and injection molding.  Known
              characterization techniques such as x-ray diffraction (XRD), differential
              scanning calorimetry (DSC), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) will be used
              to evaluate the polymer morphology and structure at the interface.  Cooperative
              arrangements have been made with an industrial partner  to do scale up testing
              and mechanical strength evaluation of the joints between polymer and metal.  
              The results of this research will be applied to bio-medical, automotive and
              aerospace industries.  It is anticipated that this innovative joining between
              plastics and metals will lead to major reductions in production cycle time
              which can reduce the total cost.  Further new design features can be
              incorporated taking into account in-situ joining capabilities.
