Title       : Novel Molar Design Concept for Low Molar Mass Glass-Forming Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9500737

Award Number: 9500737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaw H. Chen shch@lle.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal NO. CTS-9500737  University of Rochester  Shaw H. Chen   
              Liquid crystals have found potential applications to various optical and
              optelectronic technologies.  With the exception of active components based on
              the change in molecular orientation in response to an applied field, practical
              applications of liquid crystals are limited by the intrinsic fluid nature and
              tendency to crystallize.  To provide mesophase stability and environmental
              durability, liquid crystalline polymers have been explored as an alternative in
              view of the potential for vitrification with a glass transition temperature
              above the ambient.  However, polymeric materials are inherently difficult to
              process into uniform films because of a generally high melt viscosity.  It is
              most desirable to combine the attributes of these two classes of materials,
              i.e., ease of material processing and ability to preserve a high degree of
              mesomorphic ordering in a glassy environment.  To achieve this ultimate goal, a
              two-year program is proposed for research on low molar mass glass-forming
              liquid crystals.    In principle, all liquids should vitrify given a
              sufficiently rapid cooling rate.  Nevertheless, the question of why some
              materials are more prone to glass formation than others has remained unanswered
              to date.  Since theoretical or computational approaches do not appear to
              promise a rational molecular design tool in the foreseeable future, it is
              proposed that a molecular design concept be pursued from an empirical
              standpoint.  In essence, low molar mass liquid crystals represent a subtle
              balance between two seemingly opposing factors:  one to encourage liquid
              crystal mesomorphism and the other to discourage crystallization.  It is
              proposed that two diametrically different structural features, mesogenic moiety
              and excluded-volume core, be chemically bonded to each other via a flexible
              spacer.  The idea is to enable the chemically combined system to form and
              optically anisotropic, morphologically stable glass, even though  both
              mesogenic moiety and excluded-volume core may crystallize on their own.    Our
              technical approach consists of molecular design, chemical synthesis, and
              relevant characterizations including morphology, theology, and the kinetics of
              thermally activated phase transformation.  In addition, characterizations with
              a direct bearing on practical applications will also be performed.  Results
              from the proposed research will furnish new insight into vitrification, liquid
              crystallinity, morphology and processing of low molar mass compounds.  In
              addition, through judicious molecular design, multifunctional materials capable
              of optical and optoelectronic applications are expected to come forth. 
              Specific examples may include light polarization, nonlinear optical activity,
              photochromizm, and electroluminescence, which constitute a broad base for
              emerging display, imaging, and communications technologies.
