Title       : Propagation of Waves of Chemical Activity in Stratified Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9500763

Award Number: 9500763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175800             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Tyson is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational  
              Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of propagating waves of  
              chemical activity in stratified media.  In collaboration with Pavel K.  
              Brazhnik, Tyson will study wave propagation in media with stratified  
              inhomogeneities attempting to characterize the reflection and refraction   of
              traveling waves at boundaries between layers.  The study will be   carried out
              by analytical, numerical, and experimental techniques.    Analysis will be done
              by two complementary methods: the kinematic   approach, and singular
              perturbation theory.  Numerical simulation will   also exploit complementary
              methods: standard finite-difference   approximations to partial differential
              equations, and cellular automaton   modeling of excitable media.  The
              analytical and numerical results will   be compared with experimental
              observations of wave propagation in a   stratified chemical excitable medium,
              the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction.  Traveling waves of chemical reaction are
              unusual but not uncommon   occurrences in the natural world.  Examples abound
              in combustion   chemistry, catalytic converters, waves of membrane
              depolarization   propagating through muscle tissue,  waves of cyclic AMP
              production in   slime mold growth, and a prominent Calcium wave signaling the  
              fertilization of an egg by sperm.  Chemical wave propagation has been   studied
              for many years in homogeneous, isotropic media.  Tyson's work   would be the
              first attempt to study wave propagation in media with   stratified
              inhomogeneities which are more realistic mimics of important   biological
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
