Title       : Average Complexity of Global Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9500173

Award Number: 9500173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Calvin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500173  Calvin   One of the objectives of this research is to compare different
              algorithms for global optimization problems using an average performance
              criteria. Several classes of functions are considered, including smooth
              functions and non-differentiable continuous functions. The set of functions is
              endowed with a probability measure and the expected performance with respect to
              the given probability distribution of different algorithms are compared. This
              average performance can be traded off with the computational requirements of
              the algorithms. A range of algorithms is considered, from simple ones that
              choose the observations on a fixed grid of points to complex methods that
              choose each site to maximize some functional of all previous observations. A
              second objective of the research is to develop efficient algorithms for global
              optimization, where efficiency is measured in terms of average performance.    
              The outcome of this research will serve several purposes. First, it will fill a
              void in global optimization studies. The void is the proliferation of
              algorithms with no systematic methods of assessing their performance quality.
              This research will provide a characterization of global optimization
              algorithms. Second, the knowledge gained from the results of the algorithmic
              performance quality will help identify areas where additional work is needed.
              Third, by benchmarking the algorithms, the current state of research
              advancement in global optimization can be characterized. This characterization
              is necessary in projecting  future research directions in the area. Fourth, the
              research will also help to validate and invalidate some of the assumptions made
              in developing global optimization algorithms. Finally, the outcome of the
              research will provide some insights in choosing the techniques and algorithms
              to solve problems with certain structures and characteristics. The insights
              gained can translate into savings in time and resources by researchers from
              better problem understanding and savings  in time and cost due to
              misapplications of algorithms.   .
