Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dynamics of Oscillator Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9500948

Award Number: 9500948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strogatz shs7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS_9500948 Strogatz  The proposal is to study the nonlinear  dynamics of
              oscillator arrays, using mathematical methods of  dynamical systems theory,
              bifurcation theory, and perturbation  theory, along with numerical simulation.
              One project concerns  arrays of superconducting Josephson junctions, and will
              be  carried out in collaboration with an experimental group at MIT.  This work
              is aimed at understanding the phase-locking properties  of series arrays; the
              propagation and instabilities of kinks in  one-dimensional parallel arrays; and
              the behavior of vortices and  row-switched states in two-dimensional arrays. A
              second project  (in collaboration with an experimental group at Georgia Tech) 
              will address the dynamics of laser arrays. Areas of investigation  will include
              phase-locking in slightly detuned laser arrays;  controlling chaos in laser
              arrays; and mutual synchronization of  chaotic lasers, with possible
              applications to private  communication.  The Principal Investigator and his
              experimental  collaborators will study the dynamics of superconducting 
              Josephson arrays and laser arrays. Josephson arrays can be used  as very
              sensitive detectors of magnetic fields (with biomedical  and astronomical
              applications), voltage standards, power  generators at submillimeter
              wavelengths (a part of the spectrum  that is difficult to access by other
              technologies), and as  ultrafast switching devices and transmission lines. All
              of these  technologies would benefit from a deeper mathematical  understanding
              of synchronization and vortex propagation in  Josephson arrays. The goals of
              the laser array project are to  find methods for improving the phase-locking
              characteristics of  laser arrays (to increase their power output), and to
              develop  novel encryption schemes for private communications, based on  mutual
              synchronization of chaotic lasers.
