Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: A FTIR Spectrometer Coupled with an Ultraviolet
               Light Source for Polymerization Reaction Engineering and Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9500477

Award Number: 9500477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher N. Bowman bowmanc@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Falconer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9147,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Bowman   9500477    The PIs plan to purchase a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
              Spectrometer for use within the Department of Chemical Engineering at the
              University of Colorado.  This instrument will be used to study the molecular
              processes involved in UV-initiated polymerizations and in UV photocatalysis. 
              The FTIR spectrometer has the high resolution (0.3 cm-1) and high speed (20
              scans per second) required to study these processes, which are fast even at
              room temperature.  In addition to the spectrometer and associated computer, a
              fiber-optic UV light source, filters, and multiple internal reflectance
              accessory will be purchased while a controlled-atmosphere cell for catalytic
              studies will be constructed.  This spectrometer will be equipped with two
              sample/detection compartments so that it can effectively be used by two
              investigators.    Polymerization reactions for the production of highly
              cross-linked polymers will be initiated by the UV light, and a novel technique
              for studying reaction diffusion termination mechanisms will be employed.  This
              technique involves monitoring small changes in the double bond conversion after
              the UV light has been turned off.  In this manner the importance of reaction
              diffusion will be established, and the reaction diffusion constant will be
              measured.  The changes in surface concentrations of reactants and intermediates
              and identification of adsorbed intermediates will be measured with the FTIR
              spectrometer during photocatalytic oxidation of organics on titania catalysts. 
              These transient measurements will help identify reaction steps and measure
              their rates when combined with mass spectrometric detection of reaction
              products.  Temperature-programmed desorption and reaction will also be used to
              identify adsorbate concentrations.  The addition of an FTIR spectrometer will
              enhance funded research that is currently in progress in these areas.    It is
              anticipated that the spectrometer will also be valuable in other polymerization
              and catalysis research.  At presen t, there is no IR spectrometer in the
              College of Engineering.  Both PIs have experience at other universities with
              FTIR spectrometers.  The University of Colorado will aost share 40% of the
              purchase price of this equipment, and the equipment will be maintained by
              research grants of the two PIs.
