Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Coding Methods in Algebra, Computability Theory and Model
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9500983

Award Number: 9500983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre Nies nies@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500983  Nies       Nies' research concerns areas of algebra and logic that
              involve  coding with first-order properties in structures and in classes of  
              structures.  He is interested in proving undecidability of fragments of 
              elementary theories consisting of sentences with few quantifier  alternations,
              in particular, for theories of classes of finite  groups, the theory of finite
              distributive lattices, and for the   theory of the lattice E of enumerable
              sets.  Interest in such fragments   arises from their containing the
              first-order sentences that usually occur  in mathematical practice.  Moreover,
              he will work toward determining the   complexity of theories of degree
              structures from structural complexity   theory and toward using coding methods
              to investigate model-theoretic  properties of the structure D of enumerable
              Turing degrees.  Both E and D  are central structures in computability theory. 
              Also using coding methods,  he intends to prove nonelementary equivalence of
              various degree structures  and intends to introduce a measure of the
              informational content of  isomorphism types of structures belonging to various
              classes of structures  from model theory.  In a further project, he plans to
              separate complexity  classes that are generalizations of deterministic and
              nondeterministic  linear time.       The general idea of coding is to represent
              objects of one kind by  objects of another kind, with a fixed decoding key used
              to retrieve the   information from an object of the second kind.  In this
              project, the   objects are certain structures from algebra, computability
              theory, and   model theory.  The decoding key consists of a collection of
              formulas  in first-order logic, a formal language which can be viewed as a  
              formalization of a major part of natural language within mathematics.  A  
              coding of a structure A in a structure B guarantees that B is at least as  
              complex as A.  Nies will investigate the abstract ordering on classes of all  
              possibly infinite structures by comparing their co mplexity and will apply  
              similar methods to classes of finite structures, a field which has been the 
              focus of interest in recent years for its connections with computer science. 
              In a second part of this project, coding methods will be applied to 
              computability theory, that part of mathematical logic which deals with 
              computability in the ideal sense.  Undecidable sets can vary with respect to 
              their computational complexity.  The goals here, beyond determining the 
              complexity of the associated first-order theory, are to find out the 
              symmetries of the structures and to find a simple characterization of these 
              structures.  These questions are important for deepening the understanding  of
              computation.  ***
