Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis, Algorithms, and Computations for Models of
               High-Temperature Superconductivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9500718

Award Number: 9500718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiang Du   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ANALYSES, ALGORITHMS, AND COMPUTATIONS FOR MODELS OF  HIGH-TEMPERATURE
              SUPERCONDUCTIVITY  Qiang Du Department of  Mathematics Michigan State
              University E. Lansing, MI 48824   Project Abstract  During the past few years,
              the investigator and  his colleagues have achieved significant progress in the 
              modeling, analysis, and computation of superconducting phenomena.  The proposed
              work of the   investigator and his collaborators  includes the further
              development and refinement of their previous  work on mezoscale models (in
              particular, the Ginzburg-Landau  model and its variants), as well as new
              computational and  analytical explorations into the macroscale (homogenized)
              models.  At the mezoscale level, the investigator continues the  development
              and implementation of efficient algorithms for  treating a variety of
              interesting phenomena involving the motion  of vortices in type-II
              superconductors, especially the high  critical temperature layered
              superconductors. At the macroscale,  the investigator proposes to develop
              enhancements of existing  models that can account for inhomogenieties and for
              applied  currents and voltages and to develop and implement discretization  and
              solution algorithms for determining approximate solutions for  these models.
              The types of phenomena the investigator and his  colleagues wish to simulate
              include vortex liquid and vortex  glass structures, pinning by normal
              impurities and thickness  variations, motion and de-pinning due to  thermal
              fluctuations  and applied currents and voltages, resistivity caused by motion, 
              and critical currents.      Superconductivity is one of the grand  challenges
              identified as being crucial to future economic  prosperity and scientific
              leadership. With the advent of modern  computational technology, scientists,
              engineers, and  mathematicians who wish to design superconducting devices
              and/or  who wish to study the physics of superconductivity are in need  robust
              and efficient algorithms and codes for the numerical  simulation of superconduc
              ting phenomena. The investigator and his  colleagues are aimed at meeting such
              a need. Useful tools will be  developed not only for the use of physicists and
              material  scientists interested in studying superconducting phenomena at  the
              vortex level, but also for those involved in the design of  superconducting
              devices.
