Title       : Propagation and Scattering of Coupled Elastic Surface Waves in Curved Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9500723

Award Number: 9500723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1037,9162,AMPP,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                DMS-9500723 Harris  This work investigates the propagation of  surface waves
              over the curved elastic surfaces of a shell and  studies how these waves couple
              from one surface to another. The  curved shell is an elastic waveguide whose
              properties change  slowly with wavelength, these changes being caused by the
              varying  radii of curvature and thickness, while its two surfaces form  weakly
              coupled surface-wave waveguides. The propagation is  studied by asymptotically
              expanding the wavefields in inverse  powers of the radii of curvature with each
              term subsequently  expanded in the Rayleigh-Lamb modes. The beating over the 
              propagation path of the two lowest Rayleigh-Lamb modes gives rise  to a surface
              wave that couples back and forth between the two  surfaces. The scattering that
              a surface wave experiences when it  strikes a compact discontinuity near one of
              the surfaces or  encounters a region of roughness along one of them is also 
              studied. The compact scatterer is modeled by assigning it  reflection and
              transmission coefficients determined from a local  analysis of the wavefields
              near the discontinuity. The roughness  is modeled by working out the
              attenuation to the surface wave.  The results of this work will be compared to
              existing data at the  Center for Nondestructive Evaluation at Iowa State
              University.    Turbine blades rotated at high speeds and pipelines used to
              carry  oil or natural gas are among the common curved structures 
              ultrasonically inspected for damage such as fatigue cracking or  corrosion.
              Fatigue cracks in a turbine blade often occur at its  root, a location not
              always visually accessible. Corrosion to a  pipeline can begin at its interior
              supface where it cannot be  detected unless a section of the line is shut down.
              This work  investigates how these curved, elastic shell structures can be 
              inspected using surface waves that propagate first over the  exterior surface,
              then over the interior surface, ultimately  returning to the exterior surface
              where they are picked up. Th ese  waves detect damage to an interior surface
              and carry that  information to the exterior. Ultrasonic inspections must also 
              give an estimate of the seriousness of the damage. By modeling  scattering from
              a small surface crack or attenuation caused by a  patch of corrosion, this work
              enables the information carried by  a surface wave from one surface to another
              to be interpreted to  give quantitative estimates of the damage.
