Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Common Zeros of Polynomials in Several Variables and
               Cubature Formulae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9500532

Award Number: 9500532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan Xu yuan@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500532  Xu    The purpose of this research project is to study the common zeros
              of polynomials in several variables in connection with the numerical
              approximation to integrals in several variables. Compared to the case of one
              variable, zeros of polynomials in several variables and high dimensional
              quadrature formulae are much more difficult and the results have been
              scattered. Recently the a new approach was used to study the topic and showed
              that positive high dimensional quadrature formulae can be characterized through
              the existence of real common zeros of certain set of quasi-orthogonal
              polynomials; necessary  and sufficient conditions for the existence of such
              zeros were also obtained, which are given in terms of certain nonlinear matrix
              equations.  The project will involve the continuation of this study and will
              use this approach to conduct a systematic study of this topic. It is very
              likely that the approach will enable one to tackle several fundamental
              questions, such as the  connection to moment problems in several variables
              which may lead to an analytic characterization of common zeros, structure of
              minimal and ``near'' minimal cubature formulae, and construction of new
              efficient numerical integration formulae. The goal is to establish a unified
              theory for high dimensional numerical  integration formulae based on the common
              zeros of quasi-orthogonal polynomials.    The outcome of the project will help
              in understanding the structure of high dimensional numerical integration
              formulae and the structure of the common zeros of polynomials. The information
              will be very useful in finding new formulae for practical evaluation of high
              dimensional integrals, which is one of the essential questions in numerical
              analysis and is often taken as a test problem in high speed computing; it can
              also be very useful in  constructing formulae with special properties, for
              example, the equal-weight formulae on spheres, which have applications in
              coding theory. The project is also motivated by the potential a pplications of
              the outcome in other areas of numerical mathematics, such as orthogonal
              polynomials in several variables and interpolation by polynomials which are
              basic tools for data fitting and surface reconstruction.
