Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Long-term Historical Research Record of
               Cyanobacterial Blooms in the Baltic Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9500018

Award Number: 9500018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Bianchi tbianch@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 5937,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This two-year award will support U.S.-Sweden cooperative research on the
              history of cyanobacterial blooms in the Baltic Sea between Thomas S. Bianchi of
              Tulane University and Ragnar Elmgren of Stockholm University.  The objective of
              their research is to determine through paleoecological methods, the long-term
              record of cyanobacterial blooms in the Baltic Sea.   They will use marker
              pigments from fossils, siliceous microfossils and biogenic amorphous silica to
              determine past phytoplankton assemblages.  Petrogenic components and
              radionuclides will be used to determine sedimentation rates and resuspension
              events.  Dr. Bianchi brings to this collaboration expertise in biomarkers as
              tracers of carbon.  This is complemented by Swedish expertise in eutrophical
              studies in the Baltic and in geochemical assessment of sediments.  Increased
              nutrient loading over the past four decades in the Baltic Sea has resulted in
              significant eutrophication problems.  While there has been a concerted effort
              in recent years to control nutrient inputs, many problems still exist.  For
              example, cyanobacterial blooms proliferate in the summer and the causes of
              these blooms remain largely  unknown.  The project will advance our
              understanding of why these blooms occur and whether they are a natural
              phenomena of the Baltic Sea that are not necessarily associated with
              anthropogenic inputs. Information about the origins of cyanobacterial blooms
              and the effects on long-term nutrient limitations will contribute to the
              development of an environmental management plan for the Baltic Sea.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
