Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Non-Normal Matrices and Operators: Analysis,
               Computations, Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9500975

Award Number: 9500975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lloyd N. Trefethen lnt@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9218,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Trefethen       The investigator studies problems in the mathematical  sciences
              involving highly non-normal matrices and operators.  Approximately speaking,
              this means matrices and operators whose  eigenvectors or eigenfunctions are far
              from orthogonal.  Most  matrices and operators that arise in applications are
              normal or  close to normal, but the highly non-normal cases constitute an 
              important minority, one that has been poorly handled by  traditional methods
              based on eigenvalues.  The emphasis of this  project is on methods that avoid
              the use of eigenvalues.  Some of  these make use instead of certain sets in the
              complex plane known  as pseudospectra, defined in terms of perturbations of the
               spectrum or equivalently as regions bounded by level curves of  the norm of
              the resolvent.  The applications investigated fall in  three areas:  numerical
              solution of non-self-adjoint partial  differential equations; iterative
              solution of large-scale matrix  problems; and fluid dynamics, specifically
              hydrodynamic stability  and transition to turbulence.       This work is
              connected with some major ongoing developments  in science and engineering. 
              One is a basic change in the  prevailing view of how fluid flows become
              unstable and eventually  turbulent, with potential applications across many
              branches of  mechanical, aeronautical, and civil engineering as well as in 
              meteorology, geophysics, and other scientific fields.  A second,  less
              accessible to the public but still of great importance, is  the great shift
              underway in computational science from "direct"  to faster "iterative" methods
              for solving large-scale linear  algebra problems.  The work of the
              investigator's group in both  of the areas just mentioned has had considerable
              visibility.  It  is also having a growing educational impact through the idea
              of  "pseudospectra" mentioned above, a way of visualizing these  mathematical
              problems on a computer that many students (and  professors!) find visually and
              conceptually appealing.
