Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Solution of Differential Equations in Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9500672

Award Number: 9500672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas N. Arnold dna@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Min Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1037,9146,9216,CVIS,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500672  Arnold    This project will involve devising, improving, and analyzing 
              methods for   the numerical simulation of complex physical phenomena modeled by
                 partial differential equations.  A major  emphasis will be on the  modeling
              of   thin structures (plates and shells). Specifically, an innovative  new
              finite   element method recently proposed by a team of computational  engineers
              for   plate bending will be analyzed and a new approach the  investigator  
              introduced in collaboration with Brezzi to develop and analyze  new finite  
              element methods for modeling the deformation of elastic shells  will be  
              pursued.  This latter approach has produced the best theoretical  results to  
              date for avoiding the phenomenon known as membrane locking which  has   plagued
              shell computations.  In addition to studying numerical  methods and   the
              errors they introduce, the investigator will consider the  errors introduced  
              by mathematical models of thin structures.  Specifically, a new  technique of  
              analysis to study the convergence of two-dimensional models of  thin plates  
              will be used.  This technique gives the possibility of obtaining  sharp  
              convergence estimates for plate modeling errors both globally and  away   from
              the lateral boundary (where convergence may be higher).  It  is hoped   that
              this research will clarify in what situations the  Reissner-Mindlin plate  
              model affords better approximation than the classical Kirchhoff  model, an  
              important question that eluded resolution for decades.  A second  area of  
              emphasis will be on the  development, implementation, validation,  and  
              dissemination of a finite element code to simulate the collision  of black  
              holes.  This problem involves the solution of the Einstein field  equations on 
               an unbounded domain in four dimensional space-time and is  extremely  
              demanding computationally.  Work will focus, at least initially,  on the  
              solution of the initial data problem for black hole collisions,  i.e., the  
              determination of physical ly consistent and meaningful initial  data. The  
              initial data problem is a nonlinear elliptic system posed on an  unbounded  
              three-dimensional domain.  For this problem the computer code to  be   produced
              will involve a variety of sophisticated modern  techniques that   have not yet
              been applied in  computational relativity, including  adaptive   tetrahedral
              mesh generation and multigrid preconditioning.    The investigator's work is
              directly related to several critical  technological   issues.  It is generally
              agreed by practitioners that the current  state of the art   of numerical
              modeling of shells is inadequate, and this has been  implicated   in the
              failure of engineering structures such as stadium roofs  and airplane  
              fuselages.  The investigator's work in both the area of the  development and  
              analysis of finite element methods for plates and shells, and on  plate  
              modeling errors is directed at overcoming these problems.  The  work on the  
              simulation of black hole collisions is directly motivated by the  ongoing  
              construction of the LIGO gravitational wave observatory.  LIGO is  expected  
              to be able to detect radiation from black hole collisions early  in the next  
              decade.  Massive numerical simulations are needed to identify the   
              cosmological events which are the sources for the detected  radiation. It is  
              clear that these simulations push the limits of available  hardware and  
              software technology.  The investigator's work is directed at  improving the  
              speed and accuracy of these  simulations by employing and  adapting recent  
              advances in numerical algorithms.  The resulting computer codes  will be  
              adapted to parallel computer architectures and will provide an  excellent  
              opportunity for the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows  working   under
              the supervision of the investigator to learn high  performance   computing
              techniques.
