Title       : The Importance of Foraging Pattern on Reproductive Success in the Northern Fur
               Seal, Callorhinus Ursinus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9500072

Award Number: 9500072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Costa costa@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Goebel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9500072  Costa  Over the last several decades many populations of pinnipeds and 
              seabirds have undergone significant declines.  Many hypotheses to  explain the
              declines have been made and numerous studies have  been undertaken to search
              for the underlying causes.  Juvenile  survival, however, may be one of the most
              critical factors  influencing the growth and recovery of depleted populations
              of  pinnipeds.  Maternal resources imparted to offspring prior to  weaning are
              important for a successful transition from  nutritional dependence to
              independence and subsequent survival.   This may be particularly so of species
              whose life histories are  constrained by rearing young at high-latitudes and
              species which  wean their young abruptly.  Growth and recovery of depleted 
              populations at high-latitudes are further constrained when life-  history
              fecundity schedules limit individuals to producing one  offspring per year. 
              Thus, the quantity and quality of maternal  investment to the young are a
              critical determinant of post-  weaning survival.  This research will examine
              the relationship  between foraging behavior and maternal investment in northern
              fur  seals.  The research will be conducted in the Pribilof Islands;  Alaska,
              where lactating northern fur seals have been shown to  have three distinct
              foraging patterns (shallow, deep, and mixed).   The location of the Pribilof
              Islands, near the edge of an  extensive continental shelf, fortuitously gives
              animals breeding  there two distinct foraging environments, one on the
              continental  and one off.  Each environment has a distinct assemblage of prey 
              species.  Previous studies show the deep diving foraging pattern  to be
              associated with foraging over the continental shelf.  We  will quantify the
              foraging costs and total investment in pups  associated with the different
              foraging strategies observed in  northern fur seals.  This will be done by
              comparing the maternal  investment in terms of both the actual energy and
              material  delivered to the pup and the ene rgetic cost to the mother.  These 
              data will be used to determine if one foraging strategy is  energetically more
              efficient or beneficial and if this is so,  does it allow the mother to make a
              greater investment in her  young.
