Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Theory and Applications of Finite- Dimensional Nonlinear
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9500798

Award Number: 9500798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector J. Sussmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500798  Sussmann  Research will be carried out on nonlinear control theory, 
              continuing the principal  investigator s previous work in this area on a broad
              class of  problems in optimal control,  applications to robotics, feedback
              stabilization, and  nonholonomic motion planning.  The  methods used will be
              those of differential geometric control  theory, nonsmooth analysis, and  the
              theory of real analytic maps and their associated  stratifications.  Necessary
              mathematical   tools will be developed to solve a number of open problems in
              the  areas of optimal control,  controllability, and realization theory.  In
              particular, recent  results of the principal investigator  on the Pontrayagin
              Maximum Principle for systems of vector fields  will be extended, with the 
              goal of proving a general Maximum Principle for systems of  differential
              inclusions under  minimal hypotheses.  The question of the regularity of
              optimal  trajectories will also be  addressed.    The proposed research fits
              within the general framework of  control theory, which is  concerned with
              design problems in which some components of a  dynamical system are  accessible
              to a controlling agent that can modify them so as to  alter the system s
              behavior.    The object is to control the system so as to achieve a desired 
              behavior, or meet some  specifications.  Situations of this kind occur
              everywhere in  engineering as well as in all of the  physical and biological
              sciences, and many apparently different  problems turn out to have  common
              structural features from the mathematical point of view.   The purpose of the 
              mathematical theory of control systems is to study these features  in a
              systematic way and to  develop techniques for solving particular design
              problems, such  as causing a robot arm to  carry out a particular task, or
              keeping an antenna focused.  The  issues considered in this  project deal with
              (a) optimal control, in which the goal is to  determine how to control a system
               so as to optimize some criterion; (b)   stabiliz ation, where the  object is
              to drive the system  towards some desired operating point and keep it there;
              and (c)  motion planning, where it is  sought to find a control strategy that
              will cause a system to  move along some prescribed  path.  ***
