Title       : COOPERATIVE RESEARCH PROGRAM WITH KOREA: CONTROL OF SEPARATED FLOWS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9500160

Award Number: 9500160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark N. Glauser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9500160  Glauser    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Mark N. Glauser,
              Department of Mechanical and  Aeronautical Engineering, Clarkson University, to
              pursue with Dr. Hyung Jin Sung,  Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea
              Advanced Institute of Science and  Technology, for 24 months, a program of
              cooperative research on control of separated  turbulent flows.  The turbulent
              flow of a fluid over a bluff body (block) will be studied.  For  this flow, the
              collaborators will (1) study the influence of control on the spatial structure
              of  the Proper Orthogonal decomposition (POD) eigenfunctions and (2) assess
              whether a POD  based low dimensional dynamical systems model is feasible in
              this flow.    Fundamental separated flows are encountered in many practical
              fluid engineering situations  such as ducts and heat exchangers.  The
              separated, reattached, and recirculating flow  downstream of the separation
              point greatly enhance the amount of heat, mass, and  momentum that are
              transferred, when compared to flows without separation at similar  Reynolds
              number.  Thus, this research is of practical as well as theoretical interest. 
              The  collaborators have extensive experience with separated flows and the
              application of the POD  to various flows.  Their strengths complement one
              another so that their cooperative effort  should be truly beneficial in
              furthering understanding of the control of separated flows.  This  project is
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which 
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers  through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. 
              Korean participation in the project is supported  by the Korea Science and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
