Title       : Rapid Synthesis of Phosphonate and Phosphonamidate Peptide Analogs from Reduced
               Phosphorus Intermediates and Determination of their Enzymatic Inhibitory
               Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9500992

Award Number: 9500992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Hammer rphammer@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                    The focus of this research is the
              development of new approaches to the synthesis of  phosphonopeptides that can
              be adapted to solid state synthesis for application to combinatorial 
              chemistry.  The key building blocks will be protected phosphorus(III) amino
              acids.  Specific  studies will include the synthesis of model phosphonate and
              phosphonamidate dipeptides in  solution using dichlorotriphenylphosphorane for
              activiating the phosphorus(III) amino acids; the  evaluation of benzyl
              protection of phosphonates and phosphonamides; applications of these  methods
              to solid-phase synthesis of phosphonopeptides and their thio derivatives;
              enantioselective  synthesis of H-phosphinate amino acids; ald measurement of
              enzyme inhibition for these newly  synthesized compounds.    With this award,
              the Synthetic Organic Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities 
              are supporting the research of Dr. Robert P. Hammer of the Department of
              Chemistry at  Louisiana State University.  Professor Hammer will focus his work
              on the development of new,  general and high-yielding methods for the
              preparation of phosphono-substituted peptides that can  be applied to solid
              state procedures for the production of combinatorial libraries.  This approach 
              will provide thousands of compounds simultaneously which can be screened for a
              variety of  biological activities, such as protease inhibition.
