Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Models of Structured Population Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9500631

Award Number: 9500631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn F. Webb webbgf00@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Webb       The investigtor studies the qualitative behavior of the  linear and
              nonlinear partial differential equations of structured  population dynamics. 
              In these equations structure variables such  as age, size, maturity, or other
              physical attributes of members of  the population relate individual population
              behavior to total  population behavior.  The methods of the research employ the
              theory  of semigroups of linear operators in Banach spaces, the spectral 
              theory of linear operators in Banach spaces, and the theory of  positive linear
              and nonlinear operators in Banach lattices.  The  project appliies these
              researches to (1) models of the blood  production system and abnormalities in
              this system such as  aplastic anemia, (2) models of loss of telomeres in ends
              of  chromosomes in proliferating cell lines and the distinction of  normal and
              cancer cells in these loss processes, (3) qualitative  models of AZT treatment
              of AIDS and the development of resistant  strains of HIV as a result of
              treatment, (4) models of periodic  chemotherapy of tumor cell populations, and
              (5) models of  epidemics with infection incubation periods and geographical 
              dependence.       This project studies the ways in which populations may 
              behave, if the behavior is described by certain kinds of equations  that
              incorporate features of the populations.  Such features  include the age, size,
              or maturity of members of the population.  The mathematical results are applied
              to models of populations of  cells, of epidemics, and mf treatments.  In these
              various  applications the qualitative behaviors of physical and biological 
              phenomena are modelled as dynamical population processes.  The  significance of
              this work is in the development of mathematical  methods to analyze the
              qualitative behavior of solutions of the  equations that describe structured
              populations, and to apply these  methods to the qualitative understanding of
              biotechnological  processes.
