Title       : Lie Superalgebra Representations: Algebraic and Geometric Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1995     
File        : a9500755

Award Number: 9500755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lance W. Small                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan B. Penkov penkov@math.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently there have been several essential developments in the  representation
              theory of Lie superalgebras.  One of them is  Serganova's reduction of the Kac
              problem on characters of  atypical finite-dimensional gl(m+ne)-modules to the 
              semi-simplicity conjecture for a functor analogous to the Vogan  functor. 
              Another one is Kac and Wakimoto's discovery of a  striking relationship between
              number theory and integrable  representations of affine Lie superalgebras. 
              Finally, there is  the theory of triangular decomposition of arbitrary 
              finite-dimensional Lie superalgebras and the related theory of  generic
              irreducible highest weight modules developed by Serganova  and the principal
              investigator.  The research supported by this  award is on five different
              topics related naturally to those  developments:  geometry of
              finite-dimensional generic modules  over arbitrary finite-dimensional Lie
              superalgebras; arbitrary  generic modules over finite-dimensional Lie
              superalgebras;  special (both non-generic and atypical) modules over classical 
              Lie superalgebras; generic integrable modules over Kac-Moody  superalgebras;
              and quantum superalgebras.  In most of the cases,  it is planned to use a
              combination of algebraic and geometric  methods.  This research is concerned
              with a mathematical object  called a Lie algebra.  Lie algebras arise from
              another object  called a Lie group.  An example of a Lie group is the rotations
               of a sphere where one rotation is followed by another.  Lie  groups and Lie
              algebras are important in areas involving analysis  of sperical motion.
