Title       : Preventive Maintenance for Complex Systems Under Transient State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a9500289

Award Number: 9500289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158123             (Estimated)
Investigator: O. Geoffrey Okogbaa okogbaa@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tapas K. Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500289  Okogbaa   This research project focuses on the problem of preventive
              maintenance for complex systems under transient state. The goal is to develop
              models and algorithms useful for operating and characterizing a preventive
              maintenance system. In particular, the following objectives are pursued to
              realize the set goal: (1) develop techniques for characterizing failures and
              renewal process distributions for complex multi-unit systems with emphasis on
              systems transient phenomenon and the aging process; (2) construct analytical
              models based on transient formulation using renewal and semi-regenerative
              processes with maintenance cost consideration; (3) explore the convexity of the
              resulting transcendental functions using optimization techniques and heuristics
              with the aim of minimizing maintenance costs; (4) develop a set of cost
              boundary indices to assist in analyzing the reasonableness and sensitivity of
              the cost options; and (5) test and verify the sensitivity and endurance of the
              models and the algorithms using discrete event simulation. Actual industrial
              data will be used in the testing and validation of the models.   Many man-made
              systems today are characterized by mechanical, electrical, and electronic
              components that are highly integrated to produce a working system. With high
              integration also comes increased vulnerability to failure due to the
              malfunctioning of individual or groups of components in the system. A reliable
              and workable preventive maintenance program ensures a high run time for
              machines and a more productive system. Increased productivity is essential for
              economic competitiveness both for a company and to a nation. If successful, the
              tools developed as part of this research will contribute to the realization of
              effective preventive maintenance programs. Given the critical need to keep
              systems running and prevent catastrophic failures, research in this area has
              much to offer to the industrial world.
