Title       : Dissertation Research: Cultural Context of Health Behavior of Puerto Rican
               Adolescents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9500730

Award Number: 9500730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8580               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet W. McGrath jwm6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The home power movement in the United States now counts over 100,000 homes whose
              owners have implemented their own photovoltaic (solar cell), wind and
              micro-hydroelectric power systems.  The object of this research is to examine
              this movement as a rare instance of direct democratic decisionmaking in the
              area of technology design and development.  Linking the home power experience
              with elements of democratic theory and the science and technology studies
              literature, the investigator will develop a new model of public participation
              in science and technology decisionmaking and compare and contrast it with
              other, more familiar institutional structures and practices in which such
              decisions get made.  Empirical data gathering on the home power movement will
              involve interviews with major national figures and other activists, and
              participant observation in the community around Amherst, Wisconsin, that
              produces the annual Midwest Renewable Energy Fair.  Research will examine the
              unique nature of popular interactions in shaping a knowledge base; the nature
              of participation in the movement and the effects of participation on the
              participants themselves; the distinctive perception and handling of expertise
              in the movement; and any links that may exist between particular attributes of
              the technologies involved and the directness of individual participation.  To
              help to refine the model and gauge its applicability, the investigator will
              consider whether relationships exist between home power developments and
              citizens' concerns about toxic waste disposal, or the emergence of
              `participatory research` efforts in the U.S. and abroad.  The model to be
              developed will be responsive to recently expressed concerns about technology
              decision making in a democracy and contribute to ongoing re-examinations of
              relationships between government and science and technology in light of
              post-Cold War changes in social and economic circumstances.  In this climate,
              new patterns of decisionmaking and their impacts are worthy of consideration. 
              Findings will be presented at conferences and meetings and in articles for both
              academic and popular audiences; a book may also result.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
