Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Quantized Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9500882

Award Number: 9500882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masamichi Takesaki mt@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sorin Popa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Effros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9500882  Effros    Effros will continue to investigate the mysterious
              mathematical world of   quantum group analysis, in collaboration with his
              former Ph. D student   Z.-J. Ruan. This work is based on his new approach to
              quantizing functional   analysis - the theory of operator spaces. Popa plans to
              broaden his wide-ranging   studies in the rapidly evolving field of subfactors,
              using both analytic and   algebraic points of view. Popa is one of very few
              researchers who has been   working on theanalytical aspects of subfactor
              theory. It may be argued that this   technically difficult area has thus far
              constituted the deepest aspect of   the subject. Takesaki, together with
              several coworkers, has very recently   completed one of the central
              classification programs for discrete amenable   group actions on operator
              algebras.  He would like to build on this success   by returning to the largely
              unexplored area of continuous group actions.    He also plans to work once
              again on his earlier theory of duality, which   is currently playing a major
              role in quantum group theory.    Quantized analysis was introduced in the
              1930's by John von Neumann in   order to provide a mathematical framework for
              quantum mechanics. This   development has had a profound effect on the field of
              mathematics itself,   since it has enabled researchers to formulate
              non-commutative or   "quantized" versions of many quite distinct mathematical
              disciplines. We   now have quantized versions of ergodic theory, the
              non-commutative geometry   of Alain Connes, the non-commutative probability
              theory of Dan Voiculescu,   and the remarkable interactions of operator
              algebras, knot theory, low   dimensional topology, and conformal quantum field
              theory in large part   pioneered by Vaughan Jones.  Effros, Popa and Takesaki
              have been actively   involved in working on the frontier of some of these
              exciting new areas of   mathematics.  ***
