Title       : Remote Manufacturing Decision Support Using Virtual Reality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9500396

Award Number: 9500396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pat Banerjee banerjee@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. DeFanti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjay Mehrotra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9500396  Banerjee   The use of virtual environment could provide a major
              advancement for manufacturing information management and decision support
              technologies.  In this research virtual reality will be used in facilities and
              product layout information management and optimization systems.  In the layout
              domain, the research will address three important problems: (1)
              three-dimensional (3D) general layout design, (2) layout of manufacturing cells
              and material flow paths in factories, and (3) layout of multi-module
              assemblies.  The short-term objective is to demonstrate the feasibility of
              using virtual reality in reducing the manufacturing cycle time.  The long-term
              objective is to develop raw technology for a real-time-virtually-real
              management control and decision support tool.  There is also a major software
              development component.  In addition, the research involves collaborations with
              Motorola and five other industrial firms, the Chicago Manufacturing Center, and
              National Institute of Standards and Technology, and industry collaborators will
              co-fund the work.   The research aims to enable a shorter lead time in
              manufacturing.  It will enhance the fundamental understanding of manufacturing
              decision support in light of integration of new technological developments in
              virtual reality.  It will provide a new generation of tools for training,
              develop alternatives to physical prototyping and provide avenues for sustaining
              employee interest in better design of manufacturing systems through continuous
              improvement.  The research will be introduced through lectures and laboratory
              experiments to graduate and undergraduate students.  Concepts will be
              incorporated into courses in computer-aided design, virtual environments,
              production control, intelligent manufacturing systems and facilities layout. 
              Seminars will also be conducted for industrial partners and other companies.
