Title       : Dynamics of Rotating Stratified Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9025087

Award Number: 9025087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379089             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hart John.Hart@Colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Experimental and numerical studies of ordered and chaotic                 
              dynamics in rotating stratified fluids are proposed.  Numerical                
              computations and laboratory experiments will further clarify the               
              role of sidewall boundaries and boundary layer separation in                   
              observations of two-layer baroclinic chaos.  Direct retrieval of               
              Poincare sections of fluid column motions will allow a comparison              
              of LaGrangian mixing in the laboratory with that predicted by                  
              models.  For example, mixed wave states, or vacillatory states                 
              may generate localized (in space) chaotic particle dynamics that               
              can be predicted by applying Melnikov's method to the governing                
              Hamiltonian dynamical system for parcel motion.  The effects of                
              weak to moderate "seasonal" forcing will be studied both in                    
              laboratory and in fully resolved two-layer models, with the goal               
              of verifying the robustness of previous results which showed a                 
              dramatic destabilization and loss of predictability in low order               
              models that include such forcing.                                              
                                                                                             
                   A focus of the proposed research is the application of                    
              recent ideas from dynamical systems to both experimental and                   
              numerical data on baroclinic flows.  These techniques include                  
              singular value decomposition, linear and nonlinear prediction,                 
              and principle orthogonal decomposition.  We hope to generate                   
              cleaner pictures (e.g. Poincare sections and return maps) of the               
              deterministic part of the data, along with better estimates of                 
              dimension, Lyapunov exponents, and other qualitative signatures                
              of nonlinear baroclinic flow.  Low-order descriptions of the                   
              fractal dynamics observed in high resolution numerical solutions               
              of the quasi-geostrophic partial differential equations will be                
              sought.
