Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Markov Models for the Time Development of DNA Damage
               Repair
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1992        
File        : a9025103

Award Number: 9025103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rainer K. Sachs sachs@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Time-dependent problems of interest in radiation biology                  
              will be investigated mathematically.  Emphasis will be on using                
              analytic solutions, bounds or approximations to understand                     
              numerical results and vice-versa.  Detailed comparisons of the                 
              mathematical results with current published experiments will be                
              made.  The main project is to use continuous time Markov chains                
              for modeling ionizing radiation damage to mammalian cells.  The                
              specific generators used will be modifications of those                        
              introduced in recent papers (Albright 1989; Tobias et al. 1989;                
              Curtis 1989; Sachs et al. 1990; Hlatky et al. 1990; Hahnfeldt et               
              al. 1991).  The following biological endpoints will be                         
              considered:  (A) the yield of DNA double strand breaks and other               
              chromosome damage during irradiation; (B) the yield and variance               
              of chromosome aberrations evolving from DNA double strand breaks               
              via enzymatic cellular repair and misrepair processes during                   
              and after irradiation; (C) the fraction of cells clonogenically                
              viable after irradiation.  In (B) and (C) the main mathematical                
              technique will be to use the embedded discrete time Markov chain               
              to work out the long time asymptotic behavior in a form suitable               
              for numerical evaluation and comparison to experiments,                        
              especially experiments on human lymphocytes.  (A) mainly involves              
              use of perturbation theory and of Perron-Frobenius theory for                  
              the eigenvalues of the generator.  Many older models applicable                
              to one of these endpoints can be regarded as deterministic                     
              approximations to the Markov models and the domain of validity of              
              such approximations will be systematically studied.  A secondary               
              project will be to use the full, time-dependent                                
              reaction-diffusion equations with realistic reaction terms for                 
              analyzing spheroid tumor models.                                               
                   Mathematical modeling of ionizing radiation damage to DNA is              
              particularly important in relating experimental results for                    
              moderate radiation doses to results at the very low doses and                  
              dose rates which are most relevant in public health concerns.                  
              Unlike most older models, the models to be used here                           
              systematically take into account fluctuations in dose and                      
              response from cell to cell.  The results will contribute to a                  
              basic understanding of how chromosome aberrations such as                      
              dicentrics develop following ionizing radiation.  Such                         
              understanding in turn should improve methods of biological                     
              dosimetry, of risk assessment for exposures to radioactivity, and              
              of radiotherapy.
