Title       : Stereoelectronic Effects and Reactivity: Lone Pairs, Hydrogen Bonding, and
               Proton Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9025113

Award Number: 9025113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Perrin cperrin@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Perrin will                
              utilize nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to                       
              investigate five separate problems: (i) The stereochemistry of                 
              amidinate anions will be studied to complete previous                          
              investigations of proton exchange in amides and amidines. (ii)                 
              Stereoelectronic control phenomena will be studied by                          
              evaluating the effect on reactivity of having one or two lone                  
              electron pairs antiperiplanar to a leaving group or incoming                   
              nucleophile. (iii) The Method of Isotopic Perturbation of                      
              Equilibrium will be utilized as a means to investigate the                     
              symmetry of the hydrogen bond. (iv) The extent of solvation of                 
              ions in aqueous media will be probed by measuring the effect                   
              that these ions have upon bond rotation rates. (v) The                         
              phenomenon of large secondary kinetic isotope effects will be                  
              studied via examination of bond rotations in amides.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Applications of modern nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)                        
              techniques have led to increased understanding of molecular                    
              structure and reactivity. Dr. Perrin's research program is                     
              designed to take advantage of these new techniques in order to                 
              study two of the simplest structural elements in organic                       
              molecules, i.e., protons and electron pairs. Five projects will                
              be undertaken in an effort to elucidate the nature of such                     
              fundamental phenomena as hydrogen bonding and                                  
              stuructural/conformational effects on reactivity. The results                  
              are likely to be of interest to physical-organic chemists,                     
              biochemists, and theoretical chemists.
