Title       : Transition Metal Reagents in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9025108

Award Number: 9025108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Schwartz jschwartz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Schwartz's research is focused on two areas.  First,                       
              transition metal complexes will be bound to an oxide support                   
              which will then be a ligand environment for them by anchoring                  
              to prevent clustering of coordinatively unsaturated species,                   
              stabilizing high-oxidation states of the transition metal, and                 
              acting as a variable ligand in which basicity and availability                 
              of Lewis acid and hydroxylic sites can be adjusted.  These                     
              complexes will be probed by kinetic, structural and synthetic                  
              studies.  Second, early transition metal complexes will be                     
              studies for use as new synthetic reagents.  The focus will be                  
              on the catalytic conversion of hydroxy acids into lactones by                  
              use of oxotungsten compounds.  The preparation of oxide-bound                  
              zirconium species and comparisons to soluble analogs will also                 
              be carried out.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                
              Division will support the research of Dr. Jeffry Schwartz of                   
              the Department of Chemistry at Princeton University.  The                      
              research is in the general area of synthetic methodology and is                
              focused on the areas of transition metal reagents in organic                   
              synthesis.  The goals of the project are to find metal                         
              complexes which can perform specific transformations on organic                
              substrates under mild conditions and in high yield.
