Title       : Modeling, Design, and Analysis of Control Algorithms For Scheduling
               Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9025007

Award Number: 9025007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. R. Kumar prkumar@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Manufacturing systems are comprised of a complex                               
              interaction of many entities.  There are several                               
              service centers, each consisting of several machines,                          
              and several part-types with possibly different routes.                         
              The machines may incur set-up times whenever they                              
              switch between part-types.  The yield of an operation                          
              may be random, and moreover machines fail from                                 
              time to time.  Nevertheless it is important to run the                         
              entire system in such a way as to satisfy prescribed                           
              production levels for all the part types, and to meet                          
              the due-dates for all parts as closely as possible, while                      
              simultaneously keeping work-in-process small and                               
              cycle times short.  To achieve these goals, the PI will                        
              need to schedule the entire system, i.e., decide the                           
              numbers of various parts to be released into the                               
              system, as well as their release times, and to                                 
              determine the times of all operations by machines on                           
              parts already in the system.                                                   
                                                                                             
              How does the PI incorporate these myriad details                               
              coherently in such a way that he will be able to design                        
              good scheduling policies?  In this proposal the PI will                        
              detail the beginnings of an integrated system                                  
              theoretic approach which views manufacturing                                   
              systems as inherently dynamic entities for which the                           
              objectives of control are stability and performance.                           
              He will design and analyze scheduling algorithms                               
              which can be implemented in real-time.  The ultimate                           
              objective is to also have an impact on scheduling                              
              practice, with special attention given to the problem                          
              of developing good scheduling algorithms for                                   
              semiconductor manufacturing systems.                                           
                                                                                             
              In the final analysis, what the PI seeks is the                                
              beginning of the development of a useful and                                   
              coherent system theory and practice for                                        
              manufacturing systems.
