Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1995   
File        : a9058463

Award Number: 9058463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill C. Pipher jpipher@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work by this Presidential Young Investigator will focus on                
              two areas related to the study of solutions of elliptic partial                
              differential equations.  These are the analysis of the biharmonic              
              and polyharmonic equations on non-smooth domains and boundary                  
              value problems for second order elliptic divergence form                       
              operators with non-smooth coefficients.                                        
                   In past work it was discovered that the range of solvability              
              of higher order elliptic operators on non-smooth domains depended              
              on the dimension of the underlying domain.  There remains a gap                
              in the range which the solution will have a finite norm (above                 
              the quadratic).  If the domain has dimension four or greater then              
              solutions exist with unbounded p-norms for some value of p                     
              greater than two.  But the first value of p is not known, nor is               
              it known whether this gap reduces to zero as the dimension                     
              increases.  Work will be done in an effort to obtain sharp                     
              estimates on this range.                                                       
                   There is a close connection between the study of                          
              differential operators on non-smooth domains and those with non-               
              smooth coefficients.  Research will concentrate on establishing                
              representations of solutions through integrals of boundary                     
              values.  This is a particularly delicate matter.  In the case of               
              smooth coefficient operators, the integrals are Lebesgue                       
              integrals (the harmonic measure is absolutely continuous with                  
              respect to surface measure).  This is not necessarily the case in              
              general.  Work will be done in establishing criteria which will                
              still guarantee the integral representation through approximation              
              procedures.  Once these are established, one can then begin to                 
              study the behavior of solutions as the variable is made to                     
              approach the domain boundary.
