Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award - Analytical Modeling of Structures and
               Applications in Earthquake Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9058316

Award Number: 9058316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Allison Smith johndavidgordon@erols.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is supported under the Presidential Young                         
              Investigator (PYI) Award program.  The project is initiated                    
              in FY 90 for a 5-year period.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The objectives of the project is to develop analytical                         
              modeling techniques for vibrating systems and apply them in                    
              earthquake engineering.  The development of analytical models                  
              that accurately represent structural behavior plays a crucial                  
              role in dynamic response prediction.  Many analytical                          
              procedures are rendered ineffective if the finite element                      
              model and computational technique used in implementing the                     
              procedure involve inaccuracies due to improper respresentation                 
              of the vibrating system.  The research will focus on the                       
              development of finite element models used to implement dynamic                 
              analyses of structural systems.  These models must accurately                  
              represent all structural attributes such as stiffness and mass                 
              properties, boundary conditions, joint fixities, and material                  
              and geometric nonlinearities.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Several tasks have been identified as part of an overall                       
              research program:  1) development of a high-resolution finite                  
              element model of an existing structure which will represent                    
              structural characteristics with minimal approximation, 2)                      
              development of a conventional finite element model of the same                 
              structe which contains typical modeling assumptions, 3)                        
              studies involving the two models which evaluate the validity                   
              of the assumptions in the conventional model when compared to                  
              the high-resolution model, and 4) development of new                           
              techniques which will minimize the inaccuracies associated                     
              with the modeling associated with the modeling assumptions.                    
              This research will be implemented on structures undergoing                     
              seismic excitation.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research will benefit industry by verifying and                           
              quantifying assumptions used in modeling vibrating systems and                 
              will enhance dynamic analysis technology by developing                         
              techniques which minimize modeling inaccuracies.
