Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Awards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1994      
File        : a9058560

Award Number: 9058560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue A. Bidstrup-Allen sue.allen@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Polymers play a critical role in electronic materials processing,              
              including packaging and interconnection of electronic components,              
              photolithography, use as passivant overcoats and interlevel                    
              insulators.  The performance of an electronic device often hinges on           
              the properties of the polymer film used in these applications.                 
              Structure-property relationships are crucial for developing new                
              chemical systems, formulating process models and predicting end-use            
              performance.  My research interests are focused on these materials             
              issues in electronic packaging and interconnection.  Two of my ongoing         
              research projects are:  1) Integrated Circuit Encapsulation.  Rapid            
              polymerization processes, including resin transfer molding, are                
              employed in chip packaging operations.  These processes would benefit          
              from an on-line monitoring technique which provides instantaneous              
              information on the state of cure and does not disturb the                      
              manufacturing process.  In-situ monitoring of dielectric properties            
              via the use of microsensors may be a valuable method for elucidating           
              structural and mechanical properties.  The goals of this study are to          
              establish the fundamental relationships between conductivity and               
              structural and rheological properties, and to develop a dielectric             
              cure monitoring system for controlling the encapsulation process.  2)          
              Non-Destructive Analysis of Polyimide Films.  High performance                 
              polyimide films and coatings are required by the electronics industry.         
              The properties of these polyimides are critical in the fabrication and         
              performance of integrated circuits.  Thermal cure history fabrication          
              environment and type of substrate upon which the pre-polymer is cast           
              all can have a significant effect on the chemical structure of the             
              polymer, which in turn affects the final performance properties of the         
              film.  In this study, in-situ spectroscopic, birefringence, X-ray              
              diffraction, thermal and dielectric analysis will be combined with             
              microfabricated load-deflection test sites to study the processing,            
              environmental and structural dependence of performance properties for          
              thin polyimide films.
