Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Rapid Numerical Algorithms for Scientific
               Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1994      
File        : a9058579

Award Number: 9058579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie F. Greengard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9227,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One goal is to incorporate the Fast Multipole Method (FMM) into                
              the molecular dynamics simulation package being developed by                   
              Charles Peskin and Tamar Schlick at the Courant Institute.  In                 
              such particle simulations, the greatest computational burden has               
              classically been that of evaluating the self-consistent                        
              electrostatic field induced by all of the partially charged                    
              individual atoms.  This is precisely the problem addressed by the              
              FMM.  The hope is that certain inaccuracies in molecular dynamics              
              calculations can be eliminated, yielding more physically                       
              reasonable results.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The second major area of research is potential theory for the                  
              heat equation.  Earlier work, in collaboration with John Strain,               
              has yielded a scheme for the rapid evaluation of heat potentials.              
              It is planned to devote substantial research time over the next                
              few years to the examination of extensions of this scheme as well              
              as its ramifications.  The combination of potential theory and                 
              integral equations may provide a fundamental change in the way                 
              heat equations are solved, since spatially complex and time-                   
              dependent domains are handled without additional difficulty.  It               
              also appears likely that the method will extend in a natural way               
              to variable coefficient and nonlinear parabolic partial                        
              differential equations.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The third area of research is phase separation in material                     
              science.  A new integral equation-based scheme has been                        
              constructed for the Laplace equation in multiply connected                     
              domains.  It is planned to incorporate this method into a model                
              of "Ostwald ripening," which follows the dynamic motion of the                 
              interface between two phases.  This requires the solution of                   
              Laplace's equation at each step.
