Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9058492

Award Number: 9058492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sigurd Angenent angenent@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The primary focus of the mathematical research of this                    
              Presidential Young Investigator will be on partial differential                
              equations arising from geometrical problems.  The equations are                
              typically nonlinear of elliptic and parabolic type.                            
                   One class of problems involves what is known as curve                     
              shortening.  The question is one of describing the long time                   
              behavior of a family of plane curves which evolve so that their                
              normal velocity coincides with their curvature.  More complicated              
              situations arise when the normal velocity depends in a general                 
              way on the curvature and time; the latter case occurring in                    
              models of phase transitions in two dimensions.                                 
                   The solution to a curve shortening problem has been shown to              
              develop singularities (blow-up) under certain circumstances.  The              
              asymptotic shape of the (suitably rescaled) singular part does                 
              not depend on the initial data.  Numerical simulations suggest                 
              that the actual blow-up rate of the curvature is a function of                 
              the iterated logarithm of time.  Work will be done in determining              
              if this observation is true and in seeking the mechanism                       
              responsible for the log-term in the estimate.                                  
                   Work will also be done in determining periodic orbits with                
              prescribed energy of Hamiltonian systems on cotangent bundles of               
              smooth compact surfaces.  The Hamiltonian is assumed to be convex              
              and even on each fibre.  A particular goal of the work is to                   
              establish the existence of periodic orbits on energy surfaces                  
              whose projections on the manifold intersect the projection of a                
              given periodic orbit a prescribed number of times.  Such a result              
              may be regarded as a global analog of the Poincare-Birkhoff                    
              theorem.  Related work will study the linking of parts of                      
              solutions of Hamiltonian systems in two dimensions.  Estimating                
              linking numbers can be viewed as analogous to measuring the                    
              number of roots of a scalar parabolic partial differential                     
              equation.
