Title       : Intercellular Trafficking of Knotted1 Gene Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9727959

Award Number: 9727959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Jackson jacksond@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727959  Jackson  This proposal addresses the question of how plant cells
              communicate with each other to coordinate their development.  The PIs are
              studying intercellular transport -- the movement of proteins and other
              molecules from one plant cell into another.  This process takes place through
              small channels, celled plasmodesmata, that connect plant cells and allow them
              to communicate with their neighbors.  The PIs are focusing specifically on the
              KNOTTED1 (KN1) protein in maize.  This protein is in a class of transcription
              factors called homeodomain proteins that are vital to orchestrating the
              development of many organisms.  In maize the kn1 related genes are expressed in
              the meristem, the developmental heart of the flowering plant.  The PIs found
              previously that the KN1 protein is able to move or traffic between plant cells,
              and this process may be important in coordinating the development of the plant.
               The PIs will use fluorescent labels to observe KN1, as it moves from one cell
              to the next; ultimately the PIs hope to elucidate the mechanisms and pathways
              involved in its intercellular transport.  This work holds great promise for
              agricultural applications; the mechanisms of cell to cell trafficking that are
              discovered will likely apply not only to cellular proteins like KN1, but also
              to viral pathogens that cause considerable damage to farm crops each year.
