Title       : Neurohypophysial Hormone Function and Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9727915

Award Number: 9727915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Cornett cornettlawrencee@uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727915  Cornett    The domestic chicken (Gallus domesticus) is an increasingly
              important human food source and a significant segment of the agricultural
              economy of the United States.  An important goal of animal agriculture is to
              provide an abundant and economical food supply.  Substantial economic gain
              could be realized by developing better methods to control the growth and
              reproductive processes in chickens. Vasotocin is an important peptide hormone
              produced in the brain that may be central to attaining this goal This hormone
              is involved in a number of functions including the regulation of blood
              pressure, water balance, and egg-laying.  Vasotocin is released into the blood
              stream and acts on target organs (e.g. blood vessels, kidney, shell gland and
              brain) by binding to protein receptors on the surface of responsive cells. 
              These receptors, help produce signals which ultimately cause the desired effect
              (e.g., increased blood pressure by stimulating contraction of arteries, water
              retention by stimulating the kidneys, or the laying of eggs by stimulating
              contraction of the shell gland).  Unfortunately, little is known about the
              relationship between vasotocin and its receptors in non-mammalian vertebrates. 
              Dr. Cornett will remedy this problem.  Using a variety of molecular techniques,
              he will isolate the genes that encode vasotocin receptors.  From the genes, the
              structures of the vasotocin receptors will be determined.  Dr. Cornett will
              then make use of this information to establish a functional characteristics of
              the receptors.  The cellular processes that are activated by vasotocin
              receptors will be also be determined using physiological techniques.  Besides
              expanding our knowledge and understanding of the action of this important
              neuropeptide and the physiology of the domestic chicken, this research promises
              to provide novel new information about how the genes encoding vasotocin
              receptors are turned on and off.  It follows that this new knowledge may
              provide insight into how this hormone sy stem can be manipulated to improve egg
              and meat production.
