Title       : Call Discrimination, Mate Assessment, and Male-Male Vocal Competition in an
               Anuran Amphibian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a9727623

Award Number: 9727623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116871             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Carl Gerhardt gerhardtc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua J. Schwartz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727623   Schwartz    Animal communication in nature involves detection of 
              important signals in a noisy environment.  In gray tree frog  mating choruses
              calling males attempt to attract mates,  females must discriminate among large
              number of competing  calls and use this acoustic information to choose among 
              competing males making this an ideal setting in which to  investigate such
              signal discrimination in a noisy  environment. The proposed research will also
              improve our  understanding of mate assessment in nature and competition  among
              males.  Females of the gray treefrog base their choice  of mate solely on
              acoustic criteria. In the intensely  competitive environment of a chorus, males
              change their  calls in a way that laboratory experiments suggestshould  improve
              their attractiveness.  However, we don t know how  well females can assess
              males in the complex acoustic  environment of a chorus or why certain patterns
              of calling  are preferred. Nor are the fine details of the vocal  competition
              that occurs among males or the relationship  between these details and male
              condition understood. This  research, using field-based tests of female choice
              and  laboratory studies of male vocalizations, will help answer  these
              questions in addition to addressing the general  problem of signal detection in
              a noisy environment.  Experiments will use a computer-based interactive
              playback  system, that constitutes a new  methodology for application  to
              studies of animal communication.
