Title       : Inner-Shell Electron Spectroscopy of Small Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9727471

Award Number: 9727471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229789             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Darrah Thomas thomast@chem.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports T. Darrah Thomas of  
              Oregon State University in his continuing studies on inner-shell  
              photoelectron spectroscopy of small molecules.  He will focus on  
              high-resolution spectroscopy of carbon 1s electrons, using the  
              high-resolution electron spectrometer at the Advanced Light Source (ALS)   at
              Lawrence Berkeley Lab.  The ultimate goals are to develop a better  
              understanding of the relationship between ionization energies and   reactivity
              and other chemical properties, to develop procedures for   assigning group
              electronegativities, to better understand the factors   that contribute to
              electronegativity and to test current theories for   predicting and
              understanding ionization energies.   These topics are at the forefront of
              current research in electron   spectroscopy and have recently become extremely
              topical because of the   availability of third-generation synchrotron radiation
              sources.  While   there have been many molecular systems studied at
              high-brightness   synchrotrons, almost all of the previously published studies
              of other   investigators have been demonstration studies.  These studies go far
                beyond that.  The beauty of x-ray spectroscopy is that it can be  
              atom-specific, even in the `chemical site` sense of the term.  For   chemically
              important compounds, this requires the extremely high   resolution available in
              the synchrotron sources that will be exploited in   these studies. 
              Photoelectron spectroscopy and Auger spectroscopy are by   far the most
              important and widely used techniques for surface analysis in   industry and
              fundamental research in these areas remains vitally   important.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
