Title       : Stabilization of Biopharmaceuticals in Single Crystal Hosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9727492

Award Number: 9727492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bart E. Kahr Kahr@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean A. Chmielewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Bart Kahr, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of  
              Washington, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry   Program
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the   Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences Directorate through a Grant   Opportunities for Academic
              Liaisons with Industry (GOALI) award for his   studies of the stabilization of
              biopharmaceuticals in single crystal   hosts.  Through exploration of the
              host/guest chemistry of single   crystals of known biopharmaceuticals and
              excipients and the single   crystal matrix isolation of biopolymers in
              hydrogen-bonded molecular   crystals, Professor Kahr and co-Principal
              Investigators Jean Chmielewski,   of Purdue University, and Jerry Lewis, of Eli
              Lilly, are developing   methods for the stabilization toward light, heat, and
              moisture of various   peptidic pharmaceuticals, including glucagon and human
              growth hormone.    The stability of the mixed crystals and the activity of the 
               biopharmaceuticals upon release from their crystal hosts will be explored  
              through a variety of physical and biological assays.  In part due to the
              emergence of recombinant DNA technologies, a number of   biopharmaceutical
              agents are appearing.  These drugs, often comprised of   polypeptides
              (proteins), generally display poorer stability toward   ambient conditions of
              light, temperature, and humidity than do typical   small-molecule drugs, and
              development of methods for their stabilization   beyond storage at low
              temperature, which is not always practically   feasible, are required.  Through
              a Grant Opportunities for Academic   Liaisons with Industry (GOALI) award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular   Chemistry Program and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the   Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate support Professor Bart   Kahr, of the Department of Chemistry at
              the University of Washington, for   his studies of the inclusion of
              biopharmaceutical agents within single   crystal `hosts.`  Professor Kahr's
              studies are focused on the ability of   biopolymers, including human growth
              hormone, to crystallize within the   crystal lattice of various pharmaceutical
              `excipients` and on the effects   of this incorporation on the thermal, light,
              and moisture stability of   these biopolymers.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
