Title       : Barrel-Like Molecular Architecture from Folded Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9727172

Award Number: 9727172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Moore moore@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the preparation of novel molecular   architectures
              as candidates for catalytic scaffolding.  The basic design   of the targeted
              oligo(phenylene ethynylene)s involves attaching polar   side groups to the
              oligomer's non-polar hydrocarbon backbone.  Secondary   helical structure is
              then realized from a conformation in which the   oligomer folds back upon
              itself such that the aromatic rings stack   face-to-face along the helix axis. 
              This approach to the development of   new catalysts benefits from the enormous
              molecular diversity available   through sequence modification, the full
              three-dimensional definition of   these spontaneously organized tubular
              compartments and the intrinsic   chirality of the helix.   The proposed
              catalysts hold the promise of   being more robust that proteins and have the
              potential to catalyze a wide   range of organic reactions.  The deracemization
              of alpha-chiral acids is   an example.  With this renewal award, the Organic
              and Macromolecular   Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              Jeffrey S. Moore of   the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Illinois.  Professor   Moore will focus his work on the molecular design,
              synthesis and study of   oligo(phenylene ethynylene)s that fold into helical
              conformations,   thereby creating tubular cavities.  These solvophobically
              driven helical   structures produce a shape that is reminiscent of the most
              common active   site domain observed in enzymes, the alpha/beta-barrel motif. 
              Thus, a   long term goal of the research is to use this barrel-like scaffolding
              as   an architecture for catalyst discovery.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
