Title       : RNA-Protein Interactions in a Double-Stranded RNA Virus of Saccharomyces
               Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9727630

Award Number: 9727630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy A. Bruenn cambruen@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Gottlieb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jeremy A Bruenn  MCB 9727630  RNA-Protein Interactions in a Double-Stranded RNA
              Virus of Sacchromyces Cerevisiae  1. Technical Abstract - Many of the
              double-stranded RNA viruses of lower eucaryotes are non-infectious viruses that
              persist indefinitely by replicating in tandem with their host cells, their
              spread mediated entirely by sexual and asexual reproduction.  They have adapted
              to this lifestyle in some cases by packaging extra RNAs inessential to the
              virus but encoding products of selective value to their host cells.  These
              products are cellular toxins that kill cells not harboring the virus (the
              killer phenotype).  Several such systems are known among the fungal dsRNA
              viruses, the best studied of which is the Saccharomyces cerevisiae virus (ScV).
               A number of characteristics make this system very attractive for studying
              nucleic acid-protein interactions.  First, the host cells are readily amenable
              to molecular and classical genetics.  This makes it possible to use the killer
              phenotype for screening and selection of viral mutants.  Second, the virus
              separately encapsidates its RNAs, making many experiments simpler than those in
              the dsRNA viruses of higher eucaryotes, many of which have as many as 12 unique
              dsRNAs encapsidated in each viral particle.  Third, extensive analysis of the
              single essential large viral dsRNA (4580 bp) has mapped many viral functions. 
              There are only two viral proteins, one the major capsid polypeptide and product
              of the cap gene, and the second a multifunctional protein the result of
              frameshifting between the two open reading frames (cap and pol) to produce a
              Cap-Pol fusion protein.  The Cap-Pol fusion protein has the enzymatic and
              packaging activities of the virion.  Among the cis-acting sites is the viral
              binding site (packaging site) which has (for RNA) a very high affinity for its
              recognition protein (the Cap-Pol fusion protein), with a Kd of less than 1 nM. 
              The present proposal study seeks to understand the nature of the interaction
              between Cap-Pol and this b inding site.  This will involve further in vitro
              selection of binding sites, cross-linking and mutagenesis experiments to map
              active site residues in the Cap-Pol protein, structural determination of the
              20-base RNA binding site, and optimization of the Cap-Pol binding domain.  This
              is one of the few systems in which both in vivo and in vitro systems for
              selection and analysis of altered binding sites and binding protein exist.  It
              promises to contribute significantly to understanding RNA-protein interactions.
                 2. Non-technical Abstract - There is a group of small viruses of fungi and
              protozoans in which the genome is a single large double-stranded RNA.  These
              viruses express their genomes by transcribing the RNA in the viral particles
              and extruding one strand (the plus strand) into the cytoplasm.  Their RNAs may
              either be translated by the cell?s machinery or packaged in newly assembled
              viral particles.  Consequently, the viral particles must choose from among all
              the RNAs in the cell the one RNA that is viral for packaging.  This is
              accomplished in the yeast virus by the specific recognition of a small sequence
              in the RNA by a domain of 75-150 amino acids in the viral polymerase.  This
              interaction is examined in this study by a number of molecular biological,
              biochemical, and biophysical techniques.  The very high affinity of the RNA for
              its viral protein and the very small RNA sequence recognized only 20 bases) and
              the simplicity of the packaging process in this group of viruses makes this
              system an attractive one for understanding how RNA viruses construct their
              particles.
