Title       : Quantification of Carbon Sources & Sinks for North Plains & Mountain Landscapes
               Using Simultaneous Aircraft, Tower, & Leaf Measurements of CO2 & H2O Vapor
               Flux, & Stable Isotope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9727796

Award Number: 9727796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Earle R. Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Welker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Reiners  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1095,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Smith  9727796      Quantitative evaluation of the global carbon budget,
              including  identification of sources and sinks, will be crucial to our 
              understanding of future climatic and anthropogenic impacts on the  global
              biosphere. To date, models of the global carbon budget have  been unable to
              balance the amount of CO2 released by fossil fuels  and modification in
              land-use with the amount of CO2 remaining in  the atmosphere. Of particular
              concern is the lack of information  regarding the spatial and temporal dynamics
              of the carbon exchange  properties of the terrestrial versus oceanic portions
              of the  biosphere, although it has been suggested that the terrestrial 
              biosphere has acted as a net sink for the uptake of CO2 because of  imbalances
              in photosynthesis and respiration due to annual  variations in climate. The
              principle objective of the research  will be to identify the annual source/sink
              dynamics in  globally-important ecosystems that are represented in the Rocky 
              Mountains and northern Plains. Identification and quantification  of potential
              terrestrial sinks for CO2 is necessary for predicting  future changes that may
              occur in the global environment. The  estimation of net CO2 exchange from
              vegetative surfaces using  remote sensing techniques provides a fundamental
              data-set for  computing the global carbon budget and the existence of carbon 
              sinks that may ameliorate the impact of continued, anthropogenic  release of
              carbon compounds into the atmosphere. However, this  approach may also become
              valuable as a method for establishing  physiological status (e.g.
              photosynthesis) and, thus, the health  and vigor of both native and
              agricultural ecosystems on a global  scale. The PI proposes a research plan
              that characterizes  principal ecosystem types of the northern Rocky Mountains
              and  Great Plains. These selected ecosystem types (conifer forest,  shrublands,
              mixed grass prairie and several agricultural types)  are excellent
              representatives of large parts of Earth representing  16%, 18%,11% a nd 16%,
              respectively, or a total of 61% of the total  usable land area of the globe.   
                For some time now, carbon budgets of different ecosystems have  been
              evaluated using measurements of the exchange of CO2 within or  above the
              representative vegetation. These studies require  expensive and labor intensive
              measurements that are affordable  when only a small number of geographical
              locations are monitored.  Thus, a substantial sampling problem is inherent in
              the current  leafand canopy-level process submodels, which precludes an 
              accurate coupling with atmospheric circulation models and ultimate 
              extrapolation to broader geographic scales. In the current  proposal, aircraft
              measurements of eddy transport of water vapor  and C02 exchange will be
              combined with isotopic data to estimate  CO2 fluxes on an annual and seasonal
              basis. Results will be scaled  directly up to the northern Rocky Mountains and
              northern Great  Plains with regional, digital coverage's together with GIS
              methods  and ecosystem modeling techniques in order to produce a regional 
              estimate of carbon fluxes for a significant portion of North  America. Incident
              sunlight, precipitation, soil and plant  moisture, air temperature and humidity
              will be monitored  concurrently with CO2 flux measurements. In addition, the 
              capability for measuring natural isotopes of carbon and water  provides an
              accurate and reliable method for estimating the  component sources of CO2 that
              comprise measured values of net CO2  flux . Net fluxes will be partitioned into
              a balance of particular  sources (i.e. atmosphere, plant photosynthesis and
              respiration,  soil respiration, etc.), according to differences in 
              discrimination between stable isotopes contained in each  environmental
              component (e.g. leaf and soil organics; leaf, stem,  and soil water, etc.).
              Overall, these results will will provide  the groundwork for testing process
              models that extrapolate  globally. Both "topdown" and "bottom-up"
              approacheswill be  compared by using measurements taken sim ultaneously at the
              plant  level, above the canopy (eddy correlation tower), and with  aircraft
              sampling. Although we will be focusing on the more  difficult problems of
              spatial heterogeneity within this region,  the applicability of our results
              from this region should be  important for extrapolating to similar ecosystems
              across the globe  (e.g. Asian continent).
