Title       : Violent Incidents Among African-American Public School Students: A Proposal for
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9727882

Award Number: 9727882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35005              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Lockwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Savannah State University
	      State College Branch
	      Savannah, GA  31404    912/356-2186

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research extends the  theoretical and empirical development of our
              understanding of  school-based violence.  The work adds to  prior research by
              conducting a sequence analysis of violent incidents among African-American
              public school students, and by conducting a formal content analysis from a
              social interactionist perspective  The project's database is transcribed
              interviews of participants in violent incidents. Both quantitative and
              qualitative (ethnographic) methods are being used to analyze data from 100
              participants participating in approximately 250 incidents. The particularly
              intriguing aspect of this research and where it is likely to lead to a major
              contribution to the literature on violence is that the research analyzes the
              narratives of opposing antagonists in violent events.  In the past, research
              has typically been based on the account of only one participant.  Because of
              its interactionist perspective and use of the incident or event as a unit of
              analysis, the research has the potential to augment other ongoing work being
              conducted by researchers under the auspices of the NSF sponsored National
              Consortium on Violence Research.  The potential impact on the infrastructure of
              science is significant, as well.   %%%  This research extends the  theoretical
              and empirical development of our understanding of  school-based violence.  The
              work adds to  prior research by conducting a sequence analysis of violent
              incidents among African-American public school students, and by conducting a
              formal content analysis from a social interactionist perspective  The project's
              database is transcribed interviews of participants in violent incidents. Both
              quantitative and qualitative (ethnographic) methods are being used to analyze
              data from 100 participants participating in approximately 250 incidents. The
              particularly intriguing aspect of this research and where it is likely to lead
              to a major contribution to the literature on violence is that the research
              analyzes the narratives of opposing antagonists in violent events.  In the
              past, research has typically been based on the account of only one participant.
               Because of its interactionist perspective and use of the incident or event as
              a unit of analysis, the research has the potential to augment other ongoing
              work being conducted by researchers under the auspices of the NSF sponsored
              National Consortium on Violence Research.  The potential impact on the
              infrastructure of science is significant, as well.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
