Title       : The Urea Cycle in Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2000  
File        : a9727741

Award Number: 9727741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilmar L. Salo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727741  Anderson  Most fish remove waste nitrogen (from protein and energy
              metabolism) as ammonia, which diffuses across the gills into the water.  This
              is in contrast to most terrestrial vertebrate animals, which convert ammonia to
              urea which is stored and excreted periodically in the urine (referred to as
              "ureotelic" species); the metabolic pathway for this conversion is called the
              urea cycle.  One group of fishes, the clasmobranchs (sharks and rays),
              synthesize and retain high concentrations of urea in their tissues for the
              purpose of maintaining an osmotic balance with the high salt concentration in
              sea water.  The urea cycle in these species is analogous to that in ureotelic
              species, but with some significant differences.  Dr. Anderson has determined
              the structure of the gene that expresses this unique enzyme catalyzing the
              first metabolic step in the urea cycle.  This same unique enzyme is found in
              some telcost fishes as well, but apparently is absent in most adult species,
              and he has determined the structure of the gene for the enzyme in several
              teleost fishes.  A surprising finding is that is several teleost species, this
              enzyme and in some cases, all of the urea cycle enzymes, is expressed primarily
              in muscle, rather than in liver as expected.  The proposed studies will help to
              establish if the gene for this enzyme of the urea cycle is present in all fish
              and when and how and why it is expressed.  The hypothesis is that this enzyme
              and the urea cycle are expressed only during embryogenesis (very early
              development) in most fish.  Ammonia toxicity is the number one problem in the
              aquaculture industry.  Understanding the mechanism of how expression of the
              urea cycle enzymes is regulated in fish may provide an opportunity to
              genetically modify fish to express the urea cycle and thus increase tolerance
              to ammonia.
