Title       : Functional and Structural Roles of Nucleolin in Vertebrate Cell Nucleoli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9727917

Award Number: 9727917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. DiMario pdimari@unixl.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727917  DiMario    In the nucleus of every eukaryotic cell, there is a
              morphologically distinct region termed the nucleolus, which can be seen readily
              by light microscopy.  The primary function of the nucleolus is the production
              of ribosomes.  The ribosome is the machine which translates the genetic code
              (in the form of messenger RNA) into specific protein sequences, and chemically
              it is a supramolecular complex consisting of defined proteins and ribonucleic
              acid molecules (r-RNAs).  The genes (DNA) for the r-RNA molecules are located
              in the nucleoli and are transcribed there, and certain aspects of ribosomal
              assembly take place there.  Although we know that nucleoli are the site in
              which ribosomes are made, relatively little is known about the molecular
              interactions that occur either between nucleolar-specific proteins and the
              small nucleolar RNAs, or between nucleolar-specific proteins and the nascent
              ribosomal RNA that is transcribed from genes within the nucleolus.  Also, very
              little is known about the functional contributions made by nucleolar proteins
              in pre-RNA processing, ribosome assembly, or nucleolar structure.      This
              proposal focuses on nucleolin, an abundant nucleolar protein with a modular
              structure.  Nucleolin is known to bind to pre-ribosomal RNA, but little else is
              known about its function or its interactions with other cellular components. 
              The primary objective of this project will be to genetically engineer a line of
              cultured mammalian cells (CHO cells) in which the synthesis of nucleolin can be
              turned on or off at will by the addition or subtraction of drugs from the
              culture medium (e.g., using either the glucocorticoid-inducible MMTV promoter
              or the tetracycline transactivator system).  The resulting modified cell lines
              will  be used to determine the life span of endogenous nucleolin in vivo and to
              characterize nucleolar structure in the absence of endogenous nucleolin.  This
              information will be used as the basis for subsequent studies (beyond the scope
              of this project)  to determine the biological consequences of expressing
              altered versions of nucleolin in the absence of endogenous wild-type nucleolin.
