Title       : Functional Signaling Domains of Notch Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9727951

Award Number: 9727951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Fleming flem@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fleming, Robert J..  9727951      During the development of multicellular
              organisms, single cellular receptors are often used at multiple developmental
              periods. The Notch gene family represents a highly conserved group of genes
              whose functions are required in organisms as diverse as nematodes and humans.
              Notch and Notch-related gene products function as cell membrane receptors for
              intercellular signaling events to coordinate cell fate decisions in a variety
              of tissues during development. Notch activity is regulated by membrane-bound
              ligands which, in Drosophila, are represented by the products of the genes
              Serrate (SER) and Delta (DL). SER-like and DL-like molecules have also been
              found to be conserved in the same species where Notch family genes are found.
              These ligands demonstrate distinct temporal and spatial expression patterns
              suggesting that they each regulate NOTCH in particular processes.
              Interestingly, both SER and DL can act to initiate NOTCH signaling and appear
              to have equivalent capabilities during some processes yet function distinctly
              in others.    Because SER and DL can elicit distinct responses from the single
              NOTCH receptor and since NOTCH is central to many cell fate decisions, these
              studies will investigate the mechanisms by which specificity is generated by
              each ligand upon association with NOTCH. The proposed experimentation will
              examine the roles of specific protein domains within SER and DL that contribute
              to the ability of that ligand to activate NOTCH in different cellular
              environments. Mechanisms of ligand function will be determined by constructing
              mutations of extracellular or intracellular (IC) domains of each ligand and
              expressing the mutant molecules in vivo. By analyzing the properties of these
              chimeric molecules relative to normal SER and DL, specific functional
              properties produced by individual protein domains will be determined.
              Initially, studies will focus on possible parallel mechanisms between NOTCH
              ligands and TGF(-like molecules that require IC domains f or proper
              extracellular function. Preliminary studies in these areas suggest that SER
              molecules function cooperatively and may activate NOTCH as a dimer or other
              aggregated form during some aspects of NOTCH signaling. These findings suggest
              other areas of experimentation including molecular examination for SER cleavage
              products and functional interactions between extracellular region mutations and
              the IC domain. Other areas of investigation include the characterization of a
              unique cysteine-rich domain found only within the SER ligand and not in DL. The
              properties of this domain will be characterized by deleting it from SER and/or
              inserting it into DL and assessing the ability of these modified ligands to
              interact with and/or activate the NOTCH receptor in specific cellular
              environments. Taken together, these studies are expected to expand the
              understanding of NOTCH signal regulation and further clarify mechanisms by
              which receptors in general may serve to send multiple, discrete signals upon
              activation by theft identified ligands.
