Title       : SGER: Encoding and Strategy Use in Children's Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9727881

Award Number: 9727881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha W. Alibali   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns conceptual development in childhood, focusing on the
              processes whereby children develop new problem-solving strategies.  When
              children solve problems, they `encode` - that is, extract and mentally
              represent -- perceptual regularities about the problems. The central
              theoretical premise of this project is that children use this encoded knowledge
              when they need to construct new strategies. This theoretical framework leads to
              predictions about when children will generate new strategies, and about the
              types of strategies they will generate.  The proposed experiments examine
              problem encoding and strategy change in children learning the concept of
              mathematical equivalence, which is the notion that the two sides of an equation
              (e.g., 6 + 4 = 10) represent the same quantity.  Understanding of this concept
              will be probed with problems of the form 3 + 4 + 5 = ? + 5; children are asked
              to supply the missing number (in this case, 7).  Study 1 tests two hypotheses: 
              (a) that feedback and instruction lead to changes in problem encoding; and (b)
              that children who encode problem features they do not use in applying their
              current strategies are especially likely to create new strategies.  Study 2
              explores two additional hypotheses:  (a) that modifications in children's
              encoding will lead them to construct new strategies; an (b) that the types of
              new strategies children generate will depend on the specific problem features
              they encode.  In addition to testing these substantive hypotheses the research
              will develop a set of new methodological tools for assessing children's problem
              encoding.  Two novel behavioral measures will be developed:  (a) assessments of
              performance on problem recognition tests (e.g., Which problem did you see
              earlier?, with choices including 3 + 4 + 5 = ?, 3 + 4 + 5 + 5 = ?, etc.); and
              (b) assessments of spontaneous hand gestures produced during problem
              explanations (e.g., pointing in a particular sequence to the numbers in the
              problem).  The studies will explore the relationship between these two
              measures, and how each relates to strategy use and strategy generation.  The
              results of the project will contribute to understanding of cognitive
              development, and should also provide a basis for improving instruction in
              mathematical problem-solving.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
