Title       : LT: Life Cycle Assessment/Design Methodology for Reinforced Commingled Recycled
               Plastic Lumber (CRPL) of Efficient Structural Form
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9727144

Award Number: 9727144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99643              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Engblom engblom@roo.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    305/768-8000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727144  Engblom  The objectives of this research are threefold and include: 
              (1) the characterization of micromorphology, (2) the  determination of life
              cycle mechanical properties, and (3)  the development of a computer-based
              design methodology,  i.e., for fiber-reinforced commingled recycled plastic 
              lumber (CRPL) of efficient structural form.  Reinforcements  would include
              hybrid combinations of chopped natural fibers,  chopped recycled synthetic
              fibers, and continuous synthetic  fibers.  Rectangular hollowcored CRPL
              profiles will be  extruded with variations in wall thickness and reinforcement 
              to obtain mechanical properties equivalent to or better than  2x4 wooden
              lumber.  The design methodology will be developed  on the basis of
              characterizing micro-morphology through  microscopy in combination with full
              scale structural  testing.    Rectangular hollow-cored CRPL profiles will be
              extruded with  variations in the weight percentages and types of chopped 
              fibers, variations in weight percentages of continuous glass  rovings,
              variations in thermoplastic waste, and variations  in compatibilizers.  A
              statistically significant set of  samples, of each of these material
              combinations, will be  subjected to tension, compression, flexure, fatigue and 
              creep structural testing to determine short/long term (life  cycle) properties.
               Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) will  also be performed on small specimens
              cut from structural  samples to quantify both the micro-morphology and damage 
              mechanisms of the various reinforced CRPL blends.  The  microscopy data will be
              essential in developing a finite  element (FE) based design methodology.  The
              computer  modeling approach taken will be to utilize repeating cells  (or
              super-elements) to model repeating' representative  volumes of the commingled
              thermoplastic matrix with  distributed reinforcement.    Synthetic lumber has
              been developed due to the large  quantities of dirty and/or mixed thermoplastic
              waste that is  not easily or cost effectively recyclabl e.  However,  primarily
              due to their low elastic moduli (stiffness)  properties, present unreinforced
              CRPL products do not  compete with pressure treated lumber for load-bearing 
              applications.  Perhaps as importantly as finding uses for  waste plastics is
              the need to minimize the environmental  impact of deforestation of old growth
              forests.  Additional  environmental impact is related to the toxic treatment of
               lumber.  The waste products from pressure treating  operations are highly
              toxic and require elaborate disposal  methods.  Furthermore, treated lumber
              itself poses health  hazards to people and the environment.  Without pressure 
              treatment, the life expectancy can range from 5-10 years for  lumber as
              compared to more that 30 years for plastic  alternatives.    The significance
              of the proposed research is, therefore,  that both a material properties data
              base and associated  design tools can be developed for hybrid forms of CRPL
              that  can potentially replace pressure-treated lumber in much  residential and
              commercial construction.  Long term 'life'  material properties data for
              reinforced CRPL does not  presently exist.  Since macro-mechanical behavior of 
              reinforced CRPL is strongly related to micro-morphology and  to structural
              form, efficient structural profiles  (extrusions) will be utilized in all of
              the structural  testing.  The knowledge gained in this research should  provide
              the basis for developing superior  construction materials which (1) pose no 
              health hazard, and (2) provide the means of  preventing waste plastics from
              ever entering  the waste stream in the future.  ***
