Title       : Regulation of the Cytoskeleton in the Early Drosophila Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9727944

Award Number: 9727944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerold A. Schubiger gerold@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In all animal cells, the rise and fall of cyclin controls the entry into and
              exit out of mitosis. The objective of this investigation is to link gene
              products that regulate the cell cycle in the nucleus with the dynamic
              regulation of the cytoskeleton in the cytoplasm. Changes in the cytoskeleton
              cause chromatids to segregate and cells to cleave. But the cytoskeleton is also
              responsible for movements of the nuclei within the cell and for cell shape
              changes. To study the role of cyclin in shaping the cytoskeleton, the PI will
              use the early Drosophila embryo because the first divisions are nuclear and
              take place within a single cell, the cycle is synchronous, and the regulation
              of the divisions depends entirely on maternal contributions.  By increasing and
              decreasing cyclin gene dose in the mother, the PI can define the role that
              cyclin has in microtubule and microfilament dynamics. The PI has found that
              increased cyclin results in faster and more complete microtubule breakdown. To
              identify other genes, which collaborate with cyclin and affect the microtubule
              dynamics, the PI has proposed a genetic screen.  During the early stages of
              embryogenesis in Drosophila, nuclei move in a specific phase of the cell cycle.
              This movement depends on the specific breakdown of the microfilament network.
              The dynamics of the microfilaments depend on several specific, known proteins,
              and we will characterize their role by changing their gene dose in the mother.
              Several characterized proteins are known to regulate microfilament dynamics.
              The PI will define their role by changing their gene dose in the mother.
