Title       : A National Library for Undergraduate Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and
               Technology Education: Needs, Options and Feasibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9727710

Award Number: 9727710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Dianne Martin                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodger W. Bybee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Research Council's Center for Science, Mathematics. and Engineering
              Education (The Center) proposes to undertake for the National Science
              Foundation a project that would examine the need, options, and issues in
              establishing a digital National Library for Undergraduate Science, Mathematics,
              Engineering, and Technology (SME&T) Education (hereafter referred to as the
              "National Library").  The purpose of such a library would be to provide a
              comprehensive, dynamic, and readily accessible and searchable collection of
              high-quality educational material in undergraduate science, mathematics, and
              engineering education that is intended to facilitate and enhance the NSF's
              programs to improve and evaluate undergraduate teaching and learning.    To
              facilitate the work of the NSF, the NRC will assess the strategy, and potential
              effectiveness for the Foundation to develop a National Library.  The proposed
              NRC project will produce a consensus report of findings and recommendations
              concerning the need for a digital National Library for Undergraduate SME&T
              Education, and the options, timeline, and components that will be important for
              planning a National Library. First, background papers on key subjects by
              acknowledged experts will be commissioned to provide state-of-the-art surveys
              of current opportunities for establishing a National Library and the challenges
              that NSF must confront if the Foundation decides to fund the National Library. 
              Second, these papers will be presented and discussed at a two-day workshop to
              be attended by individuals with technical expertise in digital libraries,
              representatives from the federal agencies sponsoring national library projects,
              college/university faculty and students, and representatives from the corporate
              sector.  Third, workshop proceedings will be developed to summarize the outcome
              of the workshop and offer recommendations about the feasibility and logistics
              for developing a National Library for undergraduate SME&T education.  The
              proceedings will be delivere d to the Foundation in mid-September, 1997.
