Title       : Superoxide Response Regulon of E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9727980

Award Number: 9727980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Weiss  9727980  SoxR of the bacterium Escherichia coli is a transcriptional
              activator for an oxidative stress regulon.  It is one of only three known
              regulatory Fe-S proteins and the only one with a  2Fe-2S  center.  Ultimate
              goals of the study are (i) to find out how oxidation of the Fe-S clusters
              alters SoxR to become a transcriptional activator, and (ii) to elucidate the
              redox pathway that counters the autooxidation of its Fe-S clusters and keeps
              them in a reduced state in the uninduced cell.  As an aid to the intended
              studies, SoxR derivatives will be produced containing deletions or protein
              fusions that may increase solubility and stability of this difficult protein. 
              The protein will be dissected by deletion and point mutations in order to map
              specific domains and to see which ones might interact.  These domains, whose
              functions are to be individually assayed, are ones involved in dimer formation,
              DNA binding, Fe-S cluster formation, reductase recognition, RNA polymerase
              binding, and open complex formation.  Heterodimers of mutant and wild type
              proteins will be used to determine the possible participation of both
              polypeptide strands in some of these domains.  In addition, the cellular
              reductase pathway for SoxR will be investigated by standard techniques of
              protein and cofactor fractionation.  In addition, mutations for some possible
              genes in this pathway will be examined, and toward this end, insertion
              mutations will be produced for each of the two known flavodoxins.   The SoxR
              protein of Escherichia coli regulates about 10 genes responding to oxidative
              stress.  It can sense changes in the oxidation state of the cell, which are
              brought about by various oxidants such as the superoxide radical anion or
              nitric oxide.  Superoxide is produced from oxygen by electron leakage during
              aerobic metabolism.  It is also produced by some environmental toxicants like
              the herbicide paraquat and by macrophages as an antibacterial agent.  The
              ultimate goal of this project is an understanding of cellular de fenses against
              highly reactive derivatives of oxygen, which is important, for example, in
              understanding how bacteria overcome plant defenses that involve oxidants.
