Title       : Prospects for DNA from Neandertals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9727105

Award Number: 9727105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Stoneking mas23@psuvm.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently, Dr. S. PÞÞbo of Munich determined a mitochondrial DNA sequence from
              the Neandertal type specimen, and it was independently confirmed in our
              laboratory.  Sequence analysis  indicates that it is unlikely that Neandertals
              contributed mtDNA to contemporary human populations;  however, this conclusion
              rests on this single sequence.  A more definitive demonstration requires an
              assessment of the range of mtDNA variation in Neandertals.  Such analyses
              require the successful retrieval of authentic DNA from additional Neandertal
              remains.     The objective of this research is, therefore, to provide a
              thorough assessment of the prospects for retrieval of DNA from at least 10
              additional Neandertal remains.  This will be accomplished by analyzing a number
              of remains by a two-step procedure.  First, a small quantity of bone powder
              will be analyzed for amino acid racemization, which has been shown to be a
              reasonable proxy for DNA.  Second, for those specimens for which the degree of
              racemization is low enough to suggest  DNA might survive in sufficient quantity
              and quality for analysis, DNA will be extracted and primers specific for the
              previously-determined Neandertal mtDNA sequence will be used in PCR
              amplifications.   All amplification reactions which yield a PCR product of the
              expected size, and for which amplification and extraction controls are suitably
              negative, will be cloned and the sequence of at least 10 clones determined. 
              Similar work will be carried out in parallel by Dr. PÞÞbo's laboratory in
              Munich.  Specimens that yield a Neandertal-like sequence (as judged by
              comparison with the sequence obtained from the Neandertal type specimen), and
              which are replicated in both laboratories, will be judged as yielding reliable
              and authentic Neandertal DNA.  These specimens would then be the subject of
              future analysis to determine additional mtDNA sequence information.  The use of
              Neandertal-specific primers, which is only now possible, means that a lack of
              success cannot be attributed to the inadvertent use of primers that select
              against any authentic Neandertal DNA. Hence, specimens that do not yield
              Neandertal-like sequences can be truly said to lack sufficient DNA for
              analysis.  In this way, the goal of this work, namely a robust assessment of
              the likelihood of obtaining additional authentic Neandertal mtDNA sequences,
              will be achieved.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
