Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Maize kn1 Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a9727611

Award Number: 9727611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Hake maizesh@nature.berkely.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727611  Hake  Shoot meristems are self-organizing centers responsible for
              organogenesis of the shoot.  They contribute initial cells for lateral organs
              while maintaining a population of indeterminate cells. Knotted1 (kn1) encodes a
              homeodomain protein tht is abundantly expressed in shoot meristems and is
              absent in leaves.  The down-regulation of kn1 in the meristem appears to
              predict where the next leaf will form.  kn1 is expressed during embyrogenesis
              at the site of the initiating meristem.   Expression persists into the
              inflorescence, branch and floral meristems, but disappears as carpels initiate.
               kn1 loss of function mutants in maize are defective in meristem maintenance;
              fewer branches form from the inflorescence but extra determinate organs such as
              leaves and carpels form.  Ectopic expression of kn1 in tobacco andArabidopsis
              causes a number of alterations including very dwarfed plants and lobed leaves
              bearing ectopic shoots.  From these expression studies, gain and loss of
              function phenotypes, we conclude that kn1 plays a significant role in meristem
              maintenance.  A series of experiments are proposed to understand the regulation
              and function of kn1 with the long term goal of understanding how shoot
              meristems function.  The mechanism by which kn1 expression is restricted to
              specific domains of the meristem will determined A construct has been placed
              into transgenic maize that contains 3kb of the kn1 promoter and the kn1 3' end
              driving GUS.  The expression of four independent events revealed non-specific,
              ubiquitous expression rather than meristem-specific expression as seen with in
              situ analysis.  Further transgenic experiments will test the role of the
              introns in spatial regulation of kn1 expression.  The extent of
              posttranscriptional regulation will be explored by examining kn1 RNA expression
              patterns in 35S:kn1 or UBI:kn1 transgenic plants.  The kn1 promoter construct
              will be used to determine whether KN1 regulates its own transcription.  In
              order to identify genes that interact with k n1, genetic screens will be
              carried out to identify mutations that enhance or suppress the kn1 loss of
              function phenotype.  The yeast two hybrid system will be utilized to identify
              other interacting components and to test whether zag1, the maize AGAMOUS
              homolog, interacts with kn1 since the loss of function phenotype of the female
              flower is similar for zag1 and kn1.  To identify downstream targets of kn1, an
              inducible system was constructed and transformed into Arabidopsis.  kn1 will be
              induced for a limited time period and RNA isolated from induced and uninduced
              plants to compare the populations of transcripts using differential display and
              PCR-substraction cloning.  Identification of the maize homolog is then
              possible.      The research goals of this proposal, understanding the mechanism
              by which kn1 is regulated, finding proteins that interact with KN1, and
              identifying potential targets, will collectively increase our understanding of
              kn1 and thus increase our knowledge of how meristems function.
