Title       : Collaborative Project: Pokeweed Antiviral Protein and Inhibition of Ribosomal
               Frameshifting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9727941

Award Number: 9727941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilgun Tumer Tumer@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727941
Tumer/Dinman

Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), a 29-kDa antiviral
              protein isolated from Phytolacca americana, catalytically removes a specific
              adenine residue from the alpha-sarcin loop of eukaryotic and prokaryotic
              ribosomes. Ribosomes depurinated in this manner are unable to bind the EF-2/GTP
              complex and protein synthesis is blocked at the translocation step. PAP
              displays broad-spectrum antiviral activity against plant and animal viruses,
              including influenza virus, poliovirus, herpes simplex virus, and HIV. While the
              mechanism underlying the catalytic activity of PAP has been determined, much
              less is known about how PAP gains access to its ribosomal target and the role
              other proteins play in this process. Research from these laboratories has
              focused on characterizing the mechanism of cytotoxicity and antiviral activity
              of PAP. Recently, it has been demonstrated that expression of PAP in S.
              cerevisiae leads to specific inhibition of frameshifting in the +1 direction
              and significantly inhibits retrotransposition of the yeast retrovirus Ty1.
              These results suggested that PAP can be used as a specific probe to dissect the
              mechanisms regulating programmed ribosomal frameshifting and as a general tool
              to study the elongation phase of protein synthesis. The primary objective of
              this project is to use recombinant PAP mutants and yeast cellular mutants to
              investigate the mechanism by which PAP gains access to the ribosome and
              inhibits +1 frameshifting in S. cerevisiae. These studies will enhance our
              basic understanding of the mechanism of action of PAP and elucidate the role of
              PAP in translational reading frame maintenance and virus propagation. 

This
              project will use Pokeweed Antiviral Protein (PAP), a plant protein that
              modifies the ribosome and thereby affects cellular protein synthesis, as a tool
              to study a phenomenon known as ribosomal frameshifting. Ribosomal frameshifting
              is a process by which messenger RNA, which contains information defining the
              sequence of amino acids in a newly synthesized protein, slips in the protein
              synthesis machinery, so that different three letter words are read. The project
              will characterize the structure of PAP that is responsible for this activity
              and examine other cellular proteins that may be involved. This project will
              increase our understanding of ribosomal frameshifting, which is required for
              the replication of some viruses. It may also increase our understanding of
              translation elongation, the process by which the three letter words are read
              and amino acids are added to the newly synthesized protein. Finally, it could
              lead to therapeutic or antiviral strategies for animals and plants.

