Title       : Catalysis by Shape Selected Metallic Nanoparticles: Mechanism of Shape Control
               and Nanoparticle Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9727633

Award Number: 9727633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa A. El-Sayed mostafa.el-sayed@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhonglin L. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              focusses on the characterization of transition metal  nanoparticles prepared by
              a process involving hydrogen reduction  and control of particle shape by the
              presence of capping polymers.   Professors El-Sayed and Wang and their students
              at Georgia Tech  will characterize the shape and composition of these
              nanoparticles  using high resolution transmission electron microscopy,
              parallel-  detection electron energy-loss spectroscopy, energy-dispersive X- 
              ray spectroscopy, and Raman and FTIR vibrational spectroscopies.   The
              objective is to establish an understanding of the synthetic  parameters that
              control the shapes of these nanoparticles and their  properties.  The long-term
              aim of this work is to develop useful  nanoparticle structures for applications
              in heterogeneous  catalysis.  A new synthetic process for preparing transition
              metal  nanoparticles that can control their shape has been developed by 
              Professors El-Sayed and Wang at Georgia Tech.  This process  involves reduction
              of metal ions using molecular hydrogen in the  presence of polymers that cap
              the particle surface.  The factors  that are important in controlling the size,
              shape, and composition  of these particles will be determined using an array of
              surface  characterization methods, particularly high resolution transmission 
              electron microscopy.  The long-term goal of this work is to develop  a family
              of new low temperature heterogeneous catalysts for  industrial use.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
