Title       : Action and Composition of Assassin Bug Venom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9727532

Award Number: 9727532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37530              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9727532  PI:  EDWARDS  Some animals can produce venom that includes not only
              slowly acting enzymes, but very rapidly acting neurotoxins, which are molecular
              compounds that have drastic effects on the signalling or transmission
              properties of nerve cells.  These compounds may be used for prey capture, as in
              some snakes and spiders, or for defense, as in some insects.  Recently it has
              been discovered that a potent rapid neurotoxicity remains in heat-denatured
              saliva of an insect called the assassin bug, which squirts this venomous saliva
              at predatory larger insects, causing rapid paralysis.  This toxic activity
              appears to be from non-enzymatic peptides.  This Small Grant for Exploratory
              Research is to isolate, purify and identify neuroactive components for
              comparison with known neuroactive peptides, and to establish their mode of
              action using pharmacological studies on insect nerve-muscle proparations.  The
              working hypothesis is that the active components are peptides that act at the
              neuromuscular junction, or act to generally depolarize membranes by acting on
              specific channels or by creating membrane pores.  This work opens a potentially
              large new area of research, because we know about some neurotoxic venoms from
              spiders and some from wasps and bees, but virtually nothing about other insect
              neurotoxins.  The potential impact of this work in neuroscience is high because
              the few well-characterized known toxins have led to particularly useful
              information about the molecular structure of nerve cell membranes.  This new
              venom may have novel molecular properties, and the amounts of readily
              collectable venom are far greater than for other insect or spider toxins, which
              could lead to an inexpensive commercial source for pharmacology.  The impact of
              this work in ecology is also likely to be high because it will open questions
              about molecular evolution of insect venoms as well as evolutionary development
              of insect defense strategies.
