Title       : Genetic Analysis of Flavobacterium johnsoniae (Cytophaga johnsonae) Gliding
               Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a9727825

Award Number: 9727825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. McBride mcbride@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              McBride   9727825  Gliding motility (the active movement of cells over surfaces
              without the aid of flagella) is a trait shared by many unrelated bacteria, yet
              the mechanism of gliding motility has remained a mystery for over 100 years. 
              Newly developed genetic techniques will be used to analyze Flavobacterium
              johnsoniae (formerly Cytophaga johnsonae) gliding motility.  Transposon
              mutagenesis and cosmid complementation will be used to identify F. johnsoniae
              gliding motility genes (gld genes).  The gld genes will be cloned in E. coli,
              sequenced, and analyzed.  The sequences will be compared to sequence databases
              to determine possible functions for the individual components of the gliding
              machinery.  Mutations will created in individual gld genes and the effects on
              cell motility will be assessed.  gld genes will also be cloned onto expression
              vectors in E. coli to allow overproduction of the Gld proteins.  These proteins
              will be used for biochemical experiments aimed at determining their functions. 
              They will also be used to raise antibodies.  The antibodies against the
              individual GLD proteins will be used to determine the amounts of each GLD
              protein in the motile cells.  The antibodies will also be used to localize the
              proteins within the cells by cell fractionation experiments and by
              immunoelectron microscopy.  These studies will lead to the development of a
              model to explain the mechanism of bacterial gliding motility.  In addition to
              expanding our knowledge on this common but little understood means of bacterial
              locomotion, these studies could have more practical value since gliding
              bacteria are important as pathogens of plants, animals, and humans, as agents
              of biodegredation, and as producers of enzymes, antibodies and other secondary
              metabolites.
