Title       : Agile Manufacturing: Integrated Manufacturing Technology Roadmapping (IMTR)
               Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9727891

Award Number: 9727891
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Neal   (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Brosey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DOE-Oak Ridge Operations
	      
	      Oak Ridge, TN  37830    /   -

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5223,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9727891  Neal    This research is to develop a set of enabling technology
              roadmaps which identify key cross cutting advances and capabilities required to
              meet near and long term goals of the U.S. manufacturing community.  This
              project is intended to build on the roadmapping work done for the Next
              Generation Manufacturing study by identifying specific research needs,
              opportunities, gaps and overlaps for the next 15 years.  The goal of this
              effort is to provide a focused national research agenda which will highlight
              opportunities for individual and collaborative R&D throughout the U.S.
              manufacturing community. The study will include:(1)a technology assessment -
              current state of the art needs and barriers;(2)requirements - goals and
              objectives to advance enabling manufacturing technologies over the next 15
              years;(3) technology roadmap - timeline of required capabilities and advances;
              and(4)current programs-directory of related ongoing federal and private
              development activities. Subject areas will be drawn from the Next Generation
              Manufacturing study and will include: Adaptive Responsive Information  Systems;
              Pervasive Modeling and Simulation; Next Generation Manufacturing Processes and
              Equipment; and Enterprise Integration tools. There has been little concerted
              effort or collective focus to address the technical challenges associated with
              "Next Generation Manufacturing". Many of these challenges are too difficult for
              a single company or government agency to address. It is clear that there is a
              need to develop broad-based plans that address the infrastructure tools and
              capabilities essential to the evolution of the nations' manufacturing base. The
              U.S. manufacturing community would greatly benefit by having a more cohesive
              research agenda highlighting key technology needs in manufacturing
              infrastructure.  This is especially crucial in the current environment where
              the amount of R&D money available for manufacturing is declining. The results
              of this project would provide a mechanism for agencies  and industry to pool
              their resources in areas of mutual interest.
