Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Two-Phase Flow Instabilities in Boiling and
               Condensing Flow System, Award in Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9727087

Award Number: 9727087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20968              (Estimated)
Investigator: P K. Sarma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Andhra University
	      
	      Waltair, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9727087  Sarma  Description:  This award is for a joint project in mechanical
              engineering  entitled "US-India Cooperative Research: Two Phase Flow
              Instabilities in  Boiling & Condensing Flow Systems".  The co-investigators are
              Sadik  Kakac of the University of Miami and P.K. Sarma of Andhra University  in
              Visakhaputnam.  The investigations on two-phase flow instabilities and  heat
              transfer in horizontal in-tube boiling and condensing systems are  
              experimental and theoretical.  The main objectives of the research are to 
              study the fundamental mechanisms of various boiling and condensing two-  phase
              flow instabilities, the parametric effects on these instabilities, the 
              interaction between heat transfer and these instabilities, and to model these 
              complicated phenomena mathematically.  By combining their expertise, the 
              investigators expect to be able to reveal the similar fundamental physical 
              mechanism of both boiling and condensing flows dynamics and heat  transfer, and
              to further clarify the differences between the two physical  phenomena.      
              Scope:  This joint project resulted from an NSF supported workshop held  at
              Andhra University in 1995.  The research is complementary and  mutually
              beneficial.  The US PI has extensive research experience in the  study of
              boiling flow instabilities and oscillations; while the Indian PI has  extensive
              experience in the study of condensing heat transfer and  dynamics. 
              Accordingly, experiments in boiling two-phase flow  instabilities will be
              conducted at Miami, while the two-phase flow  condensation instabilities and
              heat transfer experiments will be done at  Andhra.  Research teams at both
              universities will participate in each  other's experimental investigations, and
              in the theoretical model  development.  As a new collaboration and for its
              involvement of students  in the research, this project supports INT objectives.
                   ***
