Title       : Conformational Analysis and Energetics of Cyclic and Open Chain Ketones, Ethers,
               and Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9727788

Award Number: 9727788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas Baer Baer@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, Tomas Baer will use resonance enhanced   multi-photon
              ionization spectroscopy (REMPI) of jet-cooled molecules to   investigate the
              ultraviolet spectra and conformational equilibria of ring   and open-chain
              molecules such as ketones, ethers, and hydrocarbons.    Temperature-dependent
              spectral data will yield conformational enthalpy   differences which can be
              compared with values from calculations.    Gas-phase measurements will be
              related to solution studies via solvent   effects.  Vibrational
              relaxation-isomerization rates in the supersonic   expansion will be modeled
              using the master equation.  The accurate   measurement of interaction energies
              will provide valuable information   about the nature and strength of non-bonded
              interactions of alkyl groups   in organic molecules.  Many molecules have
              flexible structures, where the overall positions of   atoms can vary
              significantly without breaking or making any of the strong   chemical bonds
              that connect the atoms.  The many forces exerted among   different regions of a
              molecule that are much weaker than chemical bonds   can strongly influence the
              overall arrangement of atoms in the molecule.    For large molecular systems
              (such as biological molecules), the   collective effect of these small forces
              can play a dominant role in   determining the structure, and thus the
              functional behavior, of the   molecule.  These studies will explore the nature
              of some of these weak   interaction energies.  Results from this project could
              help to refine the   data bases used for computational predictions of
              properties of large   organic molecules.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
