Title       : Context Dependence of Learning and Memory Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9727992

Award Number: 9727992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Bouton mbouton@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nontechnical Abstract  Context Dependence of Learning and Memory Processes   
              Memory is usually best when the act of remembering takes  place in a presence
              of the background stimuli ( contextual  stimuli ) that were also present when
              learning occurred.  However, this is not always true; memory for some types of 
              material is not very context- dependent.  This project seeks  to understand why
              some memories are context-dependent and  others are context-independent.  It
              will study the role of  contextual stimuli in classical conditioning, a
              fundamental  example of associative learning that is connected with many 
              aspects of cognition and behavior in animals and humans.  Rats will learn that
              one stimulus, such as a tone or a light  or a distinctive flavor, signals the
              occurrence of another  stimulus, such as a food pellet or a mild footshock or 
              malaise.  The signal comes evoke behaviors that indicate  that learning (and
              also remembering) have taken place.  The  project will test the effects of
              changing the context on  various forms of this kind of learning.  Some, but not
              all,  are context-dependent.  For example, if a signal is  associated with
              different stimuli (e.g., shock and food) at  different times, the second
              association, but not the first,  is typically context-dependent.  The project
              will test  several ideas of why this should be so.  It will also study  several
              different kinds of cues that can provide a   context.   This research will have
              major impact on theories  of learning, memory, and acquired motivation.  It
              will also  be relevant to research on the neurobiology of learning  memory. 
              And the results may help us design better cognitive-  behavioral therapies of
              human behavior disorders (e.g., drug  dependence and anxiety), which may be
              successful or not  depending on whether the learning they involve is context- 
              independent.
