Title       : RUI: Genetic Analysis of the Function of Cytochrome Oxidase Subunits Encoded on
               Mitochondrial DNA in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a9727738

Award Number: 9727738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Cameron cameron@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Cameron  9727738  Cytochrome c oxidase is an enzyme complex required for
              respiration in all eucaryotes and some procaryotes. The enzyme complex is the
              terminal member of the electron transport chain, responsible for transferring
              electrons from cytochrome c to molecular oxygen. Electron transfer is coupled
              to proton pumping, and the ensuing proton gradient is used to drive the
              synthesis of ATP. The number of subunits in the complex is variable, ranging
              from three or four in bacteria to as many as 13 in the bovine enzyme. The three
              largest subunits, subunit I, II and III are encoded on mitochondrial DNA in
              eucaryotes and are homologous to the three subunits found in some procaryotes.
              Therefore, it is likely that these mitochondrially encoded subunits represent
              the catalytically significant subunits of the enzyme. Subunit I is required for
              both electron transport and for proton pumping. Subunit II has been shown to
              carry a binuclear copper center, which is the initial site of electron transfer
              from cytochrome c. In contrast to subunits I and II, the function of subunit
              III is not well understood, and it has not been demonstrated to have a role in
              either electron transfer or proton pumping. Subunits II and III are encoded by
              simple, unspliced genes and all three of these genes contain regions of amino
              acid sequence which are conserved in all organisms in which the genes have been
              studied.  To better understand the function of subunits II and III of
              cytochrome c oxidase, yeast strains with defects in the enzyme due to mutations
              in these two mitochondrial genes have been identified. Such defects lead to
              loss of the ability to carry out cellular respiration. A number of strains
              bearing mutations in the gene encoding subunit II ( COXII ) and three
              frameshift mutations in the gene encoding subunit III( COXIII ) have been
              identified and analysis of some of these strains has been completed. The
              remaining strains are being investigated in detail. In addition, the collection
              of strains bearing mutations in t hese two genes will be enlarged by
              identification of additional spontaneous mutants and by construction of
              specific mutations of interest using site-directed mutagenesis. Once strains
              with mutations that have the potential to shed light on the function of the
              subunits have been identified/constructed, the investigation will be extended
              to revertants of these strains, where the revertants have recovered function.
              Classes of revertants that may be obtained are true revertants that restore the
              wild type sequence, pseudo-revertants where a different amino acid codon is
              substituted for the one which originally resided at that site, intragenic
              suppressors where a mutation in one region of a polypeptide chain can
              compensate for an alteration in another region, and strains carrying extragenic
              suppressors. Among the latter group may be gene products, both nuclear and
              mitochondrial, that interact directly with these two subunits or are involved
              in their expression. This analysis will yield information concerning
              functionally critical amino acids in the proteins and possibly about
              interactions between oxidase subunits.   Undergraduate students will be
              involved in both the research and analysis of the results.    Because the
              subunit amino acid sequences are so highly conserved, information deduced about
              the function of these proteins in yeast should help to elucidate the function
              of these proteins in higher organisms. Such an understanding is of importance
              to understanding how organisms use oxygen in the process of generating energy.
