Title       : Role of Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Channels in the CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9727724

Award Number: 9727724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Zufall fzufa001@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-27724  ZUFALL      An important feature of the nervous system is its
              ability to  receive complex signals and translate some of them into meaningful 
              information, a process that is called information processing.  Information
              processing is not a static process but is highly  adaptive; this provides the
              basis for organisms to change in  response to certain stimuli, or -in other
              words- to learn.  Perhaps most critical for this process are proteins termed
              "ion  channels" because they have a pore in the middle that allows  certain
              ions to pass back and forth between inside and outside of  the cell.  In this
              project, Dr. Zufall will analyze the properties  of a novel class of ion
              channels and determine their role in  neuronal information processing.  These
              ion channels are termed  "cyclic nucleotide-gated" (CNG) cation channels
              because they can  be activated by the ubiquitous intracellular messenger
              molecules  cAMP and cGMP ("cations" are positively charged ions).  An 
              important property of these channels is that they allow for the  entry of Ca2+
              into nerve cells which itself acts as an important  messenger molecule in
              neuronal signaling. The general approach  being used is to use cultured neurons
              (neurons grown in a dish)  from a specific brain area (the "olfactory bulb")
              which is  critical for the sense of smell, and to probe these neurons with 
              specific markers for CNG channels.  The next step will be to apply 
              electrophysiological recording methods and to measure ionic  currents through
              activated CNG channels.  This will allow for the  characterization of
              functional properties of CNG channels and  determination of their specific
              roles in neuronal signal transfer.  A second goal is to use a microscope
              capable of detecting Ca2+  fluxes through activated CNG channels. Results from
              this project  will establish the existence and properties of this novel family 
              of ion channels in neurons of the central nervous system and  determine their
              precise role in information processing.
