Title       : Paleolithic Faunas of the Zagros Mountains: Zooarchaeological and Taphonomic
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9727668

Award Number: 9727668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Curtis Marean and colleagues will
              analyze faunal remains recovered from archaeological sites in the Zagros
              Mountains of Iran and Iraq. From the early 1950s until political difficulties
              in the 1970s made fieldwork impossible, American archaeologists excavated a
              number of cave and rock shelter sites in this region. In addition to material
              which shed light on the origins of agriculture, extensive Middle Paleolithic
              material was recovered. Generally attributed to Neanderthal people and dated
              between ca. 40,000 and 200,000 years ago, it documents the culture of the
              inhabitants of Europe and Western Asia prior to the appearance of anatomically
              modern humans. While archaeologists have examined the stone tools from many of
              these sites, the associated fauna is almost completely unstudied. Much of it is
              stored in museums within the United States and Dr. Marean and colleagues will
              conduct a systematic analysis of these materials. The project has several
              goals. Most of the faunal remains were introduced into the sites by humans as
              food and therefore reflect the range of species eaten. Through analysis of  the
              body parts represented and the cut marks they contain, it will also be possible
              to determine the methods by which prey were obtained. Some archaeologists
              believe that Neanderthal peoples were fully competent hunters while others
              argue that they obtained meat from large animals primarily through scavenging.
              Dr. Marean's previous work has demonstrated that to address such questions it
              is necessary to examine not only complete bones and large easily identifiable
              fragments but also smaller pieces which archaeologists usually ignore. He has
              developed a methodology to accomplish this goal. Finally, through an intersite
              comparison it will be possible to examine the issue of behavioral variability.
              Preliminary evidence has surprisingly indicated relatively little stereotypic
              behavior but a different mix of species at sites which are environmentally
              similar.  Archaeologists have focused attention on the Neanderthal peoples of
              Europe because they are the immediate predecessors of anatomically modern
              humans. While they share many traits, both behavioral and biological, with
              modern humans, archaeological data exhibit patterns (observed but not
              understood) which are clearly distinct. Through analysis of these `near
              relatives` it is possible to examine modern human adaptations in a broader
              comparative context. This research will provide data of interest to many
              prehistorians. It will also assist in graduate student training.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
