Title       : Receptor Phospatases and Control of Neurite Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a9727971

Award Number: 9727971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo R. Macagno   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727971  MACAGNO     Despite many novel recent findings, it is still a mystery
              how cells in the developing nervous system know where to grow.  Most neurons,
              by the time they have reached maturity, have elaborated long projections
              (axons) that follow set pathways to reach targets far from their cell bodies. 
              To do this, they must make a myriad of choices, such as when and where to grow,
              where to turn, and how to stop growing when they reach the correct target. 
              These phenomena are thought to be mediated by the growth cone, a specialized
              motile structure found at the leading edge of the growing axon.  Growth cones
              are believed to posses a variety of molecular receptors on their surface
              membranes that sense and relay into the cell local environmental signals as
              they are encountered, which then induce the cell to make steering and growth
              decisions.       Dr. Eduardo Macagno and his collaborators will study how a
              pair of newly-described molecular receptors, known as LAR-like receptor
              tyrosine phosphatases, are involved in axon growth and in target selection. 
              The structure of these molecules suggests that their domains outside the cell
              can bind specific molecules and that such binding could activate their domains
              inside the cell, which can in turn modify the properties of other components of
              the cell machinery.  Preliminary experimental results have suggested that these
              molecular receptors play important roles in the decisions of where and perhaps
              when certain neurons will grow.  Using the embryonic leech as a simplified
              system in which to study the process of axon outgrowth, it was demonstrated
              that when the normal functioning of these receptors is interfered with, the
              neurons that normally express these receptors often undergo strongly aberrant
              patterns of growth.       Dr. Macagno's research group will be examining in
              more detail what roles these receptors play in normal neuronal development. 
              For example, do they help decide where and when branches turn, or how fast they
              grow?  To help answer suc h questions, observations will be made over time on
              live, individual neurons, as their axonal projections extend in the developing
              embryo.  They will also use both genetic and biochemical approaches to identify
              the molecules that bind to these receptors, determine where such molecules are
              located in the developing embryo, and study what happens in the growth cone
              when they bind to the receptors.  Results from these studies will help
              elucidate the nature of the molecular receptor-based signaling processes that
              occur in growth cones, and thus help us to understand how neurons find and
              recognize their targets in the developing animal.
