Title       : GerE-dependent Transcription in Sporulating B. Subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9727725

Award Number: 9727725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB97-27725  MORAN    As the bacterium Bacillus subtilis differentiates from the
              vegetative form into a dormant endospore, complex morphological and
              physiological changes occur which require the sequential expression of many
              genes.  During the process, new RNA polymerase sigma subunits appear
              (oF,oE,oG,ok), displacing one another in a sequential cascade and conferring on
              the RNA polymerase a changing specificity for the recognition of different
              classes of promoters.  This mechanism of altering transcriptional specificity
              is a fundamental element in the regulation of sporulation gene expression. 
              However, during sporulation ancillary transcription factors regulate the use of
              promoters by RNA polymerase containing the sporulation-induced sigma factors. 
              These ancillary transcription factors provide an opportunity to use mutational
              analysis to study their interaction with the sporulation-induced RNA
              polymerases.  In this project the study of a DNA binding protein (GerE) that
              functions during sporulation is expected to yield novel insights into the
              mechanism of this regulator, which is representative of an important class of
              transcriptional factors found in most bacteria.    GerE is a small, 72 amino
              acid DNA binding protein that is required for activation of several ok -
              dependent promoters during the late stage of sporulation.  The amino acid
              sequence of GerE is homologous to the -35 binding region of RNA polymerase
              sigma factors, and the DNA-binding region of a family of two-component type
              response regulators including DegU, ComA, FixJ, and BvgA, and the
              transcriptional activator MalT.  There is no structural information on this
              important class of transcriptional activators.  However, the small size of GerE
              makes it a good candidate for structural analysis.  This research we will use
              genetic and biochemical approaches to test the hypothesis that GerE interacts
              directly with ok  at some promoters and with other subunits of ok  RNA
              polymerase at other promoters to stimulate transcription.  These st udies will
              complement studies of collaborators in which NMR techniques will be used to
              determine the structure of GerE.
