Title       : Sigma Factor Exchange During Bacillus Subtilis Sporulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2000   
File        : a9727927

Award Number: 9727927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Haldenwang Haldenwang@UTHSCSA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Haldenwang  9727927  The occurrence of multiple RNA polymerase specificity
              determinants (sigma factors) provides a cell with a powerful device for gene
              control. The substitution of one for another of these proteins on core RNA
              polymerase (RNAP) can activate or suppress a large number of genes by a single
              regulatory event. At least thirteen unique sigma factors are present in the
              bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Four of these are synthesized only during a simple
              differentiation (sporulation) that the bacterium undergoes in response to
              nutritional stress. The sporulation-specific sigma factors replace the
              vegetative sigmas on RNAP and are the chief activators of sporulation genes.
              This project seeks to determine the mechanisms by which sigma factor
              substitution is regulated to properly time and compartmentalize spore gene
              expression. Experiments are planned to examine the process by which the
              principal vegetative cell sigma factor (sigmaA) is excluded from RNAP and the
              predominant sporulation-specific sigma factor (sigmaE) is activated to replace
              it in just one of the two compartments that are formed by the developing cell.
              SigmaE is necessary for sigmaA's displacement from RNAP. In vitro experiments
              will measure the binding of sigmaA, sigmaE and the precursor form of sigmaE
              (pro-sigmaE) to RNAP to determine whether differences in the inherent
              affinities of each sigma for RNAP are sufficient to explain the in vivo pattern
              of sigma factor turnover on RNAP, or if other regulators are likely to be
              involved.  Additional in vitro studies will ask which sigma factor activities
              are inhibited by the 27 amino acid "pro" sequence that is present on the
              precursor form of sigmaE. The pro sequence not only silences sigmaE, but also
              tethers pro-sigmaE to the septum that separates the sporulating cell's two
              compartments. Genetic and biochemical experiments will be employed to learn the
              elements of the "pro" sequence that are responsible for membrane binding, the
              proteins in the membrane with which this sequence is l ikely to interact, and
              whether membrane binding of pro-sigmaE is essential for its processing into
              sigmaE. Other genetic experiments will attempt to discover the identity of a
              putative forespore specific protease which appears to be responsible for
              limiting sigmaE accumulation in that compartment.  Sporulation represents an
              extremely tractable model for studying sequential gene expression in a
              differentiating cell. The devices that Bacillus employs to communicate ongoing
              morphological development to its transcriptional machinery have become
              paradigms for how such processes could be controlled in a variety of systems.  
               This research has at least two areas of relevance. One is in defining how
              cells communicate structural changes to the genes, whose activities need to be
              altered for the cell to properly respond to these changes. This could provide
              insights into how the process  in which the communication could be improved,
              when needed for the repair of damaged tissues. A second area involves
              determining the basic properties of prokaryotic transcriptional regulators and
              the factors influencing protein stability in prokaryotic cells. These types of
              information may be useful in improved strategies for better expressing
              recombinant proteins in bacterial hosts.
