Title       : Fundamental Reactions of Coordinated Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1998  
File        : a9727500

Award Number: 9727500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Templeton joetemp@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              program provides continued support for studies of fundamental reactions   of
              coordinated ligands by Dr. Joseph L. Templeton, Department of   Chemistry,
              University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  Research will be   carried out in
              three areas all involving the synthesis of organometallic   complexes utilizing
              the tridentate   hydridotris(3,5-dimethylpyrazolyl)borate ligand, Tp'.  The
              strategy for   each area is to explore fundamental  reactivity patterns of
              coordinated   substrate ligands.  The first area extends the chemistry of
              chiral d4   complexes of tungsten previously shown to successfully control  
              stereochemistry at ligand beta-sites.  A cationic methylene carbene   complex
              will be used for stoichiometric and catalytic reaction studies of   substrate
              ligands.  For example, catalytic aziridine formation occurs by   reaction of
              ethyl diazoacetate with imine adducts. Single enantiomer   studies will be
              pursued.  The second and main area of the project   involves the use of a new
              high oxidation state d2 tungsten oxo system   which simultaneously accommodates
              both pi-acid and pi-base ligands.  New   d2 tungsten complexes should yield
              chiral organometallic derivatives that   contain sigma or pi bound organic
              ligands.  Preliminary results show   interesting and different reactivities
              such as ligand coupling reactions   (C-C bond formation) and proton addition at
              the oxo group converting  W=O   to W-OH, a rare example of an organometallic
              terminal hydroxo ligand.    These reactions will be extended to seek catalytic
              transfer of nitrene   and carbene ligands and  to generate chiral d2 complexes
              suitable for   promoting Lewis acid assisted organic transformations.  The
              third area   involves the preparation of chiral Tp' derivatives of Pt(IV) from
              known   hydrido complexes in order to generate vacant sites for electrophilic  
              activation of organic substrates.  This work has potential for great   impact
              because it may give insight into how C-H bond activation reactions   work in
              electrophilic, late transition metal complexes.    This project will increase
              our fundamental knowledge of transition metal   mediated reactions of organic
              substrates.  In addition, these and related   compounds may have applications
              in promoting or catalyzing important   organic transformations, including ones
              of interest to the chemical and   pharmaceutical industries.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
