Title       : Interpreting Spatial Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9727638

Award Number: 9727638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura A. Carlson LCarlson@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In everyday life we constantly talk about objects in the world around us:  we
              may enlist help in looking for an object (e.g., `Where are my keys?`); we may
              point out a surprising object in the environment (e.g., `Look at that billboard
              in front of the building!`); or, we may give instructions to put objects in
              certain locations (e.g., `Put the lamp to the left of the chair.`).  In each
              case we must perform a mapping between the linguistic elements in the utterance
              and our perception of the objects and their relation in the world.  For
              example, the words `lamp` and `chair` need to be mapped onto their appropriate
              referents in the world, and the relation `to the left of` needs to be mapped
              onto the spatial relationship between these objects.  This project focuses on
              how linguistic spatial terms are mapped onto spatial relations in the
              environment.  Two specific aspects of the process will be examined.  The first
              is how spatial terms are mapped onto directions in space.  This is an
              interesting topic because sometimes more than one mapping is possible.  For
              example, in the utterance `Put the lamp to the left of the chair,` `left` could
              refer to the speaker's left side or to the chair's left side.  Because these
              disagree for a speaker facing a chair, there is some ambiguity as to where the
              lamp should be placed.  Understanding a potentially ambiguous utterance may
              therefore be difficult if all possible interpretations are considered. 
              Previous research suggests that multiple interpretations of spatial relation
              terms are initially considered.  In the present project one series of
              experiments uses an eye tracking methodology to examine the simultaneous
              activation more closely, with the additional goal of examining how the degree
              of disagreement among the varying interpretations influences the degree of
              difficulty in understanding the utterance.  Another series of experiments
              examines how one interpretation is selected when multiple interpretations are
              initially activated.  The specific question is whether the selection of one
              interpretation is accompanied or assisted by an inhibition of the other
              interpretations.    The second aspect of the mapping process examined in the
              present project involves dividing up space around the objects into regions to
              which the relation term (e.g., `above`) does and does not apply. A series of
              experiments explores how such regions are defined, and examines factors that
              may influence the size of these regions, such as the conceptual size of the
              objects, the presence of other objects in the scene, or the functional
              relationship between the two objects.  Together these experiments should
              further our understanding of the online interpretation of spatial relations. 
              This has important implications theoretically for our understanding of the
              interface between language and spatial representation, and practically for our
              ability to use effective and unambiguous communication.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
