Title       : High Voltage Electrophoresis in Capillary Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9727505

Award Number: 9727505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502700             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Jorgenson JJ@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 0000,9104,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry   Program,
              is directed at the development of new instrumentation and   methodologies to
              enhance the capabilities of capillary electrophoresis   (CE).  A novel
              double-beam absorbance geometry is employed whereby two   photodiode arrays are
              used to obtain spatially resolved detection while   correcting for background
              absorbance and source drift.  Development of   flow counterbalanced CE, based
              on a hydrostatically driven liquid flow,   is directed at enhancing
              detectability and resolution.  A jet flow   interface is being investigated as
              a rapid means of sample introduction.    Size exclusion chromatography is used
              as an additional separation means   prior to the presently employed liquid
              chromatography-CE multidimensional   methodology.  Finally, the development of
              methods for using ultra-high   voltages (300 kV) is investigated in an attempt
              to open a new mode of CE   operation.     Methods of separating the
              constituents of complex samples are integral   to developments in biological
              and environmental analyses.  Professor   Jorgenson's laboratory is a leader in
              the development of new   instrumentation for capillary electrophoresis. 
              Capillary electrophoresis   is a very important tool in the analysis of
              biological samples, such as   blood and urine, and is finding increased usage
              in the analysis of   environmental specimens as well.  Work in this area has
              led to faster,    more sensitive, and more reliable analyses.  The work to be
              done by   Professor Jorgenson and his students is likely to result in new  
              approaches and instrumentation for complex chemical analyses.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
