Title       : A Divide and Conquer Approach to the Response Properties of Biomolecules:
               Electron Transfer Reactions, Raman Spectroscopy, and Spectroscopic Probes of
               Chirality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9727657

Award Number: 9727657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Beratan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Beratan is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to study response properties of   biomolecules including
              electron transfer reactions and Raman   spectroscopic probes of chirality.  The
              goal of the proposed work is to   develop a general new tool that will enable
              the theoretical exploration   of biochemical structure-function and reactivity
              relations by exploiting   the local nature of chemical interactions.  An ab
              initio   divide-and-conquer method is proposed, tailored to describe the  
              electronic and vibronic response properties of macromolecules.  The   methods
              will be developed in such a way that they can be used to: 1)   establish a link
              between 3D structure and electron transfer rates in   proteins and DNA; 2) 
              assist in relating molecular structure to   chiroptical properties critical for
              drug discovery and protein structure   determination, and 3) expand the
              structure-property interpretations of   proteins available via Raman
              spectroscopy.  The actual implementation of   this strategy involves the use of
              an effective Hamiltonian, and Greens   function theory to determine the
              relevant response function.  A quantitative molecular-level description of
              biological function will   arise from a detailed description of macromolecular
              electronic and   vibronic structure.  Yet, reliable electronic structure
              calculations are   possible on systems of only modest size.  Beratan's research
              program will   enable the theoretical exploration of biochemical
              structure-function and   reactivity relations at the molecular level for
              macromolecular systems of   biological interest.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
