Title       : Archaeological & Environmental Investigation of Yemeni Terrace Agriculture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9727355

Award Number: 9727355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony J. Wilkinson t-wilkinson@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              McGuire Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Tony Wilkinson and McGuire Gibson
              will continue their archaeological research in the Dhamar region of highland
              Yemen. The country is divided into better watered highland and more desertic
              lowland areas and it is in the upland regions that population density is
              greatest. In their past work the investigators have elucidated a cultural
              sequence which covers in excess of 5,000 years. They have also examined a
              complex agricultural landscape which includes extensive terracing, walls,
              cisterns and water catchment features. The goal of the current phase of the
              research is to examine the relationships between population change, terrace
              construction and environmental degradation. They speculate that it was a
              growing population and increased pressure on the landscape which led to the
              development of a more efficient terrace form of agriculture and that this in
              turn actually served to conserve soil and check the environmental consequences
              most often associated with increased population pressure.       To accomplish
              this work the investigators will focus their attention on five limited test
              regions. They will use aerial photographs to locate and map terraces and other
              agricultural features.  Through surface survey, and limited excavation they
              will locate and date archaeological sites to determine rough measures of
              population change over time. A wide range of analytical methods (phytolithic
              analysis, soil micromorphology, particle size, detailed C-14 assay and the
              retrieval of cultural inclusions) will be employed to pinpoint episodes of
              increased runoff/erosion, intensive cultivation and manuring. In addition, a
              program of coring and related microfossil analysis will be used to establish an
              accurate environmental history and chronological framework. Significant
              settlement sites and other features will be carefully surveyed and recorded.   
                  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide information
              of the history and utility of a widely practiced traditional agricultural
              technique. It will shed new light on long term human-environment interaction
              and provide data of interest to both archaeologists and natural scientists.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
