Title       : LT: Models and Tools for End-of-Life Product Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9727248

Award Number: 9727248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston A. Knight knight@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manbir Sodhi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727248  Knight  Increasing environmental concerns and impending  legislation,
              particularly concerning product takeback,  emphasize the importance of the
              end-of-life management of  products.  This has resulted in efforts to recover
              value  from components and materials before discarding of such  products and to
              reduce environmental impact.  Among the  various ways in which value can be
              recovered are,  disassembly or de-manufacturing, bulk recycling, and 
              incineration for energy generation.  Materials only have  significant recycled
              value when they are divided into clean  separate types.  This means that the
              viable recycling of  manufactured products depends greatly on the efficiency 
              with which materials can be separated from each other.  The  separation and
              recovery of items and materials from  products for recycling can be approached
              in two main ways,  which can be used together.  These are relatively careful 
              disassembly and bulk recycling, which often involves the  shredding of mixes of
              materials and using various  separation techniques on the stream of particles
              produced.  In the long term, recycling can be made more effective by  the
              design of products for greater ease of disassembly and  recycling.  This
              requires the development of suitable  product analysis tools to enable design
              teams to evaluate  the ease of disassembly and recycling of alternative 
              product concepts during the early stages of design.  In  addition, the
              development of better methods of bulk  recycling and for increasing the
              efficiency of existing  bulk recycling processes is important.  The work to be 
              carried out in this proposal addresses both of these  aspects.        The
              proposers have previously been involved in the  following developments:       
              Product analysis tools which simulate end-of-life           disassembly and
              evaluate the financial and           environmental effects of different product
              designs           and end-of-life scenarios.        Modeling of bulk recycling
              processes, in particular to            evaluate the best processing sequences
              for material           separation processes.    Building on this previous work,
              this proposal is concerned  with the investigation of several cases of the
              problem of  selecting the best sequence for recovery of materials by  bulk
              recycling, including the matching of mixes of different  products.  The use of
              this information in analyzing the best  combination of disassembly and bulk
              recycling for recovered  value or environmental impact will be also
              investigated.  Based on this investigation, tools for helping designers 
              examine the consequences of material selection upon the end  of life recovery
              of materials will be constructed, to enable  design teams to evaluate the
              recycling potential of proposed  products through optimal combinations of
              disassembly and  efficient bulk recycling.  In addition, models of material 
              separation processes for bulk recycling will assist bulk  recycling facilities
              to operate in an economic manner,  enhancing the end-of-life recovery of
              materials that would  otherwise not be recovered and be consigned to landfills.
               ***
