Title       : Lattice Dynamics and Bistability of Electronically Labile Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1999   
File        : a9727312

Award Number: 9727312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Hendrickson dhendrickson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research by Dr. David N. Hendrickson of the Chemistry  
              Department, University of California at San Diego, on lattice dynamics   and
              bistability of electronically labile complexes.  Detailed studies   will be
              carried out on transition metal complexes that have two or more   electronic
              states that are close in energy.  For compounds in which   vibrational modes
              are closely coupled with electronic modes, changes in   crystal lattice
              parameters such as those caused by modifying solvent or   counter ions can
              result in spin-crossover or phase transitions in   response to changes in light
              or other external parameters.  A primary   goal of this project is to
              characterize magnetic bistability in    molecular species. Specifically the
              magnetic behavior of a series of   dodecamanganese-oxo-carboxylate complexes
              will be probed to characterize   the factors affecting the potential-energy
              barrier and the mechanism of   resonant magnetization tunneling in these
              single-molecule magnets   compounds. Investigation of photoinduced valence
              tautomerization in   cobalt complexes and spin crossover in opically sensitive
              iron complexes   will continue.  Methods will then be sought to attach these
              species to a   functionalized surface or polymer.      The long-term goal of
              this project is to develop molecules or collections   of molecules for use in
              electronic circuits and devices. In this   research, compounds containing a
              small number of metal atoms will be   tested for sensitivity and specificity of
              response to external physical   stimuli. Only a few examples of molecules in
              which the magnetic field   changes in response to changes in external magnetic
              field are known.  In   this investigation additional examples will be prepared
              and the factors   that control their behavior will be determined. These results
              can lead to   nanoscale devices which change spin, number of electrons, or
              magnetic   properties in response to electric, magnetic, optical, or thermal  
              changes. Many applications as switches or for information storage can be  
              envisioned. In addition to the scientific content, an important aspect of  
              this project is the training of young scientists.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
