Title       : Molecular Approaches to the Design, Utilization, and Transformation of
               Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a9727324

Award Number: 9727324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Weiss weissr@gusun.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the studies of   
              Professor Richard Weiss on the effects of structural and/or electronic  
              anisotropy imposed by liquid crystals, polymers, and gels on guest   molecules.
                Molecules with well-established spectral and photochemical   properties in
              fluid solution will be incorporated into these media, and   their reactivity in
              the different media compared to elucidate structural   and electronic
              influences imposed by the media.   Conversely, well   defined anisotropic
              environments will be employed to impose specific   influences on the guest
              thereby providing insights into the fundamental   factors affecting specific
              transformations within these constrictive   environments.   Undergraduate and
              graduate students involved in this   research will be exposed to a variety of
              photochemical, fast reaction and   spectroscopic techniques, and their
              application to materials   characterization.  With this Renewal award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research and
              educational activities of Professor Richard   Weiss of Georgetown University.  
              Professor Weiss will focus his research   on elucidating the structural and
              electronic effects imposed by liquid   crystals, polymers, and gels on the
              photochemical reactivity of   incorporated molecules, called guests.   The
              local microenvironment   imposed by these materials influences the reactivity
              of the guest, and   changes in the reactivity of the guest, when compared to
              that in fluid   solution, offer unique insights into materials processing at
              the   molecular level.   The educational activities of Professor Weiss include 
               the training of graduate and undergraduate students in spectroscopy, fast  
              reaction techniques and materials characterization.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
