Title       : Impact of Episodic Transport and Resuspension on Coastal Phytoplankton
               Processes: Diatom Resting Cell Rejuvenation asa Source of Material for Spring
               Bloom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a9727408

Award Number: 9727408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew L. Julius   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Goad  (Principal Investigator former)
              James A. Teeri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement   of Opportunity
              (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great   Lakes.  This is a collaborative
              research project between   investigators from ten academic and government
              research   institutions.  The research is being conducted under the   auspices
              of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program   and the NOAA Coastal Ocean
              Program.    This collaborative, 5-year research program will focus on   the
              importance of episodic events on nearshore-offshore   transport and subsequent
              ecological consequences. The study   seeks to 1) determine what processes
              control the cross-  margin (inshore to offshore) transport of biological,  
              chemical, and geological materials in the coastal margins of   the Great Lakes,
              and to 2) develop and test scientific   strategies for assessing, quantifying,
              and predicting the   impacts of multiple stresses both natural and
              anthropogenic,   in the Great Lakes or selected coastal sub-regions.    A tight
              coupling between contaminated sediments and   overlying water exists in lakes
              and coastal ecosystems  through the process of sediment resuspension. Satellite
                observations in Lake Michigan illustrate an annually   recurrent episode of
              nearshore-offshore transport, a 10 km   wide plume of resuspended material
              extending over 200 km   along the southern shores of the lake. Preliminary
              evidence   indicates that this episodic event may be the major   mechanism for
              cross-margin sediment transport in Lake   Michigan.  This type of event impacts
              recycling of   biogeochemically important materials (BIMS), ecosystem  
              responses, cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The   program results
              will be applicable to similar events in many   coastal areas.    This
              comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement   an integrated
              observational program and numerical modeling   effort to identify, quantify,
              and develop prediction tools   for the winter-spring resuspension event and to
              assess the   impact of this event on the  transport and transformation of  
              BIMS and on lake ecology.    This component of the study focuses on
              understanding of   ecophysiological mechanisms controlling phytoplankton and  
              community structure during episodic, physical forcing events   within the Great
              Lakes.  The measurement of cellular,   species, group, and community processes
              coupled with state-  of-the-art, bio-optical instrumentation will allow for a  
              unique comprehensive examination of the taxon-specific and   community
              responses to distinct physical forcing factors.    Work will also further
              develop, evaluate, and improve the   current bio-optical production model for
              Lake Michigan and   assist in efforts to develop fresh water remote-sensing  
              algorithms.
