Title       : Learning the Syntax and Semantics of Verbs: Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9727897

Award Number: 9727897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Demuth Katherine_Demuth@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                One of the long-standing issues in the study of language acquisition has
              centered about what is 'innate' and what must be 'learned'. Much of this debate
              has focused on structures at the syntax/semantics interface, dealing
              specifically with how children acquire the argument structure of verbs. Some
              scholars  have proposed that the semantics of verbs is especially salient for
              children, and propels the acquisition of the syntactic structures with which
              they are used. Others have proposed that the syntactic frames in which verbs
              appear provide children with essential evidence for constructing the meanings
              of verbs. Still other researchers have proposed that verb meanings and their
              syntactic frames are acquired item by item as unanalyzed 'constructions'. 
              Interestingly, there seems to be some support for each of these positions,
              possibly because of the relatively conservative word order of English, the
              language on which the majority of these studies have been based.   The purpose
              of the project is to explore these issues more fully using evidence from the
              Bantu language Sesotho, where word order is flexible and productive verbal
              morphology signals an increase or decrease in the number of arguments a verb
              may take. Bantu applicative constructions (also known as 'benefactive' or
              'double object' constructions) present a particularly interesting area for
              exploring the semantic, syntactic, morphological, and lexical contributions to
              language learning.  The project will use multiple sources of evidence,
              including data from children's longitudinal spontaneous speech productions and
              performance on experimental tasks. Preliminary evidence from the spontaneous
              speech of 2-3-year-olds suggests that children are conservative 'lexical'
              learners, making few errors of commission. Applicative verbs are, however, used
              in a number of syntactic frames, mediating against a strict constructionist'
              approach. Nonetheless, certain syntactic frames, such as 'double object'
              constructions with both Benefactive and Theme object NPs, never occur in
              children's spontaneous speech, nor in the adult speech directed toward them.
              The data from younger children will be complemented with an examination of
              older children's use of applicatives in spontaneous speech, where errors of
              commission are expected. These results will be compared with results from
              cross-sectional experimental studies designed to test children's use of the
              applicative with novel verbs from different verb classes, and to test their
              developing knowledge of word order restrictions in 'double object'
              constructions.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
