Title       : Genetics of Differences Between the Mating Systems of Mimulus guttatus and M.
               nasutus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a9727578

Award Number: 9727578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Willis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9727578  Willis    The identification and analysis of quantitative trait loci
              (QTLs) offers a  powerful tool with which to assess directly the genetic basis
              of evolved   differences between interfertile organisms.  One evolutionary
              transition in   plants that offers a unique opportunity to address the genetic
              basis of   adaptations is the evolution of self-fertilization from outcrossing,
              which   is perhaps the most frequent evolutionary transition in angiosperms. 
              The   genus Mimulus (Scrophulariaceae), within which are many closely related
              and   interfertile species or populations, provides an excellent model system
              for   studying the evolution of self-fertilization and speciation.  The common 
               yellow monkeyflowers in the Mimulus guttatus species complex are arguably  
              the most polytypic and most rapidly evolving members of the genus, and  
              populations vary tremendously in terms of the degree of self-fertilization.  
              There are two specific goals of the proposed study.  First, we propose to 
              conduct a thorough genetic analysis of the floral differences between a  
              primarily outcrossing population of Mimulus guttatus and a highly selfing  
              population of Mimulus nasutus in order to determine whether genes of large  
              effect contribute to the extreme floral differences between these species.  
              This goal will be accomplished through the mapping of quantitative trait   loci
              affecting floral morphology using a high-resolution linkage map of the  
              Mimulus genome based on microsatellite, AFLP, and RAPD markers.  Second, we  
              propose to test whether quantitative trait loci affecting floral traits   that
              are correlated with selfing actually have direct effects on the rate   of
              self-fertilization in a natural population.  This goal will be   accomplished
              by analyzing in the field the selfing rates of introgression   lines containing
              a M. nasutus allele for floral QTLs in a M. guttatus   background.        
              These experiments will address long-standing and fundamental questions  about
              the role of mutations  of large effect on the evolution of   adaptations.  For
              example, a fundamental claim of neo-Darwinian evolution   is that natural
              selection acts on very slight phenotypic differences among   individuals in a
              population.  If this subtle individual variation has a   genetic component,
              then adaptations will result from the steady fixation of   genes of small
              effect.  Conversely, others have argued that adaptation   frequently results
              from drastic changes at a very few genetic loci.  These   experiments will help
              to answer basic questions such as this.  They will   also contribute to our
              basic understanding of how and why   self-fertilization and other forms of
              inbreeding evolve in natural and   domesticated populations of plants and
              animals.
