Title       : Context Dependency of Mutations in Chloroplast DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9727906

Award Number: 9727906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian R. Morton bmorton@barnard.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727906  Morton    The influence of context, or neighboring base composition, on
              the pattern and rate of nucleotide substitution in the chloroplast genome will
              be examined.  Recent work has demonstrated a strong correlation between
              flanking base composition and both substitution rate and mutation bias in
              flowering plants.  This interdependency of sites has important implications for
              processes as well as analyses in many fields of molecular biology. We are
              interested in further expanding our previous findings in order to develop a
              better understanding of how much variation in substitution bias and rate is a
              function of context as well as how context dependency affects mutation spectra
              and gene evolution.  The proposed work focuses on the chloroplast genome and
              will analyze the influence of context on the rate of substitution with the goal
              of determining how context dependency - as opposed to natural selection -
              affects variation in substitution rate among genes.  The influence of context
              on substitutions in species other than flowering plants will then be tested. 
              Finally, the effect that observed context dependencies have on gene-level
              evolutionary features will be examined.  This will include the effect on
              variation in synonymous substitution rate (mentioned above), how context
              dependency affects the dynamics of amino acid replacement and the influence of
              context dependency on frequently applied methods in molecular phylogenetics
              that assume an independence of sites.      In addition to the direct
              applications, this work will also develop a strong basis for studies on other
              genomes and other groups of organisms as well as an understanding of mutation
              dynamics in this widely studied and analyzed genome.
