Title       : Oligomerization of DctD and NtrC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9727745

Award Number: 9727745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. T. Nixon btn1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727745  Nixon  The Rhizobium melitoti dicarboxylate transport (dct) system and
              the Salmonella typhimurium nitrogen regulation (ntr) system are partly
              understood signal transduction systems.  Each one utilizes a two-component
              transduction mechanism to regulate the active state of a sigma54 dependent
              transcriptional activator (DctD and NtrC, respectively).  Despite some
              similarities, it is clear that two diverse physical strategies are used to
              integrate two-component signal transduction with sigma54 dependent
              transcription activation.  DctD is controlled negatively, with its ATPase
              domain being actively repressed by the two-component receiver domain until the
              latter is phosphorylated; in contrast, NtrC is controlled positively, with the
              phosphorylated form of its two-component receiver domain being needed for the
              ATPase domain to display its activity.  The long-term objective is to
              understand the biochemical mechanisms of two-component signal transduction
              through the DctD and NtrC proteins to the RNA polymerase-sigma54 dependent
              promoter complexes with which they interact.  The immediate goal is to begin
              determining how regulated self-assembly controls the active state of these
              sigma54 dependent transcriptional activators.  Specific aims include:  1.
              quantifying the oligomerization properties of native DctD, constitutively
              active   DctD variants, fragments 1-127, 1-143, and 1-384 of these proteins,
              NtrC, and NtrC-P;  2.   determining if and to what extent the oligomerization
              of DctD is affected by the molecules with which it is known to interact:  ATP,
              specific DNA binding sites,  sigma54, and the (-subunit of core RNA polymerase;
               3.  determining if there is a correlation between cooperativity and
              oligomerization  properties for DctD, DctD-P, and constitutively active
              variants of DctD, using  DNAse I footprinting to measure free energies of
              intrinsic DNA binding and  cooperativity, and comparing these results with
              those of objectives 1 and 2; and  4. identifyi ng mutants of dctD that encode
              DctD substitutions affecting cooperative but not intrinsic DNA binding, both
              for the transcriptionally inactive and active states of the protein, and
              assessing whether or not those residues are also important for oligomerization.
                 In order to respond to changes in their environment, organisms use a
              "two-component" signal transduction mechanism, which results in differences in
              gene expression. This kind of response is ubiquitous in eubacteria, and has
              also been characterized in eukaryotes and archaebacteria. The purpose of this
              project is to investigate transcription factor proteins that cause changes in
              gene expression when they are phosphorylated in response to environmental
              changes. Following phosphorylation, they may bind cooperatively with each other
              and with DNA, to bring about changes in gene expression. The two systems under
              study are the dicarboxylic acid transporter from Rhizobium meliloti, which is
              required for nitrogen fixation, and the nitrogen regulation system from
              Salmonella typhimurium. This project will study the detailed interaction of
              these transcription factors with each other and with DNA in response to
              environmental changes.
