Title       : Dissertation Research: Genetic Differentiation Among East African Chimpanzees
               Communities (Pan Troglodytes Schweinfurthii)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9727113

Award Number: 9727113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryellen Ruvolo ruvolo@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This study will examine the effect of social structure on the genetic
              structure of local chimpanzee populations.  Genetic samples will be collected
              from one well-studied, habituated chimpanzee community (Kanyawara) and several
              other neighboring communities in Kibale Forest, Uganda.  DNA will be extracted
              from these samples and used to examine the effects of chimpanzee dispersal
              patterns (whereby males stay in the community in which they were born and
              females disperse upon reaching sexual maturity) on three genetic elements with
              different modes of transmission. Comparisons will be made of the distribution
              of variation in Y-chromosomes (inherited through the male line), mitochondrial
              DNA (inherited through the female line) and autosomes (inherited biparentally)
              both within and between communities, to determine if they conform with patterns
              expected based on dispersal behavior.  In addition, the genetic data will be
              used to determine the sires of all offspring in the Kanyawara community and
              subsequently generate a pedigree outlining the genetic relationships between
              all individuals in this community.  This information will be used to assess
              asymmetries in the number of offspring produced by different males, and the
              extent to which males outside the community sire offspring. The results of this
              study will contribute to our understanding of the evolution of social
              organization in chimpanzees.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
