Title       : Iterative Methods for Large Scale Nonlinear and Linear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9727128

Award Number: 9727128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Homer F. Walker walker@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9727128  Homer Walker   Large-scale systems of linear and nonlinear equations
              occur almost   ubiquitously in the computational modeling of physical phenomena
              through   the discretization of partial differential equations, integral
              equations,   etc. Krylov subspace methods make up a large class of iterative
              linear   algebra methods that have been widely used for these large-scale
              linear   systems. These methods have been adapted to large-scale nonlinear
              systems   through Newton-Krylov implementations, in which they are used to
              solve   the linear systems that characterize Newton steps. This research is a  
              continuation of an ongoing program aimed at developing more robust and  
              efficient Newton-Krylov methods for nonlinear problems and, concomitantly,  
              more effective Krylov subspace methods for linear problems. The current  
              research focusses primarily on Newton-Krylov methods and related methods   for
              large-scale nonlinear problems. Specific objectives are to develop   more
              robust globalizations, to implement and test additional and more   effective
              Krylov solvers, to improve preconditioning strategies and options,   and to
              explore new techniques such as automatic differentiation. A major   extension
              of the previous program goals is to develop effective methods   for large-scale
              continuation problems. The approach is based on certain   ways of adapting
              Krylov subspace methods and Newton-Krylov methodology   to the continuation
              setting that allow the use of existing preconditioners   and other previously
              developed problem technology.   A particular aim of this work is to develop
              improved methods for large-scale   computational modeling of complex physical
              phenomena on high performance   computers. Particular target applications
              include full-physics modeling of   reactive flows (combustion and other
              chemically reacting flows) and related   problems in computational fluid
              dynamics. Success in these applications   will have great potential benefits in
              the design and operation of industrial   facilit ies such as furnaces for heat
              and power generation and chemical vapor   deposition reactors for semiconductor
              manufacturing. This work will build   on previously established collaborative
              activities with researchers at Sandia   National Laboratories, Lawrence
              Livermore National Laboratory, and the   University of Utah Center for High
              Performance Computing, in which the   methods under development have been
              successfully applied to a number of   realistic flow problems involving heat
              and mass transport on massively   parallel computers. Likely future
              collaborations are with researchers at   the University of Utah on modeling
              accidental fires and explosions and at   Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
              on modeling contaminant transport in   aquifers, with applications to
              environmental management and bioremediation.
