Title       : RUI: Pagliaccio Function in Embryonic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9727933

Award Number: 9727933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Winning bio_winning@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Changes in cell-cell adhesion play a critical role in embryonic development.
              There are numerous examples in development in which cells undergo a transition
              from an epithelial (strongly adherent) state to a mesenchymal (weakly adherent)
              state, and vice versa. Clearly, an understanding of how such
              epithelia/mesenchymal transitions are regulated is necessary for a proper
              understanding of tissue formation in embryogenesis. Epithelial/mesenchymal
              transitions generally result from inductive events in the embryo, so signal
              transduction via cell surface receptors is likely to play a role in the
              process. Pagliaccio (Pag) is an Eph-class receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that
              is expressed in Xenopus embryos in a highly localized set of tissues, including
              a subset of cranial neural crest cells, which are mesenchymal in nature. When
              Pag catalytic activity is activated ectopically in early embryos, cells
              disaggregate. The hypothesis to be tested in the proposed project is that the
              normal function of Pag in Xenopus embryos is to negatively regulate cell
              adhesion, thereby playing a role in effecting epithelial to mesenchymal
              transitions. The hypothesis will be tested by examining the cellular effects of
              Pag catalytic activity. Experiments will be performed to determine whether
              epithelial cells (both in culture and in embryos) in which Pag has been
              activated adopt a mesenchymal phenotype, express mesenchymal-specific markers,
              and exhibit a rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton.
