Title       : Dissertation Research: Harappa Bovid Exploitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9727306

Award Number: 9727306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8645               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rita P. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Rita Wright, MS Laura Miller will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Her project has two goals. The first is
              methodological and it involves the development of techniques for archaeological
              faunal analysis. The second is substantive - MS Miller will examine animal
              husbandry practices at the site of Harappa, located in the Indus River Valley.
              Archaeological data from many Old World contexts suggests that the earliest
              primary product obtained from domestic animals was their flesh. Animals were
              raised and then slaughtered for this purpose. Shifts in patterns revealed by
              faunal remains suggest that at some later time changes in animal utilization
              occurred and prehistoric peoples focused more on secondary products such as
              milk which provided a long term sustained return from a single animal. Likewise
              the use of animals for traction, to pull plows, also had a positive and
              significant impact on agricultural production.  These changes are inferred from
              the `kill profile` or demographic pattern revealed in skeletal materials.
              However such profiles can have multiple interpretations. In her research MS
              Miller is focusing on large bovids - cattle and water buffalo - from Harappa.
              Surprisingly little information is available on these two important species.
              She has already completed an ethnographic study which has documented modern
              animal use in the region and has collected modern controlled faunal samples.
              With NSF support she will conduct radiographic and cross sectional analysis of
              these remains to determine the effect which continued milking has the bone
              structure and density and the kinds of growth patterns and damage which results
              from the mechanical stresses caused by pulling a plow. The methodologies thus
              developed will be applied to archaeological materials from Harappa.  Northern
              India and Pakistan saw the rise of a civilization which developed largely
              independently from that in the Near East and China and archaeologists have
              focused on this region to increase their understanding of the processes which
              lead to civilization. MS Miller will analyze bovid bone from different
              specialized activities area both within and immediately adjacent to the site.
              She hopes to trace both the primary and secondary roles which bovids played and
              to determine how these changed over time. It should be possible to determine
              the relative importance of bovid meat as well as dairy products and traction.
              By studying the spatial distribution of materials it is possible also to gain
              insight into economic and political organization.  This research is important
              for several reasons. It will develop a set of methodological tools which can be
              applied in many regions of the world. It will shed new light on the rise of
              complex Indus river valley societies and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
