Title       : RUI: Proteolysis and Calcium in Spindle Pole Duplication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9727240

Award Number: 9727240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather B. McDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9727240  McDonald      Accurate cell division is fundamental to the growth and
              development of all organisms.  For genetic information to be faithfully
              transmitted to a cell's progeny, its chromosomes must be correctly duplicated
              and then precisely segregated to each of the two new daughter cells.  The broad
              aim of the work to be done in this project is to gain a better understanding of
              the formation of the mitotic spindle, which is the intracellular structure that
              functions to segregate the duplicated sets of chromosomes.  The spindle
              apparatus is organized at each of its two ends by a structure, termed the
              centrosome (in animal cells) or spindle pole body (in yeast cells).  Since the
              spindle requires two centrosomes for proper organization, the first step of 
              spindle formation is duplication of the centrosome.  The work to be done in
              this project will address the mechanism of centrosome duplication.  In the
              yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, several genes have been shown to be
              specifically required for spindle pole body (SPB) duplication.  One of these
              genes, PCS1, encodes a protein (Pcs1p)that is part of the proteasome, a
              multiprotein complex which functions to proteolytically degrade certain
              proteins that are destined for such degradation.  Specifically, Pcs1p is a
              subunit of the proteasome cap, which is believed to have a gatekeeping function
              of controlling the entry of proteins that will be degraded.   This intriguing
              observation suggests that Pcs1p specifically recognizes some substrate(s)
              protein(s) whose degradation is required in order for SPB duplication to occur.
               The experiments to be performed in this project will test this hypothesis by
              searching for the proteins whose degradation triggers SPB duplication.  Three
              screens, combining the techniques of genetics, molecular biology, and
              biochemistry, will be undertaken to search for these proteins.  Extragenic
              loss-of-function suppressors of the pcs1 mutant phenotype will be sought, on
              the theory that loss (by mutation) of such substrate  proteins might compensate
              for lack of Pcs1p-mediated degradation.  Based on similar logic, a screen for
              genes that enhance the pcs1 phenotype when overexpressed will also be
              performed.  Third, a phage-display library of yeast protein fragments will be
              screened for Pcs1p-binding constituents, or if this is not productive, a
              two-hybrid screen for Pcs1p-interacting proteins will be undertaken.  Candidate
              proteins identified in these screens will be further characterized to determine
              if they do indeed undergo Pcs1p-mediated proteolysis and if so, if this
              proteolysis is cell cycle stage-specific.      Given the high level of
              similarity between the intracellular processes in yeast, plants and animals,
              these studies have great potential to clarify the process of centrosome
              duplication in all eukaryotic organisms.
