Title       : Star Porphyrazines, Solitaire Phthalocyanines and Related Multimetallic
               Macrocycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9727590

Award Number: 9727590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Hoffman bmh@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Brian M. Hoffman, Chemistry Department, Northwestern University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program of the Chemistry Division for a collaborative project with Dr.  
              Anthony G. M. Barrett, Chemistry Department, Imperial College of Science   and
              Technology, London, England, aimed at synthesis and study of star  
              porphyrazines, solitaire phthalocyanines and related multimetallic  
              macrocycles. A series of porphyrazines that are peripherally substituted   with
              heteroatoms will be synthesized. These will be converted into   complexes with
              metals bound to the peripheral heteroatoms and to the core   of the central
              macrocycle. Extended arrays will be formed by connecting   several of the
              metalla-porphyrazine units through peripheral metal   bridges. The resultant
              complexes will have unusual spectroscopic,   magnetic, or electrical properties
              properties due to electron   delocalization and metal-metal interactions
              through the macrocyclic   pi-system.      Compounds which contain several
              metals often have unique magnetic and   electronic properties. In this project
              a series of such materials will be   prepared. The specific design involves a
              central metal which is   surrounded by a rigid structure of other atoms (a
              macrocyclic ligand) to   which additional metals are attached. This results in
              star-shaped or   linear arrays of metal atoms. These are expected to have a
              diversity of   applications including biomedical optical imaging, optical
              sensors, the   separation of chiral substances, and catalysis. The project
              involves the   collaboration between a group in England, where the macrocylic
              ligands   will be prepared, and one at Northwestern University, which will be  
              responsible for the conversion of the ligands into metal complexes.   Students
              will be exchanged between the groups and thus will receive an   extremely broad
              training in synthetic organic and metal chemistries. The   collaboration also
              provides the opportunity for US students to experience   the international
              aspects of modern science.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
