Title       : Biochemical Structure and Function of Nitrate Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9727982

Award Number: 9727982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilbur H. Campbell wcampbel@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727982  Campbell  Biochemistry of eukaryotic nitrate reductase (NR; EC
              1.6.6.1-3), catalyzing NADH/NADPH driven reduction of nitrate to nitrite in
              plants, algae and fungi, has been studied in this laboratory for 20 years.  The
              investigator has studied structure and function of NR, including modeling part
              of its three-dimensional structure.  Natural sources provide only small amounts
              of NR and to advance biochemical understanding, recombinant expression of NR
              and active fragments has been successfully used.  The investigation will
              involve recombinant expression of active holo-NR in Pichia pastoris, a
              methylotrophic yeast, for producing purified enzyme needed to obtain complete
              3-D structure.  Mutant forms of NR will be used to study functionality in the
              Mo-molybdenum pterin cofactor binding site (Mo-MPT), nitrate reducing active
              site and subunit interface. A model of NR is being derived using the sulfite
              oxidase 3-D structure.  Studies of NR's catalytic mechanism via spectral and
              steady-state kinetic analyses will be done with pre-steady state kinetics and
              EPR spectra done via collaboration.  Existing mutants of ligands to Mo-MPT will
              be analyzed in comparison to wild-type enzyme via x-ray absorption spectroscopy
              at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory.  These studies will yield a
              complete and detailed picture of NR structure and function and guide future
              studies.    Nitrate reductase is a unique member of a multicenter redox enzyme
              family; these catalyze long-distance electron transfer.  NR is important in
              agriculture since it serves as the first enzymatic step in nitrogen
              accumulation by plants.  NR also has importance in biotechnology for addressing
              environmental problems arising from nitrate pollution of ground and surface
              waters.  NR is a "green" catalyst for nitrate test kits for analysis of water
              and part of a system for eliminating nitrate pollution of potable water via
              enzymatic denitrification. Basic research on NR is paying off for society since
              it is a tool in environmental  biotechnology.
