Title       : Genetic Analysis of U14 snoRNP Core Protein Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a9727945

Award Number: 9727945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E S. Maxwell stu_maxwell@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727945  MAXWELL  Eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis occurs in the nucleolus where
              rRNA is synthesized as a large precursor transcript that undergoes processing
              and subsequent assembly into new ribosomal subunits.  The eukaryotic nucleolus
              contains a large population of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) which are
              critical for ribosome biogenesis.  Investigations have demonstrated that the
              snoRNAs are important for pre-rRNA folding, rRNA processing, and rRNA base
              modification.  U14 is one such eukaryotic snoRNA species, essential for
              pre-rRNA processing and 18S rRNA accumulation in both vertebrates and yeast. 
              Previous investigations have defined the RNA sequences and structures within
              the U14 snoRNA:pre-mRNA precursor required for U14 excision from its pre-mRNA
              intron.  These essential processing elements include nucleotide boxes C and D,
              consensus sequences important not only for processing but also for snoRNA
              transport to the nucleolus and pre-rRNA methylation.  A "box C/D core motif"
              has been defined within this U14 snoRNA element and shown to serve as a binding
              site for nucleolar proteins that are required for snoRNA synthesis.  The
              widespread occurrence of the box C/D core motif indicates that this snoRNA
              element as well as its associated nucleolar proteins are critical for the
              biogenesis and function of the box C/D snoRNA family.  While the essential
              snoRNA elements are well defined, the nucleolar proteins that bind this core
              motif remain uncharacterized.  Therefore, this project will isolate and define
              these critical nucleolar proteins, characterize their genes, and then
              genetically examine in yeast the role individual proteins play in snoRNA
              processing, nucleolar transport, and rRNA methylation.     Ribosomes are
              essential components of all living cells, necessary for the synthesis of
              proteins crucial for cell structure, growth, and function.  Eukaryotic ribosome
              biogenesis occurs in the nucleolus where numerous RNAs and proteins participate
              in a coordinated series of events necessary for ribos ome assembly.  U14 snoRNA
              is an essential snoRNA species required for pre-rRNA processing and the
              accumulation of 18S rRNA.  Strikingly, U14 was the first of what is now a
              rapidly-growing class of snoRNA species that are encoded within interruptions
              in the protein coding regions of genes (introns) and synthesized via an
              intron-processing pathway.  Analysis of mouse U14 snoRNA biosynthesis has
              demonstrated that an RNA structural motif is essential for processing. 
              Additional experiments have shown that nuclear proteins bind this core motif
              and are also crucial for snoRNA synthesis and function.  These experiments will
              define these important but as yet uncharacterized proteins.  These results will
              provide new and fundamental insight into the role these proteins play in snoRNA
              biosynthesis as well as snoRNP function during ribosome biogenesis.
