Title       : LT: The Environment and New Technology Adoption in the U.S. Steel Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1998      
File        : a9727297

Award Number: 9727297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Considine cpw@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727297  Considine  The steel industry provides a classic example of an evolving
               industrial ecosystem, recycling large amounts of by-product  gases and more
              than half of industry output.  Further  environmental progress depends upon new
              technology adoption.  Integrated steel producers are adopting new technology to
               compete with scrap-based minimills.  In addition, both  industry segments face
              more stringent standards for  emissions of toxic air pollutants.  In meeting
              these  economic and environmental challenges, steelmakers must  choose among
              several new technologies, including new iron  feedstocks, coke oven designs,
              and iron and steel making  technologies.    This proposal addresses an
              integrated assessment of new  technology adoption in the steel industry. 
              Analysis will be  based upon a revised and expanded version of the 
              mathematical programming model of the steel industry  developed by the PI.  The
              new framework will include a life  cycle assessment (LCA) of steel production
              from virgin ore  and primary fuel to the plant gate, estimating pollutants  for
              each process at each stage of production.  This  information will be very
              valuable to steel-using industries  conducting LCAs of their products.  The
              model will also  endogenously estimate optimal rates of steel scrap recycling 
              and investments in new steel-making technologies.  This  model will be used to
              estimate how the industry responds to  carbon mitigation policies, including
              taxes and permits, and  examine how these policy impacts interact with toxic 
              pollution control policies.  This project could be very  useful for more
              aggregate integrated assessments of global  climate change policies. This
              project will provide insights  into the tradeoffs between cost and
              environmental  objectives, such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions, toxic 
              discharges, and acidic residuals.
