Title       : Metallaborane Chemistry: From Small Heterobimetallaboranes to Large
               Metallaheteroboranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a9727570

Award Number: 9727570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Barton lbarton@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Lawrence Barton, Chemistry Department,  University of Missouri-St.   Louis,
              is  supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division for research on metallaborane   chemistry. 
              Heterobimetallaboranes that are derived from polyhedral   boranes by
              substituting two of the boron vertices by various metals will   be synthesized.
              Early transition metals will be combined with late metals   to obtain species
              with metals of different electronic configurations.   Since early transition
              metal complexes are good polymerization catalysts,   heterobimetallaboranes
              containing only these metals will be prepared and   evaluated as borane
              oligomerization catalysts. The work will be extended   to the incorporation of
              main group nonmetal atoms into a   monometallaborane. Routes to large cage
              derivatives will be sought and   the mechanisms of cluster substitution
              processes will be evaluated.   Boranes form a series of compounds and ions with
              regular structures in   which boron-hydrogen units define the vertices of
              polyhedra. The ability   of boron to support these cage structures is unique.
              The object of this   project is to substitute some of the vertices in such
              cages with   non-boron atoms. Special emphasis will be placed on examples with
              two   transition metals and ones with a transition metal and a main-group  
              nonmetal atom. These species will be designed as possible catalysts and   as
              probes to determine the details of how substitution occurs in the   boranes.
              This latter objective is important to preparing new   metallaboranes of
              specific shape and composition. In addition to the new   chemistry that will be
              uncovered in this project, postdoctoral, graduate,   and undergraduate students
              will be educated in the very precise   experimental techniques required for the
              investigation of boron hydrides.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
