Title       : Main Group and Intermetallic Coordination Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9727325

Award Number: 9727325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Reger reger@psc.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Daniel L. Reger, Chemistry Department, University of South Carolina   at
              Colulmbia, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for an   investigation of
              poly(pyrazolyl)borate and poly(pyrazolyl)methane   complexes of s- and heavier
              p-block metals.  The flexibility and large   size of these ligands leads to
              unusually stable monomeric complexes and   complexes of these species will be
              investigated in the solid and solution   state.  One basic question to be
              addressed involves the stereochemical   activity or inactivity of lone pairs in
              the p-block derivatives.  The   complexes will also be used as starting
              materials for the synthesis of   intermetallic compounds that contain main
              group element to transition   metal bonds.  Oligomeric species derived by
              coupling derivatized   poly(pyrazolyl)methane units will be prepared and used
              to form extended   arrays of metal complexes.  This is a wide ranging study
              that seeks to develop new ways of preparing   compounds containing
              'post-transition' metals such lead, tin, indium,   thallium, and cadmium. 
              These species will then be used to form compounds   in which the
              post-transition metal is directly joined to a transition   metal.  These metals
              have many applications and the species designed in   this research may be
              developed into precursors for various electronic   materials, new catalysts
              will be designed, and fundamental spectroscopic   information will be obtained
              for heavy metals.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
