Title       : Effect of Fungal Endophyte Infection on the Structure of Experimental Grasslands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9727116

Award Number: 9727116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Clay CLAY@Indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Clay    97 27116    Biotic interactions have long been of considerable interest
              in ecology particularly in light of their interactions with diversity in
              influencing ecosystem processes.  One of the more widespread and potentially
              important of such interactions is the symbiosis occurring between grasses and
              fungi that live within their cells.  In this project, the PI, Keith Clay,  will
              take advantage of an association between endophytic fungi and tall fescue,
              Festuca arundinacea, a species that occurs commonly in grasslands.  This
              particular association is unusual in Festuca arundinacea occurs in strains that
              do or do not have fungal endophytes.  This research will manipulate these two
              forms in experimental tests of the potential benefits of the symbionts for this
              grass species.    Investigations will evaluate how fungal endophyte infections
              influence the diversity and production of Festuca arundinacea grasslands.  They
               will also evaluate the degree to which resistance to herbivory and stress
              influence the dominance of endophyte-infected grasses.  A series of plots will
              be planted with seeds of endophyte- and non-endophyte infected grass strains to
              examine their effects on plant diversity and production.  Fencing and
              insecticide applications will be used to vary the levels of herbivory and the
              relative proportions of infected and noninfected grass strains that survive
              will be quantified.  Ecologically marginal sites will also be planted with the
              two strains as well as four other fescue species to examine their overall
              success rates.  The ultimate goal of this work will be to examine general role
              of microbial symbiosis in the structure and function of plant communities. 
              This work will provide important practical information because tall fescue is
              one of the dominant species across the eastern US in grasslands.
