Title       : Mechanism of Action of Bacteriophage T4 Translational Repressor RegA Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9727811

Award Number: 9727811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor K. Spicer spicerek@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727811  SPICER   This project will examine the mechanism of action of the
              bacteriophage T4 translational repressor, regA protein. The regA protein is a
              uniquely promiscuous translational repressor, which specifically recognizes and
              binds to at least 15 different T4 early mRNAs and blocks their translation. How
              regA protein distinguishes these mRNAs from the 150 other T4 mRNAs present in
              the cell at the same time is not clearly understood and is the subject of this
              project. The overall goal of this work is to assess the participation of
              individual regA residues and specific functional groups in a model RNA
              substrate (i.e. the T4 gene 44 RE) in inter-molecular interactions that lead to
              specific complex formation. The specific objectives of this study are: 1) to
              identify specific residues in regA that participate in RNA binding and
              quantitate their contribution to the free energy of RNA binding; 2) to assist
              the efforts in Dr. Chul-Hee Kang's laboratory to solve the crystal structure of
              a regA protein:RNA complex; 3) to determine the hierarchy of regA binding
              affinities for four T4 mRNAs; and 4) to characterize the repression sensitivity
              of synthetic recognition element RNAs in vivo. To accomplish the first of these
              objectives, site-directed mutagenesis will be used to test the role of specific
              residues predicted to participate in RNA binding from earlier biochemical
              studies. In addition, random mutagenesis coupled with an in vivo screen will be
              used to identify new functional residues. To better understand how
              regA-sensitive mRNAs are recognized and distinguished from other T4 mRNAs, the
              hierarchy of regA binding affinities for defined RNA sequences will be measured
              in vitro. The recognition elements defined by these in vitro studies will be
              tested for regA repression sensitivity in vivo, using a lacZ fusion gene as a
              reporter gene. By determining relative repression ratios for RNA sequences, it
              should be possible to determine if in vitro RNA binding affinities correlate
              with mRNA repression sens itivities in vivo.   In all cells, a variety of
              macromolecular interactions occur that govern the specific functions of the
              cell. Many of the critical biochemical functions that occur within the cell
              involve specific interactions between proteins and nucleic acid molecules (DNA
              and RNA). The work carried out in this project seeks to understand better how
              proteins recognize and selectively interact with RNA to regulate translation,
              the process by which proteins are synthesized using the information encoded in
              the RNA.   The model system being studied offers the opportunity to gain novel
              insights into this type of molecular recognition process. Ultimately, these
              insights should have implications for better understanding of a variety of
              cellular processes, including the replication of RNA viruses, the control of
              gene expression and the synthesis of proteins.
