Title       : Zooarchaeological and Taphonomic Analysis of the Die Kelders Cave 1 (South
               Africa) Middle Stone Age Fauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9727491

Award Number: 9727491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Curtis Marean and his students will
              analyze faunal remains recovered from the archaeological site of Die Kelders.
              Located on the southern coast of South Africa, approximately 120 km SE of Cape
              town, it includes two adjoining caves and the stratified deposits contained
              therein document human activity for possibly as much as a quarter million
              years.  The materials recovered by Dr. Marean and collaborators through NSF
              supported research include stone tools and hominid teeth as well as abundant
              faunal remains. This latter body of material constitutes the focus for the
              current study. The group will analyze mammal bones - most introduced to the
              caves through human hunting - from the earlier Middle Stone Age (MSA) levels of
              the site. The goal of the work is to examine not only diet but to reconstruct
              the techniques employed to obtain prey.  It is possible through the examination
              of body part distributions to determine whether the animal carcasses consumed
              resulted from purposeful hunting or from scavenging of carnivore kills. A list
              of species which were hunted and eaten also provides insight into hunting
              capabilities. A study of this kind is time consuming because prior work by Dr.
              Marean has confirmed the necessity to focus not only on large and easily
              identifiable bone fragments but also on smaller splinters of longbone shaft
              which archaeologists normally categorize as `unidentifiable.` Thus extensive
              refitting is necessary.  Archaeologists believe that the Middle Stone Age
              peoples of Africa were either the immediate ancestors or first representatives
              of behaviorally modern humans and through analysis of their behavior it will be
              possible to gain insight into modern human origins. There has been extensive
              disagreement about the level of cultural competence exhibited by such groups
              and much of this has centered on subsistence competence. Some archaeologists
              have argued that MSA groups lacked the ability to hunt large animals and that
              such remains recovered in sites resulted from scavenging. Others believe
              exactly the opposite is the case. With the carefully excavated materials from
              Die Kelders and the analytic techniques Dr. Marean and colleagues have
              developed, it should be possible to select among these, and several other
              alternatives.  This research is important because it will shed new light on the
              emergence of modern human behavior. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in training and furthering the academic careers of
              several graduate students.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
