Title       : Dissection of Nutrient Deprivation Responses in Cyanobacteria and the
               Degradation of the Light-Harvesting Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9727836

Award Number: 9727836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727836  Grossman  Phycobilisomes are multiprotein complexes that harvest most
              of the light energy that is used to drive photosynthesis in cyanobacteria and
              eukaryotic red algae. When cyanobacteria are deprived of an essential
              macronutrient, the organism undergoes a suite of responses, some of which are
              specific to the limiting nutrient (e.g. elevated expression of transport
              systems that help in the acquisition of the limiting nutrient), while others
              are general and occur during a number of different stress conditions (e.g. the
              degradation of phycobilisomes). There is little knowledge concerning the
              regulatory elements that control the general and specific responses; they may
              have any intersecting control points. To isolate mutants with defects in the
              regulation of the general responses, a visual screen to identify strains unable
              to degrade their phycobilisomes during sulfur deprivation was used. Many of the
              mutants had a lesion in a gene, designated nblA (for nonbleaching), that
              encodes a polypeptide of 59 amino acids which is essential for phycobilisome
              degradation.  Six additional nonbleaching mutants which do not have lesions in
              nblA have been identified. Four of the mutants do not express nblA during
              nutrient limitation and the remaining two are downstream of the NblA
              polypeptide in the pathway leading to protein degradation. All of the mutants
              that do not express nblA are complemented by a gene that encodes a response
              regulator typical of two-component regulatory systems. Four distinct screens to
              isolate additional mutants in the regulation of the general responses and the
              sulfur stress-specific responses are being used. One of the screens would also
              allow the isolation of additional mutants defective in elements downstream of
              NblA in the pathway leading to phycobilisome degradation; this screen could
              identify the proteins with which NblA interacts and the mechanism(s) that lead
              to the rapid degradation of the multisubunit light-harvesting complex. It is
              important to elucidate the function  of NblA in the bleaching process since,
              while it is understood how critical proteolysis is for the eliminating
              denatured, improperly folded and unassembled proteins and for controlling
              developmental processes and regulatory cascades, little is known about the
              mechanisms that govern proteolysis and the ways in which specific protein
              complexes are targeted for degradation.
