Title       : Development of Host's Dependence on Intracellular Symbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2000  
File        : a9727911

Award Number: 9727911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang W. Jeon jeon-k@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727911  Jeon  The long-term goals of the proposed study are to elucidate the
              mechanisms whereby infecting microbes enter host cells and survive inside the
              latter, some of them becoming integrated as intracellular symbionts.  Such
              integration may result in the acquisition of new cell components for a host
              cell.  The objectives of the current project to determine how infecting
              X-bacteria enter amoebae and survive inside the latter, eventually becoming
              integrated as intracellular symbionts.  In symbiosis between amoebae and
              X-bacteria, host amoebae are dependent on symbionts for survival and newly
              infected amoebae become dependent on symbionts within 18 months (about 200 cell
              generations).  Thus, for amoebae, the integrated X-bacteria become new cell
              components.  Two important and outstanding questions are 1) how infecting
              bacteria avoid destruction by their host cells and 2) why or how amoebae become
              dependent on bacterial symbionts for survival.  While some insights to the
              first question were gained from previous studies, it was only recent that a
              viable clue to the second question was found: X-bacteria prevent the production
              of an essential enzyme by amoebae, but then supply the enzyme through an
              alternate route.  Symbiont-bearing xD amoebae no longer produce an enzyme that
              functions as S-adenosylmethionine synthetase (SAMS) in symbiont-free D amoebae.
               The absence of SAMS in xD amoebae is attributable to xD amoeba's failure to
              transcribe the corresponding gene as a result of harboring bacterial symbionts.
               These results showed how symbiotic X-bacteria might cause their hosts to
              become dependent on them.  In the proposed study, the following hypotheses will
              be tested: 1) That X-bacteria suppress the expression of an amoeba's
              housekeeping gene, sams, but X-bacteria supply the gene product, SAMS, so that
              amoebae become dependent on symbionts in time.  The PIs have two monoclonal
              antibodies against the SAMS of amoebae to use in our studies.  2) That
              X-bacteria-produced protein(s) or a protein enco ded by a plasmid inside
              X-bacteria acts as a regulatory factor to suppress the expression of the sams
              gene in xD amoebae.  These studies will involve the use of techniques such as
              DNA cloning, nucleotide sequencing, site-directed mutagenesis and genomic
              footprinting.  The expected results from these studies will provide further
              insight into mechanisms for the general evasion of host destruction by
              infective microbes and their subsequent survival.  The results will also
              enhance the elucidation of mechanism for the establishment and maintenance of
              stable endosymbiosis leading to the acquisition of new cell components in
              eukaryotic cells.
