Title       : On Line Symposia: The Evolution of Human Diet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9727175

Award Number: 9727175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Ungar pungar@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Teaford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Much of the evolutionary success of our species can be attributed to our
              ability to procure, process and consume a wide variety of foods.  However,
              recent changes in our diet may lie at the root of many of the health problems
              that confront our health care systems. If we are to understand and successfully
              cope with the world population pressures and potential food shortages looming
              on the horizon, we need every bit of information we can gather on diet and its
              influence on our lives.  Over the past twenty years, vast amounts of data have
              been gathered on what we eat, how we eat and why we eat what we eat, not to
              mention similar studies of our ancestors and the living great apes.  This
              project brings together researchers who use many different approaches to
              address issues concerning the origins and evolution of human diet.  These
              researchers will meet and present papers during a symposium at the
              International Congress on Anthropological and Ethnographic Sciences.  An
              internet listserv and web site will be set up to foster communications among
              these researchers and other members of the scientific community.  The result
              will be a multidisciplinary approach to shed new light on issues concerning the
              origins and evolution of human diet, and health-related implications of the
              discordance between what we eat today and what our heritage has `designed` us
              to eat.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
