Title       : LT: Pollution Control in Fuel Cell Applications Using Ceramic Candle Filter for
               Cleaner Power Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9727294

Award Number: 9727294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ziaul L. Huque   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajan S. Selladurai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Prairie View Res Fdn
	      P O Box 2818
	      Prairie View, TX  774462818    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727294  Huque  The overall objective of this research effort is to develop  a
              method of removing particulates and toxic pollutants from  coal gas to be used
              in fuel cell for cleaner power  generation.  First specific objective of this
              research  effort is to develop a working prototype of a  preconditioned ceramic
              filter and, through rigorous testing  under varying flow conditions at ambient
              temperature and  pressure, show its effectiveness in protecting downstream 
              components of a fuel cell.  A second objective of this  research effort is to
              develop a method of reducing sulfur  and other contaminants from the coal gas
              by introducing  controlled size sorbent particles while zmg candle filter 
              pressure differential and the risk of filter candle  blinding or plugging. Coal
              is the most widely distributed  and readily available resource in USA.   
              Currently about 50% of electricity production is by  directly burning coal or
              coal gas.  Combustion and  gasification of coal produces both primary and
              secondary  pollutants.  One of the alternative way to utilize this  vast coal
              resource of the nation and world with relatively  cleaner emission is the use
              of coal gas in fuel cell for  power generation.  Fuel cell provide a new and
              exciting  option for the efficient conversion of fossil fuels to  electricity
              with much reduced emmission of pollutants.    Commercial development of
              fuel-cell technology has been  underway in the United States for over 25 years.
               A variety  of fuel cells have been developed of which molten    carbonate fuel
              cell (MCFC) appears to be the optimum fuel  cell design approach.  Gasified
              coal is expected to be the  major source of fuel gas for MCFCS, but because
              coal  contains many contaminants in a wide range of  concentrations, fuels
              derived from this source also  contains a considerable amount of contaminants. 
              A critical  concern with these contaminants is the concentration level  that
              can be tolerated by MCFCs without suffering  significant degradation in
              performance or reductio n in cell  life.  Ceramic candle filtration is an
              attractive  technology for the removal of particulate at high  temperature in
              Pressurized Fluidized Bed Combustion (PFBC),  Integrated Gasification Combined
              Cycle (IGCC) and other  coal utilization processes.  Due to their simple, cost 
              effective design, high temperature capability, and  effectiveness in
              particulate removal. ceramic candles  easily achieve New Source Performance
              Standards and Clean  Air Act mandates for particulate emissions, as well as gas
               turbine manufacturer particulate requirements.  Although  the application of
              ceramic candle technology to PFBC and  IGCC applications has been vast, little
              progress has been  made to integrate candle filter technology to address the 
              very different and more stringent gas stream clean-up needs  of fuel cell
              applications.  This two year project will  focus on the design, testing, and
              development of unique  preconditioned candle filter which when combined with a 
              patented technique for the use of a controlled particle  size, once-through
              sorbent, will reduce the risk of fuel  cell stack fouling and simultaneously
              increase filter  candle life expectancy and performance    by maintaining a
              porous dust cake on the filtering  surfaces.  A simple candle filtering will be
              constructed at  Prairie View A&M University.  Testing of several different 
              preconditioned filter candles will be conducted under  various flow conditions.
               Optimum preconditioning coating  will be recommended for a given set of
              conditions.  Long  term effect of sorbent particle size will also be explored. 
              ***
