Title       : Production and Regulation of Organelle Transport in Melanophores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9727728

Award Number: 9727728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leah T. Haimo leah.haimo@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9727728  Haimo    Melanocytes from fish scales and frog skin have been studied
              extensively as model systems for studying bi-directional transport of cell
              organelles, the pigment granules, along polarized microtubule tracks.  Current
              evidence indicates strongly that two separate force-generating motor proteins
              are involved, each responsible for movement in one of the opposing directions. 
              The motor kinesin is believed responsible for dispersion of granules, and
              dynein is believed responsible for aggregation.  These motors bind to the
              organelles and then interact with the microtubules to generate the directed
              forces.  A central question, however, is what regulates these motors to turn
              them on and off in a coordinated manner so that only one of the two opposing
              forces is generated at any given time.  One possibility is that directed
              movement is regulated by differential binding of the motors to the organelles. 
              A second possibility is that both motors bind stabily to the organelle, but
              that only one is active at any given time.  The present studies are based on
              preliminary evidence that supports the second hypothesis.  To confirm this
              hypothesis, dynein and kinesin will be isolated from organelles under
              conditions when one or the other motor is active, and then their properties
              will be compared.  The separate motors will be added back to reconstituted
              systems in which their ability to bind to microtubules and to generate force
              will be assayed.  Since a likely means of regulating the motor activity would
              be the reversible phosphorylation of the motor proteins, evidence for
              differential phosphorylation of the motors will be sought.  Putative
              phosphorylation sites will be altered to determine if these sites are directly
              involved in regulating the activity of either or both motors.  These
              experiments address the fundamental question of coordinate regulation of
              multiple motors involved in organelle movement.  Results will be directly
              applicable to an understanding of these and similar motors in a wide v ariety
              of cells.
