Title       : Laser Studies of Energy Flow in Polyatomic Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9727205

Award Number: 9727205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $718055             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Flynn flynn@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Prof. George W.   Flynn of
              Columbia University in his continuing studies on collision   dynamics and
              relaxation of molecules with `chemically significant`   amounts of vibrational
              energy.  Prof. Flynn will prepare high energy or   reactive donor molecules
              using excimer-pumped dye lasers or optical   parametric oscillators and then
              monitor the final quantum state of the   collision or reaction products using
              IR/VIS absorption or UV   fluorescence.  Doppler-resolved IR diode laser
              spectroscopy will yield   information on the velocity of product molecules. 
              Thus Prof. Flynn can   determine the vibrational, rotational and translational
              energy of the   energy acceptor (bath) molecules.  The ultimate goal is to
              determine the   energy transfer distribution function P(E,E'), i.e., the
              probability that   a molecule, initially at an energy E, will undergo a
              collision induced   transition to an energy E', with change in vibrational
              energy of E'-E.    The PI will investigate the mechanism for excitation of
              quencher   vibrational 'dark' states and will measure the distribution function
              at   low temperatures (10K) to gauge the effects of collision velocity and  
              complex formation in the relaxation process.    The importance of the research
              is that it sheds light on the mechanism by   which molecules dissociate, or
              break apart, and recombine.  Normally, we   assume that the loss of gain of
              vibrational energy is controlled by very   strong collisions between molecules,
              but this is a gross approximation   compared to the detail with which other
              processes, for example, the   dissociation rate as a function of energy, are
              known.  The distribution   function that Prof. Flynn will obtain, when coupled
              with good theoretical   calculations, should allow a much deeper understanding
              of the   dissociation and recombination processes that are so important to  
              combustion and atmospheric chemistry.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
