Title       : Computer Simulations of Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9727714

Award Number: 9727714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Landau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9727714  Landau  This is a renewal grant to a senior computational physicist  to
              conduct a series of simulations of condensed matter  systems.  Computer
              simulations represent a powerful tool for  obtaining fundamental information
              about wide ranging  problems in statistical physics and can complement 
              traditional theoretical and experimental approaches.  This  research will
              continue development and refinement of large  scale simulation methods for the
              study of phase transitions  in systems which are difficult to treat
              analytically.  The  techniques to be used include diverse Monte Carlo and spin 
              dynamics simulations.  Models are expected to be relevant to  magnetic
              materials, cubic binary alloys, adsorbed atoms on  crystalline substrates, and
              disordered media.  Several of  the problems include particles which may move
              continuously  in space and which are subject to elastic interactions,  whereas
              other problems will be confined to rigid lattices  (including classical spins
              with continuous degrees of  freedom) with discrete near neighbor interactions. 
              In many  of the systems finite geometries and/or the presence of  walls are
              responsible for behavior which is different than  that which is observed in the
              bulk.  Both static and dynamic  critical phenomena for systems in equilibrium
              will be  carefully examined. Simple non-equilibrium models of film  growth will
              be studied using kinetic Monte Carlo methods.  %%%  This is a renewal grant to
              a senior computational physicist  to conduct a series of simulations of
              condensed matter  systems.  Computer simulations represent a powerful tool for 
              obtaining fundamental information about wide ranging  problems in statistical
              physics and can complement  traditional theoretical and experimental
              approaches.  This  research will continue development and refinement of large 
              scale simulation methods for the study of phase transitions  in systems which
              are difficult to treat analytically.  The  techniques to be used include
              diverse Monte Carlo and spin  dynamics si mulations.  Models are expected to be
              relevant to  magnetic materials, cubic binary alloys, adsorbed atoms on 
              crystalline substrates, and disordered media.  ***
