Title       : The Dynamics and Energetics of Small-Scale Atmospheric Vortices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9727150

Award Number: 9727150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas K. Lilly dlilly@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katharine M. Kanak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9727150  Lilly        The boundary layer vortex, which includes the relatively
              well-known dust  devil,  generally takes the form of  a benign columnar
              atmospheric vortex.  It is less  well understood than its more dramatic cousin,
              the tornado, but recent evidence  suggests that it may be more common than
              originally thought and may be important  as a controlling factor of boundary
              layer structure and interactions.  An investigation  is proposed of the
              dynamics of the initiation and maintenance of boundary layer  vortices, in
              particular, the dust devil vortex.  This research will be primarily a 
              theoretical and numerical simulation study, but may include limited acquisition
              and  analysis of observational data, especially from mobile Doppler radar.     
                As with their larger scale relatives, the principal scientific question
              regarding  dust devils is their source of rotation.  A single answer probably
              doesn't exist.  An  ambient source of vertical vorticity may be found, in some
              cases, as an environmental  feature, or it may be generated locally.  In the
              absence of horizontal shear, the  vertical vorticity in a dust devil might form
              from tilting of horizontal vorticity, either  that of the mean shear in the
              surface layer or again by local generation.  In absence of  other environmental
              sources, pre-existing convective cells and their mutual  interactions have been
              evidenced as sources of both vertical and horizontal vorticity.   The study
              will consider all these possibilities, but the primary focus is on the last,
              due  partly to its mostly unexplained appearance in several laboratory
              experiments and  field projects.        By inhibiting dissipation and
              diffusion, highly helical dust devils may transport  near-surface air higher
              into the atmosphere than can non-rotating thermals. Thus they   may be
              important or even dominant in establishing the height of the mixed layer, 
              controlling or modifying heat, momentum and particulate transports.  These
              energetic   and transport properties of rotating ther mals will also be
              considered in this study.        The objectives of the proposed research are
              summarized as the following:  1.  To seek and compare mechanisms by which
              convective thermals acquire rotation  and become quasi-vertical columnar
              vortices in either the presence or absence of  horizontal or vertical wind
              shear;  2.  To examine the energetics associated with the maintenance of such
              vortices;  3.  To evaluate and compare the vertical transports of heat,
              momentum and  particulates by rotating and non-rotating boundary layer thermals
                     From this study, some necessary conditions for the formation and
              maintenance  of boundary layer vortices will be determined.  Results may shed
              some light on the  formation mechanisms of tornadoes.  Knowledge gained of the
              role that boundary  layer vortices play in transports of heat, momentum,
              chemicals and particulates may  have impact on /pollution studies, hazardous
              waste management, and the prediction of  initiation of deep convection.  ***
