Title       : Electron Transfer to Fe(III) in the Geobacteraceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9727840

Award Number: 9727840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek R. Lovley dlovley@microbio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9179,9183,9187,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727840  Lovley  The objective of this study is to elucidate the mechanisms for
              electron transport to Fe(III) in  the dissimilatory Fe(III)-reducing
              microorganism, Geobacter sulfurreducens. G. sulfurreducens is representative of
              a family of microorganisms in the delta subclass of the Proteobacteria, the
              Geobacteraceae, which have the capacity to conserve energy to support growth
              from the oxidation of organic compounds coupled to the reduction of Fe(III). 
              G. sulfurreducens has been chosen for these studies because it is easy to mass
              culture and should be amenable to future genetic studies. Initial studies will
              focus on the NADH-dependent Fe(III) reductase complex that is localized in the
              membrane fraction of G. sulfurreducens.  The Fe(III) reductase complex will be
              purified in sufficient quantities to characterize conditions for optimal
              activity, substrate affinities, subunit composition, metal content, and redox
              potentials.  The genes for the subunits in the complex will be cloned and
              sequenced.  Disaggregation and reconstitution studies will be conducted to
              determine if all of the five proteins that purify as the NADH-dependent Fe(III)
              reductase complex are actually necessary for Fe(III) reduction.  Special
              emphasis will be placed on identifying which of the proteins is responsible for
              transferring electrons to Fe(III).  The Fe(III) reductase will be localized in
              the cell using cytoimmunological techniques in order to determine if it is in
              the outer membrane as would be expected for an enzyme that is considered to
              pass electrons to extracellular Fe(III).  Studies will be conducted in which
              the essential components of the Fe(III) reductase complex will be incorporated
              into artificial membranes to determine if Fe(III) is reduced at physiologically
              relevant rates when the Fe(III) reductase components are membrane-bound.  Once
              the mechanisms for electron transport from NADH to Fe(III) are elucidated, the
              electron transport components involved in H2-dependent Fe(III) reduction will
              be studied. This  will involve determining which of the hydrogenases in G.
              sulfurreducens is capable of donating electrons for Fe(III) reduction, whether
              the Fe(III) reductase that functions in H2 oxidation is the same as for NADH
              oxidation, and determining what other components are necessary for Fe(III)
              reduction.    These studies are expected to provide a fundamental understanding
              of the mechanisms by which microorganisms couple the oxidation of organic
              matter to the reduction of Fe(III).  It has recently been recognized that
              microorganisms that can conserve energy by oxidizing organic compounds with the
              reduction of Fe(III) play an important environmental role in the global carbon
              cycle and in the remediation of organic pollution of aquatic sediments and
              groundwater.  Fe(III)-reducing microogranisms can substitute toxic metals for
              Fe(III) in their metabolism and thus can also aid in the remediation of
              metal-contaminated environments.  Furthermore, geological evidence suggests
              that Fe(III) reduction was the first globally significant process for
              completely oxidizing organic matter back to carbon dioxide on ancient earth. 
              Thus, elucidating the mechanisms by which microorganisms transfer electrons to
              Fe(III) will provide important basic insights into this important form of
              microbial metabolism, provide a better understanding of the evolution of
              microbial respiration, and is likely to advance the application of this
              metabolic pathway to environmental restoration.
