Title       : Primary Processes in Fe-S-Type Photosynthetic Reactions Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1999  
File        : a9727607

Award Number: 9727607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Blankenship Blankenship@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727607  Blankenship  The objective of this research is to extend the current
              understanding of the energy trapping processes, primary photochemistry and
              early secondary electron transfer reactions in photosynthetic reaction centers
              that contain FeS centers as early electron acceptors.  The particular systems
              that will be studied include reaction centers from the primitive anoxygenic
              organisms known as heliobacteria as well as Photosystem I of oxygenic
              photosynthetic organisms.  One of the overall goals of the work is to correlate
              some of the pigments observed in spectroscopic studies with pigments observed
              in the recent X-ray structure of Photosystem I.  Specific proposed experiments
              include, picosecond transient absorbance measurements in the blue spectral
              region in Photosystem I, studies on Photosystem I mutants in the
              quinone-binding region and the P700 binding region, dichroism experiments on
              Photosystem I and investigation of secondary electron transfer reactions in
              heliobacteria monitored using  EPR and picosecond timescale transient
              absorbance spectroscopy.  These experiments will give new insights into the
              energy trapping process in reaction centers that contain integral core antenna
              pigments and will help to identify and characterize some of the early electron
              acceptors in these systems, including chlorophylls, quinones and FeS centers. 
              The goal of this work is to understand how plants and other photosynthetic
              organisms convert the energy of sunlight into chemical energy.  This project is
              designed to give detailed knowledge of the chemical mechanism of energy storage
              in a class of photosynthetic complexes that is not well understood.  Advances
              in understanding the basic scientific principles at work in this essential
              biological process may ultimately lead to the development of artificial energy
              storage systems.  The artificial systems may decrease our dependence on fossil
              fuels and reduce emission of pullutants and greenhouse gases.  Another possible
              benefit is the use of this knowledg e in the development of improved plants
              that will help meet our food and fiber needs.  ***
