Title       : Elementary Models for Complex Fluids: Micelles and Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2001   
File        : a9727284

Award Number: 9727284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn T. Evans glenn.evans@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Glenn Evans is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his formal theoretical   studies of elementary
              models for complex fluids consisting of micelles   and liquid crystals.  He
              will study both the static and dynamic   properties of these complex systems. 
              The static behavior studies will be   based on an extension of Stell's
              modification of Wertheim's theory.  The   goal of this work is to understand
              how micelles and cell membranes self   assemble.  The aim of the dynamical
              studies is to understand how micelles   coagulate or fracture when their dilute
              solutions are subjected to shear   flow.  The dynamical studies will be based
              on an adaptation of the theory   of nuclear collisions for soft condensed
              matter.  Results will be   compared with molecular dynamics simulations. 
              Amphiphiles are complex molecules.  They can behave as anionic, cationic,  
              zwitterionic and nonionic surfactants.  At the appropriate critical  
              concentration, they can self assemble into micelles such as those found   in
              common detergents.  When biologically significant amphiphiles such as  
              cholines self assemble to form monolayers, these layers constitute cell  
              walls.  Evans' research seeks to find a molecular based theory that will  
              elucidate the complex properties of amphiphiles, and that will ultimately  
              help us to determine how to design amphiphiles with desired chemical and  
              physical properties.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
