Title       : The Role of Pollinators in Floral Evolution and Speciation in Nicotiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9727037

Award Number: 9727037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Holtsford HoltsfordT@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727037  Holtsford    Flowers exhibit a wide range of shapes, sizes, colors and
              scents.  The   diversity of floral features is thought to have evolved as a
              consequence of   a long history of interactions with the animals that forage
              for pollen and   nectar and in so doing, transfer pollen among flowers.  Plants
              with flower   traits that elicit favorable pollinator service should have more
              offspring   so that favorable floral traits will increase in frequency.  If
              different   pollinators prefer different types of flowers then pollen transfer
              between   plants with different flowers will be reduced which may lead to the  
              evolution of new plant species.  This project will experimentally address   two
              key questions in the logical but untested scenario outlined above -   what
              floral features affect pollinator interactions and are pollinators   choosy
              enough to cause a divergence in floral form?         Two species of wild
              tobaccos (Nicotiana  alata  and N. forgetiana,   Solanaceae), provide an
              excellent opportunity for experimentation. These   species are interfertile,
              morphologically divergent, and their ranges   overlap in southern Brazil. Their
              floral morphology, color, phenology, and   our observations suggest they are
              adapted to different pollinators (N.   alata  is pollinated by hawkmoths, N.
              forgetiana is pollinated by   hummingbirds and bees).  An F2 population derived
              from interspecific   crosses shows tremendous variation in many floral traits. 
              By sowing this   hybrid population in an experimental garden within both
              species' natural   range we will be able to determine which floral traits are
              most important   in attracting different kinds of pollinators.  Then, the
              offspring of these   open-pollinated flowers will be grown to see whether the
              pollinators'   behavior changed the distribution of floral traits in the next
              generation.         This work is important because it will provide detailed
              information about   plant-pollinator interactions and will provide an
              experimental test of a   pro minent speciation scenario.  We know very little
              about the formation of   new species, a shortcoming that is especially
              important because we are   losing species to extinction at an unprecedented
              rate.
