Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: The Effect of Light Quality and Quantity on the
               Developmental Ecology of Indian Tropical Forest Trees, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9727088

Award Number: 9727088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kailash Paliwal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Madurai Kamaraj Univ
	      
	      Madurai, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727088  Paliwal   Description:  This proposal is for a US-Indo  collaboration
              between biological scientists  David Lee, Florida International University and 
              Kailash Paliwal, Madurai Kamaraj University.   The research is: "The Effect of
              Light Quantity  and Quality on the Developmental Ecology of  Indian Tropical
              Forest Trees."  The   researchers will study seedlings of 16 native  South
              Asian forest trees to determine how they  respond to changes in light quantity
              and  quality as they grow in spectrally neutral and  altered shade conditions. 
              Plants will be  examined for growth rate, morphology, leaf  anatomy, and
              physiological response over a 10-  15 month period.  Results will improve 
              understanding of the ecological responses of  the species in natural
              conditions, their  sylviculture, and their establishment in  nurseries.  The
              research will increase  fundamental knowledge about the effect of light 
              quality and quantity to the development of  trees in natural light conditions. 
               Scope:  This study will be conducted almost  entirely at the Madurai Kamaraj
              University by  Indian researchers in close collaboration with  US PI David Lee
              who will spend part of his  sabbatical there.  The approach is novel and 
              should lead to significant advances in  fundamental knowledge about tree
              regeneration  in tropical forests.  The research is basic and  applied.  It
              will greatly strengthen US science  by focusing on a region little studied by
              US  researchers.  As a new collaboration that will  involve young scientists,
              this project supports  INT objectives.  The project will strengthen  research
              links between the US and India.  The  interaction is mutually beneficial.   
              ***
