Title       : Planned Behavior, Environmental Values and Domestic Water Conservation. A
               Longitudinal Case Study of the California-Nevada Truckee River Watershed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9727797

Award Number: 9727797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Trumbo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Garrett J. O'Keefe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study uses mail survey methods to examine attitudes and behaviors toward
              water conservation throughout the Truckee River Watershed in California and
              Nevada.  The survey area extends from California's Lake Tahoe Basin to Fallon
              and Pyramid Lake in Nevada, and includes the rapidly growing metropolitan area
              of Reno-Sparks, Nevada.  The project will describe the range of water
              conservation attitudes throughout the Truckee River Watershed to determine what
              natural (e.g., geographical) and attitudinal communities exist, and to discover
              cross-jurisdictional opportunities for consensus building on water issues.  It
              will also observe water conservation attitudes and behaviors across time to
              determine how these might be shifting as communities grow and diversify.  In
              terms of general usefulness, this project will add contextually to existing
              work on conservation in two ways.  First, relatively little conservation
              research has been applied to home water conservation (as opposed to
              conservation of energy, for example).  And second, previous work examining
              water conservation has been executed within political boundaries (especially
              cities), versus more environmentally meaningful boundaries such as watersheds. 
              Understanding how the diverse set of interests within the watershed can
              cooperate to share a vital, highly variable, and ultimately limited resource
              will offer valuable lessons.  Policy efforts aimed at building such cooperation
              will be aided by a scientific understanding of the range of orientations toward
              water conservation throughout the watershed.  Further, the rapid growth and
              diversification of the Reno-Sparks metropolitan area presents an outstanding
              opportunity to not only understand the dynamics of water conservation during
              such growth but also to consider and recommend information strategies and
              policy alternatives designed to promote conservation, both in Nevada and
              elsewhere.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
