Title       : LT: Nonflowing Chemical Processing for Thin Film Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1998      
File        : a9727334

Award Number: 9727334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol McConica   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727334  McConica  The research addresses the development of an approach to 
              eliminate the unnecessary flow of chemicals during the  chemical processing of
              thin films as applied to the  manufacturing of integrated circuits.    The goal
              is to enable thin film manufacturing facilities to  implement principles of
              industrial ecology by utilizing  chemical reactors that are 100% efficient with
              respect to  all process fluids.    The strategy for achieving this goal is to
              demonstrate that  nonflowing processes can be optimized to minimize the 
              consumption/creation of high purity fluids while still  meeting film property
              goals.  In the limit, 1 00% of the  fluid used in the process will be converted
              to solid film in  the case of deposition, or to fluid products in the case of 
              film etching.  The intent is not to change one film or one  chemistry, but to
              create a paradigm shift in manufacturing  technology based upon a current need
              to embrace industrial  ecology.  The way to realize the vision is to design a
              new  type of reactor that can be used in many different chemical  processes.   
              The objectives of the project are to develop a list of  flowing chemical
              processes used in IC manufacturing that  could be replaced by nonflowing
              processes; to demonstrate a  nonflowing chemical process that reduces the use
              of toxic  chemicals and the creation of waste, both by the process and 
              associated facilities, by a factor of 1000 for films  comparable to those grown
              commercially; and to demonstrate  film properties within manufacturing
              specifications for  tungsten deposition on full wafers by nonflowing chemical 
              vapor deposition.    An environmental impact paredo of chemically-driven 
              processes used in integrated circuit manufacturing will be  created.  Those
              processes will then be evaluated in order of  impact in terms of fundamental
              kinetic and thermodynamic  principles for amenability to nonflowing process
              conditions.  A paredo of impact of converting commercial thin film  processes
              to nonflowing conditions wil l result.    A system approach to thin film
              processing will result in an  algorithm for quantification of waste creation as
              a function  of processing parameters.  The algorithm will contain  information
              with respect to the thin film process and its  associated facility demands,
              such as pump oil contamination  rate and waste from reactor cleaning.   
              Experiments relating thin film properties to near-surface  gas composition
              during nonflowing processing will create a  window of process conditions that
              meet film manufacturing  specifications for a chosen test chemistry.  These
              process  conditions will be used in the above algorithm to find  reactor
              specifications and processing conditions that  optimize waste minimization and
              film properties.  This  process will be demonstrated on full wafers upon the 
              completion of the construction of a wafer scale chemical  vapor deposition
              nonflowing reactor.
