Title       : Can a Deaf Child Learn to Sign From Hearing Parents?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9727050

Award Number: 9727050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan I. Slobin slobin@cogsci.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The aim of the project is to document and compare 30  individual case
              studies of initial acquisition of sign language in  Dutch deaf children in the
              age range from 15 to 36 months. The data  consist of longitudinal video
              recordings made in home and preschool  settings, vocabulary checklists gathered
              from parents, and scales  of motor and cognitive development. Two samples of
              deaf children of  hearing parents are compared: 13 using a natural sign
              language  (SLN: Sign Language of the Netherlands) and 13 using a nonnatural 
              sign system (SSD: Sign Supported Dutch). In both samples, the  parents began to
              learn a manual language before the child was old  enough to begin linguistic
              communication. A control group of four  children learned SLN from deaf parents.
                    The video recordings will be transcribed and coded on a  number of
              linguistic, gestural, and communicative dimensions.  Transcription and coding
              will include the communicative behavior  of children, parents, and preschool
              teachers. Quantitative and  qualitative analyses will be carried out, relating
              coded  dimensions with each other, with measures of vocabulary and 
              nonlinguistic performance, and with types of parental input.  Developmental
              patterns will be established for each type of  input.       Four major
              predictions are made: (1) Adequate sign language  development is possible with
              "imperfect input" from hearing  parents provided the input is a natural sign
              language (SLN). (2)  SLN is a natural language, and is acquired in similar
              fashion to  other natural languages spoken and signed. (3) SSD does not provide
               sufficient input for adequate primary language acquisition. (4) A  natural
              sign language (SLN) can successfully function as a second  language for hearing
              parents in interacting with a deaf child.  (Findings with regard to SLN, in the
              age range considered, are  expected to closely match findings with regard to
              American Sign  Language.)       Confirmation of these predictions would argue
              for early  intervention programs in w hich hearing parents are taught a 
              natural sign language, such as SLN or ASL, in order to establish  normal
              language and communicative development in a deaf child. It  is expected that
              the study will lead to new insights into the  linguistic structure of SLN and
              other natural sign languages with  consequences for linguistic theory and for
              the assessment and  education of deaf children. Implications will be drawn for 
              theories of child language acquisition, including the cognitive, 
              communicative, and biological foundations of human language. The  findings and
              implications will be of immediate relevance to deaf  children and their
              families in the United States, as well as the  Netherlands and other countries.
