Title       : Atlanta Initiative in Mathematics and Science (AIMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a9727644

Award Number: 9727644
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18499994           (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly L. Hall blhall@atlanta.k12.ga.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betty Strickland  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Atlanta Public Schools
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30335    404/827-8075

NSF Program : 7358      URBAN SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9727644  Strickland  The Atlanta Urban Systemic Initiative (AUSI) proposes to
              aggressively advance the educational system in mathematics science and
              technology for all its students.  The AUSI will accomplish this task through a
              strategic plan adopted by the Atlanta Board of Education (ABE).  The new
              strategic plan includes provisions to provide all K-12 teachers of mathematics
              and science with the knowledge, skills, curriculum, assessment, equipment, and
              materials necessary to implement a standards-based mathematics and science
              program for all students.  Administrators, instructional specialists,
              counselors, and paraprofessionals will be included in professional development
              activities to ensure implementation of a standards-based approach to the
              teaching and learning of mathematics and science.  To facilitate this change
              district-wide policies have been adopted to support reform activities. The ABE
              has reallocated significant funding to support the integration of technology
              into the teaching and learning of mathematics and science.  Special efforts
              have also been undertaken to garner and maintain support from the community to
              promote educational reform and help sustain support and enrichment for all
              students.    To accomplish the goals of the new strategic plan, the AUSI will
              provide all APS students with the fundamentals of mathematics and science so
              that their understanding, ability, and academic achievement enables them to
              perform at or above their peers from around the world while experiencing
              success in the 21st century.  Five objectives will support proposed goals: (1)
              the institution of a stimulating learning environment which builds upon
              personal and cultural experiences of each learner in achieving success in a
              standards-based approach to the teaching and learning of mathematics and
              science;    (2) an array of assessment measures to gauge student progress; (3)
              continuous improvement in the mathematics and science instructional workforce,
              inclusive of teachers, administrators, and other  school staff: (4) the
              adoption or mending of policies and procedures to ensure implementation of
              AUSI; and (5) the development of a community support system that actively
              engages all members of the learning community in contributing to the
              mathematics and science achievement of all students.
