Title       : AG and AGL Functions in Early Flower Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9727815

Award Number: 9727815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The floral homeotic gene AGAMOUS (AG) is required for specifying reproductive
              organ identify and for controlling a determinate floral meristem.  According to
              the ABC model for floral organ identify, AG is the only known gene required for
              the C function.  Previous work in this laboratory has contributed to the
              demonstration that AG is also sufficient within the flower to confer C
              function.  More recent results from this lab have shown that AG is an important
              regulator of floral meristem identity in that it controls the meristem under
              conditions not favorable for flowering.  In this proposal, Dr. Ma will focus on
              the further characterization of AG function using genetic and molecular
              approaches.  He will characterize the phenotypes of two recently discovered
              weak ag mutants.  Analysis of these mutants will shed new light on AG function.
               He will test for possible interaction between AG genes mediating control of
              flowering by light.  This may reveal how AG function my be regulated by light
              signals.  He will identify new genes that participate in AG function by
              isolating enhancer and suppressor mutations.  These new mutations should
              provide new entry points to a better understanding of AG function.  In
              addition, new constructs that provide inducible AG function will be made to
              analyze the effective temporal and spatial ranges of AG action, and to prepare
              for further studies of AG functions, such as the identification of target
              genes.  These studies will likely produce new insights about AG functions, and
              about MADS box genes in general.  In addition, the genetic resources that will
              be generated during these studies will be valuable tools to others in the
              community.
