Title       : Demand Revealing Mechanism for Contingent Valuation Validity Tests: an
               Experimental Approach Using Appropriate Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9727375

Award Number: 9727375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93003              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Poe   (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Schulze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A critical issue in environmental policy and valuation is whether hypothetical
              contingent valuation (CV) techniques can provide an unbiased measure of `true`
              social willingness to pay for public goods.  A large body of experimental
              economics research provides convincing evidence that free riding prevents
              demand revelation for actual public goods.  As such, it is unclear whether the
              hypothetical bias reported in previous public goods validity tests (where
              hypothetical values are compared to actual payments) is due solely to `upward`
              bias associated with the CV method itself, or is also a function of mechanism
              bias associated with using actual public good collection mechanisms that do not
              induce people to contribute their true value.  This research has two primary
              objectives.  The first objective is to use laboratory experiments to develop a
              better public goods auction mechanism that can be used as a criterion for
              public goods validity tests, thus enabling an accurate measure of hypothetical
              bias in public goods valuation.  The second objective will be to provide a more
              realistic test of the single shot provision point mechanism in field settings
              with more `appropriate` populations of the type usually solicited in CV
              research, a more realistic commodity, and with realistic stakes of a magnitude
              similar to those reported in CV research.  The intent of this second effort
              will be to evaluate mechanism effects on hypothetical as well as actual
              payments.  This research will develop a robust mechanism for better collecting
              funds for public goods in a practical single shot situation.  This mechanism
              will be directly relevant to laboratory and real world settings for testing and
              calibrating CV.  It will also provide a better collection mechanism for land
              trusts, green electricity, and other public programs relying on individual
              contributions.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
