Title       : Seryl-Phosphorylation / Dephosphorylation of Plant Metabolic Enzymes in Leaves
               (PEPC) and Root Nodules (SuSy, PEPC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a9727236

Award Number: 9727236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Chollet RCHOLLET1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727236  Chollet  This renewal project is focused on this laboratory's
              long-standing interest in the control of plant primary metabolism by
              phosphorylation/ dephosphorylation cycles of regulatory proteins. The two
              related areas of overall investigation specifically concern phosphoenolpyruvate
              carboxylase (PEPC) and sucrose synthase (SuSy), two target enzymes known to
              undergo seryl-phosphorylation in intact leaves and N2-fixing legume nodules.
              While cytosolic PEPC is best known for its cardinal role in catalyzing the
              fixation of atmospheric CO2 during C4 photosynthesis and Crassulacean acid
              metabolism (CAM), this ubiquitous plant carboxylase also functions in a vast
              array of nonphotosynthetic contexts, including C/N-metabolism in general (e.g.,
              in C3 leaves) and in the more specialized cases of N2-fixing root nodules, leaf
              guard cells, and seed germination. The multifaceted nature of plant PEPC makes
              its intricate control by a highly regulated, Ca2+-independent protein-Ser/Thr
              kinase (PEPC-kinase) and an opposing protein phosphatase-2A  an extremely
              attractive target for continued study.  Accordingly, two of the three specific
              research objectives of this renewal project focus on (1) C4 and/or CAM
              PEPC-kinase, and (2)its requisite but seemingly diverse signaling pathways in
              leaves (C4, Ca, CAM) and root nodules.  Recent work has shown that SuSy, in
              addition to PEPC,  is a target for seryl-phosphorylation by a soluble,
              Ca2+-dependent protein kinase in two physiologically distinct plant "sink"
              tissues:  elongating maize leaves and soybean root nodules. These are
              potentially significant observations because virtually nothing is known of the
              posttranslational control of SuSy activity or of how the enzyme physically
              partitions between the plasma membrane and cytosol in plants. Clearly,
              reversible changes in its phosphorylation state are a possible but as yet
              unexplored mechanism for these phenomena. These newly emerged questions about
              plant SuSy will be addressed in Objective 3 of this renewal project  by the
              continued biochemical and molecular investigation of the
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of nodulin-100, the nodule-enhanced form of
              this sucrose-cleaving enzyme in soybean.    The major significance of this
              basic research project is its delineation of important fundamental details of
              the regulation of carbon-dioxide assimilation (by PEPC) and sucrose cleavage
              (by SuSy) by reversible protein phosphorylation in various tissues of
              agronomically important crop species, including maize, tobacco, and soybeans.
              At the same time, the results may provide the requisite underpinning for the
              constructive manipulation of plant carbon/nitrogen-metabolism and its control
              mechanisms through biotechnology. It must be emphasized that PEPC and SuSy
              represent two of the handful of documented examples of plant metabolic enzymes
              targeted by protein kinases and protein phosphatases in planta. Thus, the
              research will provide much-needed insight into the control of plant metabolism
              by reversible protein phosphorylation.
