Title       : Theory and Computation of Optimal Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9727859

Award Number: 9727859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Sullivan jms@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sullivan  9727859    The investigator, with his collaborators, studies geometric
              optimization  problems like finding minimum-energy shapes for surfaces and
              knots  in space.  This project completes the classification of embedded 
              constant-mean-curvature surfaces with three ends and extends  these results to
              greater numbers of ends.  The elastic bending  energy of Willmore is used
              computationally to drive several different  sphere eversions, and to discover
              new minimal surfaces in euclidean  and spherical space.  The investigator also
              studies the singularities  found in minimizers like soap films in higher
              dimensions; the foams  likely to provide solutions to Kelvin's partioning
              problem; and  configurations for knots that minimize energy or ropelength.   
              Many real-world problems can be cast in the form of optimizing some  feature of
              a shape; mathematically, these become variational problems  for geometric
              energies.  For instance, the films between cells in a  foam minimize their area
              and thus are constant-mean curvature surfaces.  Understanding these geometries
              will lead to better knowledge of important  structural properties of foam
              materials.  Cell membranes are more  complicated bilayer surfaces, which seem
              to minimize an elastic bending  energy known mathematically as the Willmore
              energy.  Knotted curves  achieve an optimal shape when a rope is pulled tight,
              or if a charged  knotted wire repels itself electrostatically; understanding
              such  configurations helps explain the behavior of biological molecules like 
              DNA.  This project explores such phsically natural problems that  are still
              challenging from both theoretical and computational standpoints.
