Title       : Excavations at Panxian Dadong
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9727688

Award Number: 9727688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne A. Schepartz Lynne.Schepartz@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sari Miller-Antonio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Lynne Schepartz and Sari
              Miller-Antonio and an international team of collaborators will conduct one
              season of archaeological excavation at the site of Panxian Dadong, located in
              Guizhou Province, Southern China. This large cavern is the middle in a series
              of three stacked within a 230 meter high hill. Its eastward facing entrance is
              55 meters wide and 50 meters high  and the main chamber averages 35 meters wide
              by 220 meters in length. Preliminary work by a joint Chinese US team of
              scientists has revealed stratified archaeological deposits which contain both
              well preserved faunal remains and stone tools. One fragmentary hominid tooth
              has also been recovered. A large series of samples collected for Uranium series
              dating suggests that the uppermost 2-3 meters of the deposits formed between
              200,000 and 130,000 years ago and that on this basis it is likely that the bulk
              of the deposits may be older that 250,000 years.   Very little is known about
              the Upper and Middle Paleolithic periods in Northern China and the
              investigators wish to conduct a long term multi-season excavation to
              reconstruct the geological, archaeological and environmental sequence and to
              place these into an absolute chronological context. During the 1998 field
              season they will expand the depth of the current excavation and also open
              additional trench units. This will serve to maximize the area of exposed
              deposits. They will replace dosimeters which measure soil radiation and collect
              samples for a suite of dating techniques. Several travertine layers have been
              located but their stratigraphic context is not clear and geologists will work
              to resolve this issue. Lithics and faunal remains will be collected and
              analyzed.  While China has yielded important hominid fossils and numerous
              archaeological assemblages, most are poorly dated. Because of this it is
              difficult to determine the role this vast area played in the broad sweep of
              human cultural and biological development and it is unclear whether the current
              focus on Africa as a crucial area results merely from the fact that much more
              archaeological work has been conducted there. This project should help to
              remedy this situation. It will provide an important counterbalance, yield data
              of interest to many archaeologists, and establish a regional framework within
              which other sites may be encompassed. It will further the careers of two
              promising young archaeologists and enhance scientific collaboration between
              China and the US                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
