Title       : A Thermodynamic Approach to Mapping the Molecular Topography of a Kir Pore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9727436

Award Number: 9727436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhe Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-28317  LANDRETH      The neurotrophins are growth factors that play
              critical roles in  the development of the nervous system through their ability
              to  sustain specific subpopulations of neurons and direct their  morphological
              and biochemical differentiation.  The prototypic  neurotrophin, nerve growth
              factor (NGF), acts through a signaling  pathway termed the "MAP kinase (MAPK)
              cascade".  The MAPK  cascadeincludes a group of enzymes  known as
              serine/threonine  kinases (and referred to as members of the "raf" family), as
              well  as other enymes (kinases) that are serially activated. The present 
              application is focused on understanding how the kinases which  comprise this
              cascade convey signals (the presence of growth  factors outside the cell) from
              the membrane to target areas in the  cytoplasm and nucleus which are essential
              for neuronal  differentiation.       In the previous grant period we have
              demonstrated that NGF  treatment of a line of cultured cells, known as "PC12
              cells"  resulted in the activation of two raf family members, B-raf and c- 
              raf.  However, only B-raf was mechanistically linked to the  activation of the
              MAPK cascade.  We have found that the capacity  to drive the MAPK cascade is
              correlated with the ability of B-raf,  but not c-raf, to form a stable complex
              with the heat shock  protein, HSP90.  We hypothesize that HSP90 is a component
              of a  molecular scaffold which serves to physically organize the MAPK  cascade
              into a functional module.       The first specific aim of this proposal is to
              establish the  identity of the G-proteins (a class of protein in cell membranes
               which is involved in the transmission of chemical messages from  the outside
              to the inside of a cell) which initiate activation of  the MAPK cascade in PC12
              cells.  The involvement of newly  discovered G-proteins in this process will be
              investigated.  The  action of the second member of the MAPK cascade, B-raf,
              will be  explored through expression (activation of a gene in cultured  cells)
              of a dominant neg ative B-raf molecule which blocks the  action of the
              endogenous B-raf.  These experiments will allow  determination of the roles of
              these molecules in mediating NGF  action.  We will also investigate whether the
              MAPK cascade is  physically organized as a signaling module.       Finally, the
              PC12 cells are a widely used neuronal model,  however, a variety of data
              suggest that signaling events in these  cells may not accurately reflect those
              occurring in authentic  neurons.  We propose to investigate the cellular
              mechanisms  subserving the activation of the MAPK cascade in these primary 
              neurons.      1
