Title       : Mitigation of Mountain-Channel Sedimentation Resulting from Reservior Sediment
               Releases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9727061

Award Number: 9727061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen E. Wohl ellenw@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Y. Julien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah J. Anthony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Release of fine sediment from small reservoirs along  mountain channel creates
              hazards for aquatic biota, and  adversely impacts recreational channel use. 
              One means of  minimizing the sedimentation hazards associated with these 
              releases would be to specify the discharge regime necessary  to flush fine
              sediments form channel reaches of critical  aquatic habit.  This research
              project will use a  representative case of recent reservoir sediment release to
               address the basic objectives of : (1) evaluating the ability  of for existing
              hydraulic models to simulate sedimentation  patterns along the type of mountain
              channels affected by  reservoir sediment releases; and (2) developing a
              conceptual  model of reservoir-release sedimentation patterns along  mountain
              channels as a function of channel geometry,  discharge, sediment volume, and 
              grain-size distribution.  Data on channel response to reservoir-sediment
              release come  form the North Fork Poudre River, Colorado, which had a  sediment
              release in September 1996.  Monitoring along the  North Fork Poudre River since
              October 1996 has created a  database of changes in velocity distribution,
              bedload and  suspended load transport, and channel geometry as a function  of
              discharge.  The research seeks to integrate existing knowledge so as to  most
              effectively apply that knowledge toward mitigating a  widespread problem.  It
              will provide resource managers with  the information necessary to choose the
              most appropriate  model for a given situation, as well as providing modelers 
              with specific data on the strengths and weaknesses of  existing models when
              applied to sedimentation along mountain  channels.  It is likely the model
              study will yield some  basic insights into the importance if increased boundary
               roughness and secondary flow.
