Title       : LT: Removal of Organic Films and Contaminants from Surfaces Using Elevated
               Pressure, Elevated Temperature Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9727249

Award Number: 9727249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Hess dennis.hess@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727249  Hess  The worldwide semiconductor market currently exceeds one  hundred
              thirty billion dollars.  Continued growth of this  technology has occurred
              because the complexity and hence  the capability of microelectronic devices and
              integrated  circuits (ICs) has increased tremendously over the past 3 5  years
              with essentially no increase in cost per IC chip.  Yield and reliability of
              these devices are determined  primarily by the ability to avoid the
              incorporation of  deleterious impurities such as organic contaminants, alkali 
              ions and metal atoms/ions into the device during  fabrication processes. 
              Competitiveness and market share in  this rapidly changing technology therefore
              depend on  cleaning methodology.  Future device structures and  dimensions
              require modifications to the traditional liquid  cleaning steps.  In addition,
              disposal of solvents, acids,  and large volumes of de-ionized water used in
              current  cleaning techniques is a significant environmental concern.    The
              proposed research focuses on the development of a novel  approach to surface
              cleaning and conditioning that ensures  compatibility of this critical
              fabrication step with vacuum  sequences in the manufacturing process.  By
              increasing the  pressure of liquid water in the vicinity of 100C, the 
              advantages of liquid cleaning can be maintained; a  reduction in pressure
              results in water evaporation,  permitting subsequent transfer of substrates
              into a vacuum  chamber.  The addition of C02 to water under elevated  pressure
              and elevated temperature conditions enhances water  reactivity to organic
              materials, and thus provides a means  to remove organic as well as inorganic
              contaminants.  Furthermore, this new cleaning approach minimizes the  volumes
              of solvents, acids, and de-ionized water used in  the numerous cleaning cycles
              required in the fabrication of  ICs, thereby reducing greatly the environmental
              impact of  IC manufacture.    Chemical and physical characterization of silicon
              and  silicon dioxide surfaces, intentional ly contaminated with  organic layers
              and subsequently cleaned, will be performed  by X-ray Photoelectron
              Spectroscopy (via in-situ transfer  from the high pressure reactor in the
              analysis system), in-  situ Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy,
              Inductively-  Coupled Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS), atomic force microscopy  and
              contact angle measurements.  These results will provide  insight into
              fundamental cleaning mechanisms of organic  contaminants using water with and
              without additives.  Preliminary electrical measurements, combined with ICP-MS, 
              will generate information concerning the ultimate utility of  this cleaning
              technique.  ***
