Title       : What's At Stake: Negotiating the Terms of Surrender
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9727888

Award Number: 9727888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Werner swerner@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this Young Investigator Opportunity award is to formulate and
              test a model that explains and predicts the terms of surrender negotiated
              between warring parties.  This research contributes to the extant literature on
              war consequences in several ways.  First, the model specifies how individual
              preferences and expectations, domestic constraints, and international
              conditions affect the bargaining power of the war participants and, as a
              result, their ability to negotiate favorable terms of settlement. Second, the
              model integrates the literature on war outcomes and war termination, leading to
              expectations not only about severity of the settlement but its timing as well. 
              Finally, the model establishes a link between the domestic consequences of war,
              on which work has proceeded rapidly, and the international consequences of war
              which has received much less scholarly attention.    This preliminary
              investigation has many important implications.  First, a model which explains
              the consequences of war will be extremely relevant to the literature on war
              causes if we make the very reasonable assumption that the decision to wage war
              is conditioned at least in part on the expectation of the results of war
              participation.  Second, the empirical results will extend existing research on
              the influence of regime type, the relevance of international alliances, and the
              importance of such psychological factors as resolve and aspirations to
              international relations.  Finally, the project provides a general theoretical
              framework, tha of bargaining, to understand and evaluate both the domestic and
              international consequences of resorting to force to realize political gains.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
