Title       : Cellulose Conversion Using Aqueous Pretreatment and Cellulose Enzyme Mimetic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9727096

Award Number: 9727096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Ladisch ladisch@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Ladisch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727096  Ladisch  This proposal addresses the processing of cellulose- 
              containing wastes and residues into sugars which can be  fermented into
              oxygenated chemicals and fuel additives.  The  proposed approach builds upon a
              recently confirmed  pretreatment method in which cellulosic materials are 
              pressure cooked in water to make them susceptible to enzyme  hydrolysis.  The
              proposed research will carry out  exploratory research to screen, identify, and
              characterize  biodegradable enzyme mimetic(s) for formation of glucose  from
              cellulosic materials pretreated by aqueous pressure  cooking.    The research
              is directed toward identifying organic acid  catalysts, particularly fatty or
              long chain acids which will  adsorb on cellulose and hydrolyze the -glycosidic
              bonds to  give glucose.  The general goal of the research is to con  tribute to
              the reduction in cost of converting a renewable  material, cellulose, into
              fermentable sugars.    Specific objectives are:    1.   Rapid screening of a
              range of organic and fatty acids    for their combined potential to adsorb onto
              cellulose,    hydrolyze glycosidic bonds and pretreated cellulose, and    give
              only minimal degradation of glucose  2.   Selection of one or two of the
              organic acids,    determination of their rate constants for cellulose   
              hydrolysis as a function of acid (catalyst)concentrations    and temperatures
              ranging from80 to 180C  3.   Development of a hydrolysis model based on a   
              mechanistic analysis of adsorption and rate phenomena for    the purpose of
              bioreactor design, and calculating the cost    of the catalyst.    Preliminary
              experiments using pressure cooker pretreatment  of cellulose have shown the
              potential of succinic acid as a  hydrolysis catalyst.  Succinic acid has the
              added property  of being soluble in boiling water while precipitating from 
              solution at room temperature.  ***
