Title       : Synthesis and Chemistry of Carboxylate-Bridged Polymetallic Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a9727243

Award Number: 9727243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1080000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Lippard lippard@lippard.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support for research on carboxylate-bridged   metal
              dimers by Dr. Stephen J. Lippard, Chemistry Department,   Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology.  Metalloproteins containing such   units are
              responsible for many biological functions, including oxygen   transport,
              methane hydroxylation, and hydrolysis of phosphate esters.  In   this study,
              three lines of investigation will be pursued:  oxidation   chemistry of diiron
              complexes as models for the active site of the   hydroxylase component of
              methane monooxygenase; metallohydrolase   chemistry that mimics urease and
              metalophosphatase; and sugar   isomerization reactions to model D-xylose
              isomerase.  Emphasis will be   placed on designing dinucleating ligands that
              have sufficient internal   preorganization so that they fold into shapes that
              create the appropriate   cavities for metal binding.  One class of ligands is
              dicarboxylates in   which two Kemp's triacid anhydride-chloride moities are
              linked by a   bridging 1,3-diaminoxylene, 1,4-diaminophthalazine, or  
              bis(aminomethylphenyl)porphyrin group.  Symmetric and unsymmetrically  
              substituted amidinate ligands, that are isoelectronic with carboxylate,   will
              also be investigated.  Attempts will also be made to functionalize  
              mono-carboxylate bridged systems using a multicomponent ligand with two  
              terminal bidentate units joined by one bridging carboxylate spacer.  The  
              compounds synthesized will be tested to see the extent to which they   mimic
              the structures, physical properties, and reactivities of the   biological
              prototypes, including intermediates in catalytic cycles.    Many
              biologically-important hydroxylases, hydrolases, and isomerases   function
              because of a reaction center that contains two linked metal   atoms and a
              surrounding carboxylate group.  In order to understand the   details of how
              these enzymes work, model compounds will be designed,   synthesized, and tested
              for catalytic activity.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
