Title       : LT: Green Modularity: Ecology and Product Retirement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9727247

Award Number: 9727247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Gershenson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727247  Gershenson  This research seeks to identify and incorporate retirement 
              modularization into mechanical design.  The research uses an  expanded
              definition of modularity, which incorporates the  potential of modularity based
              not only on disassembly but  also on grouped retirement methods.  This
              definition,  coupled with several important design tools will lead to an 
              implementable design methodology for incorporating  retirement modules into
              products.    Modularization, due to the functional independence it  creates,
              has been called the goal of good design.  Industry  has made an effort to
              modularize products to easily meet the  needs of end users and marketing.  This
              effort has led to  the creation of product families.  Occasionally, modules are
               created with some aspects of product retirement in mind.  However, this
              modularization is done without fully  understanding the financial implications
              of the design  changes.  In addition, modularization is done without a 
              structured methodology making the process difficult to  repeat if it is
              successful and difficult to avoid if it is  unsuccessful.  This research will
              develop a methodology of  creating products that are modular with respect to
              product  retirement.  Doing so will decrease environmental loads,  decrease
              retirement processing costs, and decrease product  development time.    This
              research will yield a practical, applicable methodology  for identifying
              product retirement modules as well as  combining functional and retirement
              modularity into a design  methodology and modularity measure.  The adoption of
              modular  product design in product development practices will have a 
              tremendous impact on product value, environmental loads, and  life-cycle cost. 
              Modular products will greatly reduce  development time and help us move towards
              global  sustainability.  The design theory research community will  be impacted
              by the introduction of a new direction in the  effort to better incorporate
              life-cycle values into product  design.    This r esearch will progress in
              practical steps punctuated by  validation studies.  The result of the research
              in this  proposal will be a validated design methodology and measure.  The work
              will also be disseminated in publications at each  critical juncture and
              ultimately incorporated in a computer  tool.  The work will be accomplished
              through the work of the  faculty and graduate students of the University of
              Alabama  Life-cycle Engineering Laboratory with collaboration from 
              undergraduate researchers and students.  ***
