Title       : Morphological Differentiation in a Filamentous Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9727234

Award Number: 9727234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Losick losick@mcb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727234  Losick  The goal of this project is to elucidate the nature of the
              signals and the signaling pathways that govem the process of aerial mycelium
              formation in the filamentous bacterium Streptornyces coelicolor. The formation
              of the aerial mycelium depends on so-called bld (i.e., "bald") genes, mutants
              of which produce smooth, hairless colonies. A striking property of bld mutants
              is their capacity to regain the ability to form an aerial mycelium when grown
              near, but not in contact with, certain other bld mutants, a phenomenon known as
              extracellular complementation. Experiments will be carried out to purify
              extracellular factors that stimulate the formation of the aerial mycelium. One
              such factor is transported into cells by a peptide importer, and a gene
              required for its production will be cloned. In traditional searches for
              developmental mutants, many bld mutants were probably missed due to
              extracellular complementation by wildtype colonies under conditions of high
              colony density. Additional bld mutants will now be sought by carrying out
              screens at low colony density, and the mutated bld genes will be cloned and
              characterized. Finally, to facilitate the discovery of additional bld genes, a
              new procedure for generating insertional mutants will be developed.  Aerial
              mycelium formation is one of the most fascinating and dramatic examples of
              morphological differentiation in the world of procaryotic organisms.
              Streptomyces coelicolor and other streptomycetes are filamentous bacteria that
              grow by the formation of a mold-like, branching network of multinucleoid
              hyphae. The aerial mycelium consists of hyphae that grow into the air away from
              the colony surface to form a luxuriant lawn of hair-like filaments that
              eventually metamorphose into chains of pigmented spores. The colony can be
              thought of as a kind of community in which the cells are in active
              communication with one another so as to coordinate the formation of the aerial
              mycelium. It is anticipated that this project will help elucidate the  nature
              of the intercellular interactions that govern aerial mycelium formation. It is
              likely that the findings derived from this work will provide insights into
              signaling systems used by other kinds of bacteria as well as by cells of higher
              organisms.
