Title       : LT: Formalization of Disassembly Process to Support Serviceability and
               End-of-Product Life Options
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9727136

Award Number: 9727136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99907              (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Allada allada@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727136  Allada  Stricter environmental legislation, corporate image, public 
              perception, and rising waste-disposal costs are impetus for  evolving research
              initiatives in the area of environmentally  conscious design (ECD).  One of the
              critical research issues  of ECD is design for disassembly (DFD).  Product
              disassembly  considerations have major impact on serviceability and  various
              end-of-product life cycle issues such as recycling,  reuse, and
              remanufacturing.  This research project attempts  to conduct deeper
              investigations into the disassembly  process by (1) Formalizing the disassembly
              process using  graph theory and abstract algebra techniques and, (2) 
              Developing an advanced design tool to evaluate product  "greenness" at the
              concept design and final design stages.  The context chosen is
              mechanical/electromechanical  artifacts.  The design information is fuzzy (of
              approximate  nature) in the early design stages.    However, crucial design
              decisions are made at the early  design stages.  As the design activity
              proceeds to the final  stage,  the design variables start assuming crisp
              values.  However, there are fewer avenues to improve product  greenness at the
              final design stages since there is less  flexibility to incorporate the
              redesign suggestions.  Maximum benefits will be reaped if a phased evaluation
              is  performed at the concept and final design stages.    A formal methodology
              for representing and processing  imprecise design information of a conceptual
              artifact is  proposed in this study.  The green evaluator will have  different
              evaluation perspectives for the concept and final  design artifacts -- moving
              from generality to specificity.  Fuzzy neural networks (FNN) in conjunction
              with expert  reasoning system will be used to build this green evaluation 
              design tool to determine the initial feasibility and green  indices of a
              candidate design.  The approach adopted in this  study is to infer various
              life-cycle disassembly,  serviceability, and recycling characteristics; provide
                qualitative evaluation by identifying portions of a design  artifact that are
              environmentally burdensome; and compute  appropriate green indices. 
              Component-level and productlevel  green indices will be computed in terms of
              factors such as  relative disassembly cost and time, relative service cost  and
              time, and relative product salvage value.  Research  issues relating to
              formalization of disassembly process and  development of a computational design
              tool will involve  interaction with the industrial supporters (Ford, Boeing, 
              Finale International Tool, and Home, Inc.) of this project.  The concepts and
              computational tools discussed in this study  will lead to an increased
              understanding of the disassembly  process and the development of advanced
              computer-based  design tools to produce environment-friendly products.  This 
              will help the U.S. companies to meet the targeted ecological  goals and gain
              advantage in the global marketplace.  The  Manufacturing Research and Training
              Center (MRTC), MO, has  kindly agreed to cost share $24,976 over a period of
              two  years.  ***
