Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Optimal Design and Control of Multibody
               Systems: A Parallel Manipulator Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9727424

Award Number: 9727424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25645              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Bobrow jebobrow@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5942,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9727424  Bobrow    This award provides funds to permit Dr. James E. Bobrow, 
              Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,  University of California -
              Irvine to pursue with Dr. Frank  C. Park, Department of Mechanical Design and
              Production  Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea, for 36  months, a
              program of cooperative research on optimal design  and control of multibody
              systems, a parallel manipulator  case study., Using techniques from modern
              differential  geometry, compact, closed-form equations for the dynamics of 
              such systems have been developed in prior research by the  collaborators.  The
              goal of the present research is to  integrate various mathematical methods,
              developed  previously, into a single unified design methodology for  multibody
              design and control.    These previously developed equations have led to the 
              development of gradient-based numerical optimization  algorithms for optimal
              design and motion planning  applications.  The collaborators expect to validate
              their  proposed approach with a case study, by applying the  methodology to the
              design, construction, and control of a  pneumatically actuated parallel
              manipulator for use as a  vehicle simulator.  The practical goal of this
              project is a  low-cost vehicle simulator whose performance is optimized  using
              efficient and robust design optimization algorithms.  This project is relevant
              to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea  Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
              increase the  level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and 
              engineers through the exchange of scientific information,  ideas, skills, and
              techniques and through collaboration on  problems of mutual benefit.  Korean
              participation is  supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation 
              (KOSEF).  ***
