Title       : Individual Differences in Emotion Discrimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9727896

Award Number: 9727896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Feldman Barrett barretli@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Emotional intelligence is defined, in part, by the capacity to discriminate
              between different emotional experiences. Considerable evidence suggests that
              there are individual differences in people's tendency to discriminate: some
              individuals use discrete emotion labels to name their feelings in a distinct
              and specific fashion, whereas others use the terms to refer to more global
              feeling states. The long-term objective of the proposed research is to examine
              the factors that contribute to this individual difference, with the larger goal
              of understanding the relationship between conscious emotion labeling, emotional
              intelligence, and effective emotion regulation. The research will investigate
              two psychological characteristics associated with individual differences in the
              labeling of discrete emotional experiences: valence focus (the extent to which
              individuals incorporate pleasantness or unpleasantness into their conscious
              affective experience), and arousal focus (the extent to which individuals
              incorporate subjective experiences of arousal into a conscious affective
              experience). One series of studies will determine whether valence focus is a
              characteristic specific to emotion labeling, or whether it is part of a broader
              cognitive style defined by a chronic tendency to make evaluative judgments of
              all sorts. If successful, these studies will indicate whether the failure to
              use discrete emotion labels distinctly is a function of (1) a general cognitive
              style or (2) incomplete knowledge of emotion and emotion regulation strategies.
              A second series of studies will use Signal Detection Theory to determine
              whether those who are higher in arousal focus (i.e., who incorporate subjective
              experiences of arousal into their emotional experience) have more accurate
              perceptions of their internal sensations (arising from autonomic nervous system
              activity). If successful, these studies will demonstrate that bodily cues are
              more important to the emotional experiences of some individuals than of others,
              and will provide the foundation for studying the role that the body plays in
              emotional intelligence more broadly. The proposed research has implications
              both for basic theory in emotion and for the role of emotional experience and
              emotion regulation in mental health.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
