Title       : LT: Life Cycle Design of Building Integrated Photovoltaic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9727268

Award Number: 9727268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Keoleian gregak@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mojtaba Navvab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Mazmanian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727268  Keoleian  Conventional electricity generating systems based on fossil 
              and nuclear fuels are not sustainable because of the finite  nature of these
              fuels and the environmental impacts related  to their use.  Building-integrated
              photovoltaics (BIPV) are  rapidly emerging as an important application of a
              renewable  energy technology.  BIPV systems are an integral part of the 
              building envelope and thus serve multiple functions  including weather
              protection, structural, aesthetic, and  electricity generation.  Despite the
              inherent advantages of  BIPV in roofing and facade applications, they are
              currently  limited by economic decision-making that ignores social  benefits
              and costs.  A comprehensive assessment of the full  energy, environmental and
              economic benefits of BIPV systems  has not yet been conducted.  The purpose of
              the proposed  project is to develop a life cycle design model and computer 
              software tool (the Photovoltaic Building Integrated Design  and Policy
              Assessment Tool, PV-BIDPAT) for evaluating the  full benefits and costs of BIPV
              technology relative to  conventional electricity generating systems and the
              building  materials that they displace.  PV-BIDPAT will enhance the  design,
              planning, and policy making capabilities of key  stakeholders who influence the
              future implementation of BIPV  technology.    Life cycle inventory models for
              BIPV and functionally  equivalent conventional systems will serve as a
              foundation  for comparative energy, environmental, and economic  assessments. 
              The inventory component of PV-BIDPAT will  consist of a set of modules
              representing a variety of BIPV  technologies (amorphous silicon, crystalline, 
              polycrystalline, CdTe, for example) and another set of  modules for
              characterizing the displaced building materials  (fiberglass asphalt shingles,
              galvanized metal roofing).  The inventory model will be coupled with a life
              cycle cost  model comprising economic and policy modules that will  account for
              the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act  (PU RPA), current Federal Energy
              Regulatory Commission (FERC)  rules, and existing and proposed emissions
              allowance trading  systems.  The cost model will assign monetary values to 
              social costs from pollutant emissions and environmental  damage associated with
              electricity generation.  PV-BIDPAT  will compute the following metrics:
              pollution prevention  factors for air pollutant emissions, water pollutant 
              effluents and solid waste; energy payback time and  electricity production
              efficiency; life cycle costs  including social costs.  Life cycle inventory
              model  parameters will be measured for amorphous silicon BIPV  products, using
              data collected from United Solar, and for  the displaced fiberglass asphalt
              shingles and standing seam  metal roofing materials.    PV-BIDPAT will be
              applied to and tested on two existing  sites (South Face Energy Institute - PV
              shingle in Atlanta,  Georgia and the National Association of Home Builders, 
              National Research Home Park 21st Century Townhouses - PV  standing seam metal
              roof in Bowie, Maryland) and three  proposed installations (Dana Building of
              the School of  Natural Resources and Environment - new roof for building 
              renovation, Art and Architecture Building - PV shingle demo,  Nichols Arboretum
              Urban Environmental Education Center  historic structure relocation and
              renovation).  The results  from these cases and other simulations will
              highlight the  advantages of amorphous silicon BIPV for different policy  and
              economic scenarios.    This interdisciplinary research project will be
              undertaken  by a University of Michigan team from the National Pollution 
              Prevention Center, the School of Natural Resources and  Environment, and the
              School of Architecture and Urban  Planning that will bring together expertise
              in life cycle  design and assessment, PV technology, building design, 
              environmental economics and energy policy.  This team will  collaborate with
              United Solar and the Solar Energy  Industries Association (SEIA) and a
              multi-stakeholder  Advisory Committee.   ***
