Title       : Breast Feeding Structure and Parental Investment in Papua New Guinea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1998     
File        : a9727308

Award Number: 9727308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Tracer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Parents in many traditional and industrialized societies have been seen to
              invest differentially in given offspring according to the total pool of
              resources available, as well as the offspring's age, gender, and perceived
              vigor or condition.  The discipline of evolutionary ecology offers a framework
              for understanding these differential parental investment strategies. 
              Evolutionary models of parental investment predict that parents adjust the
              magnitude and scheduling of resources allocated to their children according to
              the likely fitness payoffs of current investments and those from alternative
              uses of resources.  To date, however, little research has attempted to test
              hypotheses explicitly derived from this body of theory.    This project seeks
              to test several predictions of evolutionary parental investment theory using
              data from an observational study of mother-offspring proximity, and
              breast-feeding and supplementation practices among the Au of Papua New Guinea. 
              Prolonged lactation leads to a protracted anovulatory period as well as to
              long-term declines in maternal energy reserves which have been documented to
              affect maternal health and survival.  As such, lactation is one of the
              costliest forms of investment expended by mothers on their newborn offspring
              and should vary systematically with individual characteristics of the mother
              and child.  This study will yield important data on variation in infant feeding
              patterns in a traditional society and will help to identify the conditions
              under which specific children are at elevated risk of growth faltering,
              morbidity, and death.  It will also provide one of the first critical tests of
              evolutionary parental investment theory.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
