Title       : Collaborative Project: Analysis of Pattern Formation in Drosophila by Importance
               Sampling on Parallel Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9727177

Award Number: 9727177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuefan Deng deng@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Deng  9727177       The investigator with John Reinitz of Mt. Sinai School of 
              Medicine and their colleagues study large scale optimization  methods applied
              to problems concerning gene networks and pattern  formation in the fruit fly
              Drosophila.  These optimization  problems arise in a method known as "gene
              circuits", which was  developed by one of the principal investigators and his 
              coworkers.  The essence of this method is the numerical inversion  of a set of
              nonlinear ordinary differential equations by least  squares fits of the
              trajectories of the equations to gene  expression data obtained by fluorescence
              microscopy.  In the  past, these fits were performed by simulated annealing on
              serial  computers using the Metropolis algorithm under the control of the  Lam
              cooling schedule.  They are computationally intensive, and the  range of
              problems that can be considered was limited by the speed  of available serial
              processors.  The investigators are developing  new computational methods for
              the solution of these problems on  parallel processors.  Importance sampling is
              the most efficient,  or the most important, ingredient of an algorithm in
              treating  complex continuum optimization problems such as the pattern 
              formation analysis undertaken here.  Simulated annealing is one  method for
              importance sampling; the investigators are developing  a general method for
              parallel simulated annealing on nonseparable  problems.  Other importance
              sampling methods are derived from  methods that make use of the continuum
              properties of the problem  at hand, such as Newton's method.  The investigators
              develop a  family of parallel importance sampling methods and then 
              synergistically combine them.  This family of methods includes  genetic
              algorithms, continuum methods, a Lagrangian reformulation  of the fitting
              problem, and simulated annealing.       Networks of interacting genes lie at
              the heart of the  problems that will face biologists and biotechnologists in
              the  twenty first century.  Processes ranging from e mbryonic  development to
              cell division and cell death are controlled by  networks of genes.  In order to
              understand how these networks  work, it is necessary to understand their
              internal "wiring  diagrams".  In particular, it is important to know how genes
              turn  each other on and off.  Modern molecular biology allows  investigators to
              see which genes are on or off at a given moment,  but in order to understand
              the "wiring" between genes, it is  necessary to analyze changes in gene
              activity over time and  analyze them by computer.  The method of analysis can
              be reduced  to an "optimization" problem, in which the smallest value of a 
              complicated function is sought.  In this project, the  investigators are
              finding new ways to solve optimization problems  on large scale parallel
              high-performance computers.  Particular  emphasis is placed on parallel methods
              for simulated annealing,  an exceptionally powerful optimization method.  This
              research is  important to many areas beyond gene networks.  Simulated annealing
               and related methods are used in structural biology and other  biotechnology
              areas related to drug discovery.  It is also used in  the design of integrated
              circuits.  These and other areas are  likely to benefit from this work. 
              Funding for the project is  provided by the program of Computational
              Mathematics and the  Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the 
              Developmental Biology program in BIO.
