Title       : LT: Modeling the Industrial Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9727295

Award Number: 9727295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Graedel teg@allwise.att.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynne L. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oswald J. Schmitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727295  Graedel  A recent survey of directions for research in industrial 
              ecology identifies the analogy between biological and  industrial ecosystems as
              the central question to be explored  in industrial ecology research. 
              Biological systems are  customarily studied by iterations between models of
              system  behavior and data describing that behavior.  As a newly-  formed field,
              industrial ecology has generated some usable  data, but has yet to have
              inspired much in the way of model  development.  However, if industrial ecology
              is to be  usefully informed by biological ecology, it is necessary to  begin to
              explore models of its behavior from an ecosystem  perspective.  In such a
              system, resources are provided from  virgin reservoirs by extractors, processed
              by one stratum of  "organisms' (smelters, refiners, chemical transformers), 
              utilized by a higher stratum of "organisms" (manufacturers),  acquired by "top
              predators" (customers), and eventually  reclaimed by recyclers.  The work
              proposed here seeks to  gather relevant data for selected resources, materials 
              flows, and "organisms" in an urban area and to generate the  mathematical
              relationships needed to develop an industrial  ecology model describing
              reservoirs, the flows of resources  among them and the driving forces governing
              those flows.  The resultant model will be the first designed explicitly to 
              computationally investigate the flows of materials, energy,  and capital in an
              industrial ecosystem.    The industrial ecology model that will be constructed
              will  utilize as a framework the "Gecko" ecosystem ecology model  developed at
              the Yale University Center for Computational  Ecology.  The equations
              describing the flows of resources  will incorporate both resource constraints
              and economic  interaction parameters.  The investigators that will be  involved
              include an industrial ecologist (also an  experienced modeler of complex
              chemical systems), a natural  resources economist (also a specialist in water
              supply  economics), and a populati on ecologist (also a co-developer  of the
              Gecko model).    The result of this research will be a model that can be used 
              to investigate specific questions of interest to industrial  ecology, such as
              "Are there optimal geographical patterns or  mixes of "organisms" in an
              industrial ecosystem?"; "What are  the barriers to improved industrial
              ecosystem realization?";  "How might these barriers be surmounted?" "How are
              the  results altered if (a) the natural resource base is changed  (by the
              exhaustion of a resource, for example); (b) the  economic structure is changed
              (by the initiation of a new  tariff, for example), (c) system boundaries are
              changed  (from an urban region to a state or subcontinent, for  example)?" More
              important, it is reasonable to expect the  models to help frame the thinking of
              the industrial ecology  field, as has happened in so many other specialty
              areas.  One can then hope to take a more enlightened approach to the  role of
              industrial activity (broadly defined to include the  service industries,
              transportation etc.) in our highly  technological society.  This framing will
              be especially  important with the dynamic models that have the potential to 
              interact with global geosphere-biosphere models and  illuminate where we as a
              society and a planet have been and  where we might be headed.  ***
