Title       : Structure/Function Analysis of Trans-sialidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9727826

Award Number: 9727826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Eichinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727826  Eichinger  Trans-sialidase is a novel type of sialic acid metabolizing
              enzyme, made by the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi. this enzyme very efficiently
              moves sialic acid from one carbohydrate donor to another carbohydrate acceptor
              molecule. The enzyme thus first functions as a sialidase, by removing alpha
              2,3-linked sialic acid from donors, and then as a sialyltransferase, by
              reattaching the sialic acid to beta-galactose-terminated acceptors. The
              mechanism of this unique two step sugar transfer reaction is unknown. The
              investigator has recently identified two domains of the enzyme which are
              involved in the cleavage and transfer reactions. An N-terminal domain with
              sequence similarity to bacterial sialidases and a C-terminal domain with weak
              sequence similarity to a Fn3 domain each have amino acids involved in the
              enzymatic reactions. The investigator will now extend the analysis of these two
              domains, using domain-swap, site-specific, and random mutagenesis of the genes
              encoding trans-sialidase and related sialidases, to gain a more complete
              understanding of the structure/function aspects of the enzyme. The investigator
              will also compare the sequences of trans-sialidases and sialidases from a
              variety of other lower eucaryotes, to explore the range of conservation of
              structure in these sialic acid metabolizing enzymes.     Sialic acid is an
              important type of sugar found on many biologically active molecules. It is
              usually added to proteins as they are synthesized by enzymes found inside
              cells. Recently, a unique enzyme, called trans-sialidase, was found which moves
              this sugar from one molecule to another, uses already synthesized glycoproteins
              as substrates, and acts outside of cells. How the enzyme transfers sugars from
              one molecule to another is not known.  A detailed understanding of the steps in
              the sugar transfer reaction, and the structure of the enzyme domains that
              interact with the sugar donor and acceptor substrates, would allow for the
              design of inhibitors of the enzyme with which  to define its role in the
              organisms that make it, and for the directed alteration of this and other
              related enzymes, themselves already scientifically and commercially valuable,
              into novel types of sialic acid metabolizing enzymes.
