Title       : Interface-Induced Polyelectrolyte Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9727717

Award Number: 9727717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Schlenoff schlen@chem.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9727717  Schlenoff    Interface-Induced Polyelectrolyte Structures    Interfaces
              are known to assist in the formation of novel and  useful polyelectrolyte
              structures.  These include polymer  brushes, whcih are employed in stabilizing
              emulsions and  dispersions.  A brush is produced when a polymer with a surface-
               seeking end group or block is exposed to a solid-liquid or liquid-  solid
              interface.  Typical brush-forming macromolecules include  polyelectrolyte
              diblock copolymers, where a short hydrophobic  block drives the polymer to the
              surface from aqueous solution.  Since the hydrophilic, brush-forming segment of
              the molecules is  a polyelectrolyte, the conformation of the brush will be a
              strong  function of the nature and concentration of the counterion.  Since
              brushes will be exposed to a variety of ions when they are  applied to
              stabilizing dispersions, it is essential to determine  the effect of these ions
              on brush adsorption.  Focusing in  particular on the liquid/liquid interface -
              rarely studied yet  quite pervasive - brushes will be produced here using 
              radiolabeled polyelectrolytes.  The label permits accurate in  situ
              determination of the amount of polymer adsorbed to the  interface.  Using a
              suite of recently-developed radiometric  techniques, the surface coverage will
              be evaluated in the  presence of monovalent and divalent counterions, as well
              as other  charged polymers.  Questions of a fundamental nature that will be 
              addressed include whether the polymer is adsorbed in the  thermodynamically
              reversible, or irreversible (kinetic limited)  mode.  This project will also
              focus on ultrathin polymer films  made from the layer-by-layer deposition of
              alternately charged  polyelectrolytes.  These newly-discovered polyelectrolyte 
              structures are straightforward to prepare and have potential  applications as
              thin film conductors, light-emitting layers and  bioactive (enzyme-containing)
              thin films.  The mechanism by which  charge is balanced and distributed within
              these films is not  underst ood.  In the proposed work, the charge within the 
              multilayer films will be probed using radiolabeled counterions.  Conditions for
              producing multilayers with a range of counterion  concentrations will be
              established using novel electrochemically  active polyelectrolytes as building
              blocks.  These polyviologens  will be synthesized by a new method and will be
              tested for  application as electrochromic and electrocatalytic thin films.  %%%
               This project will enhance our understanding of polyelectrolyte  multilayers,
              thin films, and interfaces, which have important  implications to colloids,
              adhesion, lubrication, and surface  science.  ***
