Title       : P-Protein Mutants: Tools to Analyze Phloem Protein Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9727626

Award Number: 9727626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727626  Thompson  Phloem is essential for the long distance transport of
              photoassimilates from the sites of synthesis or remobilization to the sites of
              use or storage.  Although phloem tissue has been well described anatomically
              and morphologically, many questions remain to be answered to link structural
              components of the translocating cells to their function.  Phloem protein
              (P-protein) filaments form an integral network in the cytoplasm of the
              translocating cells in many higher plants, yet their function is unresolved. 
              The long term goal of this project is to relate the structural features of
              P-proteins to phloem biology.  The PIs are utilizing the divergence between
              P-proteins in Cucurbita and Cucumis species to determine the functional
              significance of conserved features within these proteins.  These experiments
              will be the basis for a broad mutational analysis of these proteins in
              functional assays performed in transgenic plants.  Structural components that
              are required for phloem filament formation will also be assessed in vitro. 
              Experiments are being conducted to evaluate binding domains in the phloem
              filament protein and to determine the involvement of additional proteins,
              especially the role of chaperones, in filament formation.  These investigations
              will enhance our understanding of the biological activity of P-proteins and the
              mechanisms by which these proteins function.
