Title       : RPG: Preliminary Functional Studies of Hro-twi Protein in the Leech Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9727760

Award Number: 9727760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julio G. Soto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern NM Univ Main Camp
	      
	      Portales, NM  88130    505/562-2121

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727760  Soto    The main focus of this research is to study the action of genes
              involved in the process of mesoderm formation and differentiation in the leech
              embryo.  Morphological information, in addition to information obtained from
              more recent nucleic acid and genetic analysis, has shown that many
              developmental processes in invertebrate and vertebrate species are very
              similar, indicating that these processes may be evolutionarily conserved.  An
              example of one of these fundamental processes gastrulation, involves the
              formation of mesodermal, endodermal and ectodermal embryonic layers.  The
              ectoderm, or outer layer, gives rise to the epithelium and the nervous system. 
              The mesoderm, or middle layer, gives rise to connective tissue, muscles, blood
              cells, blood vessels, and some organs.  The endoderm, or inner layer, gives
              rise to the digestive tract and the interior lining of some organs. 
              Determining what regulates the formation of these layers has clear implications
              for the understanding of both normal and abnormal embryonic development.  The
              main objective of this research is to understand the process of  gastrulation
              at both the cellular and molecular level in a simple organism, the leech
              embryo.  Two different approaches will be used to study gastrulation events in
              the leech.  The first will involve a molecular approach where PCR and DNA
              cloning will be used to identify genes involved in the process of
              grastrulation.  The second approach is the utilization of cell lineage analysis
              to identify cells involved in the process of gastrulation and therefore
              affected by the genes identified by the DNA approach.  During the period
              covered by this planning grant, studies will focus on a candidate of 
              mesodermal determination in the leech embryo, Hro-twi (Soto et al., in press). 
              As part of the planning activities, polyclonal antibodies against Hro-twi
              protein will be purified and protein expression determined.  In addition,
              preliminary functional analysis will be performed, which will determine th e
              feasibility of antisense/overexpression approaches to study the function of
              developmentally-important genes in the leech embryo.
