Title       : Histidine Phosphorylation in Mammalian Cellular Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9727920

Award Number: 9727920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph W. Turck turck@itsa.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  9727920  Turck           The regulation of protein function by
              transient phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues is common
              in a wide variety of biological processes, including signal transduction
              events.  Phosphorylation of these residues by serine/threonine or tyrosine
              kinase enzymes can lead to the activation of a protein or promote
              protein-protein interactions through the newly phosphorylated residue. 
              Histidine kinases mediate the phosphorylation of  histidine and have been found
              to be important in signal transduction in bacteria, yeast and plants.   
              Although phosphohistidine has been observed in mammalian cells the
              identification and characterization of a histidine kinase has not been
              reported.   Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) activates a histidine kinase in
              mammalian cells, and this research will characterize and study the function of
              this histidine kinase in signal  transduction events elicited by the fibrobast
              growth hormone receptor ( FGFR ). The enzyme will be purified and its sequence
              determined.  The cDNA will be cloned and its specificity determined.   Recently
              developed methods for the study of histidine phosphorylation will allow its
              functional analysis.  These studies are designed to begin to understand the
              significance of histidine phosphorylation in signal transduction in mammalian
              cells.          The phosphorylation of amino acids in proteins by  kinase
              enzymes has been shown to be important in most signal transduction pathways.  
              Kinases are specific for the tyrosine,  serine/threonine  or histidine residues
              in proteins.  All of these enzymes have been studied in various organisms,
              however until recently histidine phsophorylation was only found to be important
              in signaling mechanisms of bacteria, yeast and plants.   However it has been
              found to also occur in mammalian cells.  This objective of this research is to
              purify and characterize a histidine kinase from mammalian cells and study its
              function.  This will be important in our understanding o f the various signal
              transduction pathways which occur in all organisms.      ***
