Title       : Characterization of ME1 during neuronal differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9727443

Award Number: 9727443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Chiaramello   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727443   CHIARAMELLO     The general focus of this project is on  the
              mechanisms that govern mammalian neuronal differentiation.  Dr. Chiaramello
              will investigate the roles of the basic helix-loop-  helix transcription factor
              ME1 during brain development.  The ME1  gene encodes two isoforms of ME1,
              called ME1a and ME1b, due to  alternative splicing of the messenger RNA. 
              However, only the ME1a  form is neuron-specific.  Several lines of evidence
              suggest that  ME1 plays an important role in the development of the nervous 
              system:  1) It has a strong homology with transcription factors  known to be
              essential for cell determination and differentiation  in the nervous system,
              such as Drosophila gene Daughterless; 2) It  is expressed in areas of the
              nervous system where neuronal  differentiation and plasticity occur; 3) It is
              also detected in  the subependymal region of the adult brain which includes 
              constitutively proliferating cells (neural progenitor cells) as  well as
              relatively quiescent cells that have the capacity to self-  renew and give rise
              to neurons and glia; 4) It modulates the  expression of two neuronal target
              genes involved in neuronal  growth and development, GAP-43 and the low affinity
              nerve growth  factor receptor p75LNGFR; and 5) It can assume distinct functions
               as a transcription factor, acting either as an activator or  repressor.  In
              this application, we propose experiments to further  investigate ME1 with
              respect to its molecular mechanism of action  and its neuron-specific partners
              during neuronal differentiation.  The specific aims of this project are as
              follows:  In specific aim  I, Dr. Chiaramello will examine the
              posttranslational modification  of ME1a during neuronal differentiation by
              assessing whether  phosphorylation of ME1a by casein kinase II dictates the 
              transcriptional activities of ME1 on neuronal target genes.  In  specific Aim
              II, Dr. Chiaramello will unravel the molecular  mechanism of action of ME1a
              during neuronal differentiation.  ME1a  binds DNA as eit her a homodimer or
              heterodimer.  The specificity  of the genes regulated by ME1 are thought to
              depend on the  dimerization partner.  Therefore, it is of tremendous importance
               to identify the heterodimeric partners of ME1a.  In specific Aim  III, Dr.
              Chiaramello will analyze in detail the temporal and  spatial expression of
              novel partners identified in Aim II.  Results from the project will elucidate
              the cascade of regulatory  events necessary for neuronal differentiation.
