Title       : Adaptation of Proteins: Nature Plus Nurture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9727721

Award Number: 9727721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Somero somero@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Somero  9727721       Understanding how temperature-sensitive proteins are
              stabilized in  organisms that experience widely different temperatures has
              significance for  both basic and applied science. The PIs will examine two
              types of changes that  play major roles in temperature adaptation. First,
              changes in amino acid  sequences of proteins (their "nature") will be
              investigated. By determining  where adaptive substitutions occur in proteins of
              differently thermally-adapted  species, the PIs will gain a deeper
              understanding of how specific alterations  of protein sequence affect the
              molecules' structure and function, and how these  adaptive changes help to
              establish environmental tolerance limits. Temperature  changes of only a few
              degrees centigrade are adequate to perturb proteins and  affect organismal
              distribution patterns-a finding with clear implications for  models of global
              warming. Furthermore, an understanding of how evolutionary  processes alter
              protein stability will assist biotechnologists in developing  strategies for
              laboratory-engineering of protein stability.       Protein stability is also
              influenced by the small molecules and water  that bathe proteins in cells. The
              PIs will investigate how the aqueous  medium in which a protein functions helps
              to "nurture" the protein to  enhance stability. Discovery of novel stabilizing
              solutes could facilitate  development by biotechnologists of new types of
              solutions for the long-term,  safe storage of drugs, cells, and tissues.
