Title       : The Role of Endophytes in Semi-Arid, Forest-Grassland Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9727020

Award Number: 9727020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley H. Faeth s.faeth@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Faeth    97 27020    Endophytic fungi frequently live intracellularly within the
              tissues of plants with little obvious indication of their presence.  In grasses
              these symbionts have been thought to increase plant resistance to herbivory,
              resistance to drought, and the competitive abilities of some plants in their
              interactions with their neighbors.  Despite the widespread occurrence of these
              associations, however, information on the nature of fungal-plant interactions
              remains limited.    This project will continue investigations of the
              relationship between endophytic fungus, Neotyphodium, and Arizona fescue an
              economically important range grass in the southwest.  An earlier series of
              experiments, funded by the Ecology program at NSF, failed to demonstrate that
              these fungi, provide any resistance to grazing by invertebrate herbivores, in
              contrast with widely held conventional wisdom that such a resistance is
              provided.  Alternative hypotheses to be tested in this new work center on the
              observation that plants increase root biomass and, possibly, osmoregulatory
              efficiency when infected by fungi.  It will examine the varying survival of
              seed, seedling, and mature-plant stages of fescue under different conditions of
              soil moisture and nitrogen along with fire frequency and intensity for
              different plant genotypes.  It will employ a series of field and laboratory
              experiments to test the notion that the Neotyphodium-Arizona fescue mutualism
              is context dependent.  It will also consider that fire may be an evolutionary
              factor that maintains these associations.    The results of this work will
              increase the understanding of the role of microoganisms in plant-animal
              interactions, plant population dynamics and the organization  of
              plant-microbe-herbivore communities.  It will shed insight into the evolution,
              ecology and maintenance of mutualistic interactions.  It will also provide
              useful information for the maintenance important southwestern grasslands.
