Title       : Collaborative Research: Biological Baselines for Assessing Environmental Impacts
               in Antarctica Coastal Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9727582

Award Number: 9727582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65259              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Arthur Berkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Berkman  9727582  Antarctic coastal environments have been the site of recent 
              studies on the effects of human activities on marine  ecosystems. This
              international, collaborative study will  focus on developing methodologies to
              generate biological  baselines for the benthic nearshore habitat in the Ross
              Sea  region of Antarctica. These baselines will be useful to for  studies to
              distinguish between natural environmental  variability from anthropogenic
              impacts and to assess the  recovery capacity of coastal marine populations
              which have  been exposed to natural and anthropogenic stresses. The  study will
              take place in Terra Nova Bay and will be  conducted in cooperation with the
              Italian Antarctic Program.  The research will focus on populations of the
              scallop  Adamussium colbecki from a natural-impact site (meltwater  stream),
              anthropogenic-impact site (in the vicinity of the  Terra Nova Bay Station in
              Tethys Bay) and control site (no  meltwater stream in a pristine area of Tethys
              Bay). Diver-  assisted collection and remotely operated vehicle photo-  surveys
              will provide data to determine bivalve size  frequencies and densities along
              with benthic community  patterns across depth and distance gradients from the 
              shoreline at each site. Environmental gradients will also be  measured. Bivalve
              physiology profiles will be generated by  micro-respirometry measurements of
              oxygen consumption rates  as well as nitrogen excretion rates under ambient and
               temperature-stressed environmental conditions. Biochemical  assays will be
              used to assess metabolic activity. The  physiological and biochemical assays
              will be complemented by  cellular biomarker analysis performed by the Italian 
              collaborators. Integration of these biochemical,  physiological and population
              assays will provide examples of  biological baselines for assessing indicator
              species'  responses to natural and anthropogenic impacts in the  Antarctic
              coastal zone.
