Title       : LT: Models and Instruction for Life Cycle Material Content Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9727209

Award Number: 9727209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Ann Stuart   (Principal Investigator current)
              Blaine Lilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt W. Koelling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9120,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               9727209   Stuart   This proposal focuses on engineering approaches for  
              sustainability and design for materials reuse through the   development of
              polymer degradation models, product   characterization models, and life cycle
              material content   decision models.  Because these challenges are  
              multidisciplinary, collaboration between Chemical   Engineering (polymer
              processing), Industrial Engineering   (manufacturing processes), Operations
              Research (applied   mathematical modeling), and Mechanical Engineering  
              (product design) are described.  An important element of   this proposal is the
              integration of environmentally   conscious engineering approaches into
              undergraduate and   graduate engineering curriculum.      As the demand for
              plastics by the transportation,   aerospace, and durable goods industries is
              increasing, the   disposal of plastics is also increasing.  The analysis of  
              life cycle trade-offs between use of recycled plastics,   recyclability,
              reduction of process wastes, energy   consumption, yields, and product
              performance are complex.   To date, most companies process either 100% virgin  
              material or virgin material with small percentages of   regrind.  Sources of
              pure regrind may be internal or from   another industrial processor(s). 
              Companies embracing   product stewardship are struggling to develop viable  
              approaches to economically process and recycle returned   products. 
              Post-consumer polymers have been exposed to   various thermal and mechanical
              conditions.  In addition,   post-consumer products contain polymer blends as
              well as   additives such as reinforcements, paint, or flame   retardants. 
              Thus, post-consumer plastics introduce   additional raw material uncertainties
              into the   manufacturing process.      To achieve corporate sustainability
              goals for cradle to   cradle products, companies producing advanced polymers
              and   composites need polymer degradation models, product   characterization
              models, and decision tools for recycled   material content choices as well  as
              engineers who   understand sustainability issues and approaches.  Several  
              materials, manufacturing, design, and decision modeling   issues as well as
              curriculum integration must be   addressed.      First, we must be able to
              identify the measure of   degradation for incoming recycled materials. 
              Previous   studies have demonstrated the relationship between the   molecular
              weight distribution (MWD) and polymer   degradation properties such as
              viscosity and melt index.   We will investigate the feasibility of measuring
              the MWD   for common material mixes where mixes refer to various   recycling
              generations (virgin through fifth generation) as   well as polymer blends.  We
              must also characterize the   product complexities and the corresponding
              material   properties required.  Next, we will investigate the   relationship
              between the product complexities and the   material degradation properties. 
              Typical industrial   processing parameters for temperature and pressure will be
                used.  The goal is to characterize the relationship   between the ratio of
              recycled content to virgin content   and the mold geometry, mechanical
              properties, and   rheological properties.  The materials degradation models  
              will provide valuable input for the life cycle material   content decision
              model.  The objective of the life cycle   material content decision model is to
              select material   content ratios in order to minimize costs subject to  
              constraints on regrind, post-consumer, and virgin material   supply, energy
              consumption, cycle time, and quality.      In five different undergraduate and
              graduate classes, the   principal investigators will motivate future engineers
              to   grapple with environmental materials selection challenges.   Industrial
              ecology principles as well as analytical   methods for life cycle material
              content decisions will be   integrated into the engineering curriculum.   ***
