Title       : Novel Multichannel Environmental Monitoring Network Controlling Virulence of
               Ralstonia solanacearum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9727921

Award Number: 9727921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Schell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy P. Denny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              




Ralstonia (Pseudomonas) solanacearum causes a lethal wilting disease
              of over 200 different plants worldwide. Secreted plant cell-wall-degrading
              exoenzymes and the EPS I exopolysaccharide, both contribute to its successful
              colonization of a plant's vascular system after root invasion. Because EPS I
              blocks water flow in the xylem, it is also a primary cause of wilting and
              killing. Biosynthesis and export of EPS I, a long unbranched polymer of 3 amino
              sugars, are encoded by the 16-kb eps operon. Transcription of the eps operon,
              as well as genes encoding some exoenzymes and other virulence genes, is
              controlled by a large, interactive regulatory network of over 12 proteins that
              is responsive to multiple environmental signals. This network is comprised of
              two distinct two-component regulatory systems (VsrAD and VsrBC), the unique
              signal integrator protein XpsR and the unusual Phc signal transduction system.
              Preliminary data suggest that the Phc module employs an atypical phosphorelay
              cascade that responds to 3-hydroxypalmitic acid methyl ester (3-OH PAME), a new
              type of volatile, quorum-indicating molecule. Phc and 3-OH PAME in turn
              regulate phcA, encoding a global, LysR-type transcriptional regulator that
              controls reversible switching between two very different physiological states,
              one adapted for virulence in plants, the other for saprophytic survival.  A
              major goal of this project is to understand at the molecular level how the Phc
              module responds to 3-OH PAME, and how the Phc components subsequently control
              phcA function. Using two different approaches, a genetic one (transposon
              mutagenesis) or a biochemical one (DNA-affinity chromatography of R.
              solanacearum extracts on columns with the eps regulatory region covalently
              bound), missing genes that mediate regulation of eps by XpsR and VsrC), will be
              searched for, cloned, and characterized. These studies of the R. solanacearum
              virulence regulatory network are important because one of the most critical
              factors for successful pathogenesis is the ability to coordinate production of
              virulence and pathogenicity factors in response to environmental signals, and
              because the ability of the R. solanacearum network to process and integrate
              multiple signal inputs is largely unparalleled. These studies should give
              insight into the ways multiple environmental cues are processed by pathogens to
              adjust virulence gene expression.  Finally, genes required by R. solanacearum
              for rapid, efficient colonization of plants by cloning and analysis of genes
              encoding several vsrD-regulated exoproteins will be searched for. In parallel,
              in vivo expression technology will be adapted and applied to R. solanacearum.
              This technology identifies and isolates genes that are highly expressed. by a
              pathogen only during colonization of a host. Either or both of these approaches
              will provide a way to access new, important genes, and provide insight into a
              pathogen's strategies for successful colonization of plants.

