Title       : The Primary Dynamics of Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a9727439

Award Number: 9727439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Callender call@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9727439  Callender  The central purpose of this work is to understand the
              dynamics of protein folding from an experimental point of view by measuring
              what structures form on what time scales along the folding pathway(s).  In
              order to study the fast (sub-msec) processes that are known to be key to
              understanding the pathway, novel laser induced temperature jump relaxation
              spectroscopy with a resolution of about 10 nsec (and down to 50 psec if
              necessary) are developed and employed.  Here the temperature of the water
              solvent is suddenly raised about 20 (C, and the system responds by relaxing to
              the new equilibrium condition.  IR absorption in the structure sensitive
              protein amide-I band and fluorescence of tryptophan and extrinsic chromophores
              are used to probe time dependent changes in structure.  Static equilibrium
              studies using these probes, and others, are also performed.  The study will
              concentrate on the folding of apomyoglobin (apoMb, myoglobin without its heme
              group) because the protein is relatively simple and serves as an archetype for
              folding of proteins which are small, single-domain, and globular.  Moreover,
              various well characterized unfolded states of the protein can be prepared and
              the folding kinetics from one state to another probed.  In this way, the
              kinetics of the folding pathway can be 'peeled' away.  In addition, the
              kinetics of  model helical peptides, particularly the Fs  peptide, are also to
              be studied as model systems.  The peptides will be isotopically labeled at
              specific locations so as to unravel position dependent dynamics.  Understanding
              how proteins fold up into their compact three dimensional forms is a crucial
              problem in modern structural biology.  This is so because the particular
              structure of a protein governs its specific function, and any biological
              activity is supported by a corresponding protein system.  It has been known for
              quite some time that the spatial structure of a protein molecule is determined
              completely by the sequence of amino acids of its polypep tide chain, at least
              for small proteins and probably for all proteins in a general sense.  Moreover,
              the amino acid sequence also codes the way how the three-dimensional structure
              is reached efficiently.  Both aspects are equally important for protein
              engineering purposes, because any polypeptide sequence coding a new protein
              should not only offer some new function but also ensure its efficient folding. 
              Otherwise, the expressed protein cannot be accumulated in adequate quantities
              because of cellular processing.  For several decades there has been much effort
              on determining the kinetics of how a protein folds from it extended, unfolded
              conformation to its final compact form, asking the questions of what types of
              structures form first and on what time scales.  However, only recently have new
              techniques, partly developed by these studies, permitted study of the all
              important fast kinetics involved in protein folding.  The overall goal of this
              research is to measure these fast processes so that it is possible to determine
              the rules that guide the folding pathway for the first time.  ***
