Title       : Conference at MSRI in Low Dimensional-Topology 
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9727594

Award Number: 9727594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Casson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Hass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Melvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tim D. Cochran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin G. Scharlemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Sci Res Inst
	      1000 Centennial Drive
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-0143

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9727594
Casson
     This award will provide partial reimbursement for travel
              and
subsistence of speakers and participants in a conference
              on
low-dimensional topology that took place at the Mathematical
              Sciences
Research Center, Berkeley, California, May 22-26, 1998.  The purpose
              of
the conference was to bring together researchers working in all strands
              of
low-dimensional topology and to enable them to gain an overall
              perspective
on developments in the field.  Recent years have seen exciting
              new
developments in the study of 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds and
              knot
theory.  Bringing researchers in these fields together encouraged
              a
cross-fertilization of ideas and techniques, exposed graduate students
to
              these ideas, and encouraged new collaborations.  The conference took
place one
              year after the end of a closely related year-long program at
M.S.R.I.  Thus it
              was natural to review how progress had been
consolidated in this area over the
              ensuing year, and an added benefit of
the conference was to expose this
              progress to the wider mathematical
community.  Approximately 150
              mathematicians attended the conference,
more than 50 of them graduate
              students.  Some talks were tailored
specifically for these students.
    
              Topology addresses those geometric properties that depend only on
continuity,
              i.e., on the notion of one point being close to another, but
disregards the
              stock in trade of high school geometry, measurement of
quantities such as
              distance, angle, area, volume, and so forth.  Topology
of the plane is often
              referred to in popular scientific literature as
rubber sheet geometry, and
              this captures the essential spirit of the
discipline without giving so much as
              a hint of the techniques topologists
might use in their science.  They
              confront some very basic but elusive
properties, those that remain after
              rigidity has been exorcised, and the
past century has seen the gradual
              assembly of a considerable arsenal of
weapons for dealing with these
              properties.  Low-dimensional topology,
mainly the topology of 3- and
              4-dimensional geometric objects, presents
special problems of its own, for
              while we have the intuition that we
should be able to apprehend these object
              more readily, living as we do in
3-dimensional space and 4-dimensional
              space-time, in fact much of the
algebraic machinery that has been developed
              for topology fails in these
lower dimensions.  Recent years have seen some
              remarkable advances on this
front too, and this was the central theme of the
              conference at M.S.R.I. in
May.  It is also noteworthy that low-dimensional
              topology has become
sufficiently highly developed to be useful, for example,
              in applications
of knot theory to polymer chemistry and to the study of DNA. 
              As this field
continues to progress, the immediacy of the objects with which
              it deals is
likely to lead its further technical advances to find equally
              natural
applications in the real world.
***


