Title       : Effect of Solvation and Hydrogen Bonding on Conformationally Fexible Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9727527

Award Number: 9727527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223800             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Cable cable@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Cable of Bowling Green State University is supported by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to investigate hydrogen bonding   in 1:1 clusters
              formed between various aromatic molecules and either   water or ammonia.  These
              studies concentrate on conformationally flexible   molecules; by varying the
              aromatic moiety,  effects of steric hindrance   and structural distortion on
              the hydrogen bonding interaction will be   examined.  Mass-selected resonance
              enhanced ionization spectroscopy and   dispersed fluorescence of the cluster
              expanded in a supersonic nozzle   will be used to yield  information on the
              excited and ground electronic   states, respectively.  A related theoretical
              effort involves simulations   of the observed energy levels of isolated and
              clustered solutes for   chararacterization of the detailed structural
              perturbations resulting   from hydrogen bonding.  The results of these
              investigations will provide   a more detailed understanding of the factors that
              affect the strength of   a hydrogen bond and how the electronic properties of a
              conjugated solute   molecule can be modulated by structural distortion in order
              to optimize   the hydrogen bonding interaction.  Hydrogen bonding plays an
              important role in chemistry, from strongly   influencing the physical
              properties of solvents to determining the   structures of biological
              macromolecules.  Although much weaker than   ordinary covalent and ionic bonds,
              hydrogen bonds are of crucial   importance to the molecular recognition
              processes that are significant in   biological systems.  These studies will
              improve the understanding of the   common types of hydrogen bonds that are
              relevant to proteins and nucleic   acids.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
