Title       : Acquisition of a Cryogenic Magnetometer for Western Washington University's
               Paleomagnetism Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9727032

Award Number: 9727032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard A. Housen bernieh@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Myrl E. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell F. Burmester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9727032  Housen    This grant provides partial support of the costs of acquiring
              a  superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) for the paleomagnetics  laboratory
              at Western Washington University.  The PI, Bernie  Housen is a recent addition
              to the Geology Department faculty at  Western Washington, having just completed
              a postdoctoral program  at the Institute for Rock Magnetism at the University
              of  Minnesota.  In addition to Housen, Professor emeritus Myrl Beck  and Russ
              Burmeister will utilize the SRM in their research.    The addition of an SRM at
              WWU will allow analyses of weakly  magnetized sediments for research aimed at
              understanding the  influences of oxidizing fluids and active deformation on the
               magnetic properties of accretionary prism sediments and the  combined effects
              of chemical diagenesis and biological activity  on the magnetic records
              recorded in marine sediments both in  natural samples and in laboratory
              cultures.  This facility will  be unique to the Pacific Northwest region and
              will support  additional collaborative studies by researchers from nearby 
              institutions including the University of Washington, University  of Puget
              Sound, University of Idaho and the University of  Montana.  This SRM will be
              housed in a newly constructed field  free room and complement additional
              paleomagnetic instrumentation  that has recently been acquired (i.e.
              alternating field  demagnetizer, Kappa bridge).  Support for this grant is
              shared  between the Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program 
              (EAR/IF) and Division of Ocean Sciences Oceanographic  Instrumentation and
              Technical Service Program (OCE/ITS) and the  Ocean Drilling Program (OCE/ODP) 
              ***
