Title       : Structure-Reactivity Relationships in Carbanion Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9727187

Award Number: 9727187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Collum dbc6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the investigation of how  
              N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA) and related diamines modify,   or
              fail to modify, organolithium aggregate structures and reactivity.   
              Structural studies with NMR will use TMEDA and related diamines  with  
              n-butyllithium, phenyllithium, lithium acetylides and related   organolithium
              derivatives.  Comparisons and competitions of diamines with   tetrahydrofuran
              and related ethereal ligands will ascertain the   circumstances under  which 
              the ethers bind competitively or   cooperatively to organolithiums. 
              Quantitative ligand binding studies   will establish thermochemical foundations
              for subsequent rate studies.   Rate data for representative reactions of
              diamine-solvated organolithium   derivatives, in the context of
              well-established solution structure   assignments, will afford insights into
              the solvation and aggregation   events proceeding to the rate limiting
              transition structures.  Dissection   of solvation effects into ground state and
              transition state contributions   will be central to an understanding of TMEDA's
              role in organolithium   chemistry.  With this renewal award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular   Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. David B.
              Collum of   the Department of Chemistry at Cornell University.  Professor
              Collum will   focus his work on challenging the existing notions on how  
              N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA) and related diamines   influence
              organolithium structures and reactivities.  The research has   substantial
              implications for organic synthesis due to the wide spread use   of
              organolithium reagents.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
