Title       : Laser Spectroscopy of Ions and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9727302

Award Number: 9727302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1080040            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Saykally saykally@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richard J. Saykally of the University of California in Berkeley is   supported
              by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his   continuing studies of
              clusters using infrared spectroscopy.  The goal is   to determine structure,
              force fields and hydrogen bond network   rearrangements in water clusters
              (hexamer, octamer and larger) using far   infrared (FIR) laser
              vibration-rotation-tunneling (VRT) spectroscopy or   infrared-cavity ring down
              laser absorption spectroscopy (IR-CRLAS).  A   water-water pair potential will
              be derived from analysis of the dimer   spectra, and an effective potential for
              the larger clusters and liquid   water will be constructed.  Prof. Saykally
              will also investigate   intermolecular dynamics of nucleotide bases and their
              hydrated clusters.    To support these studies, a number of technological
              advances are planned   including extension of the CRLAS deeper into the mid-IR
              and development   of a new FIR laser with a ring cavity design.    Establishing
              a detailed and quantitative understanding of liquid water   continues to be a
              problem of major importance.  While the intriguing   properties of supercooled
              water and hydrophobic interactions occupy the   interest of many prominent
              chemists and physicists, the more mundane   problem of accurately describing
              the ordinary liquid over a wide range of   temperatures is of considerable
              practical importance.  This project will   enhance our understanding of the
              liquid and solid phases of water by   examining successively larger clusters
              one molecule at a time, and   studying these clusters in great detail with new
              laser technology and   state-of-the-art theoretical methods.  The resulting
              data will ultimately   provide a more detailed description of the important
              many body forces   operating in the liquid.  The newer effort involving studies
              of hydrogen   bonding of water with nucleotide bases is clearly of fundamental 
               significance in biology.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
