Title       : Energetics and Mechanisms of Organometallic Reactions Relevant to the
               Functionalization of Alkanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9727534

Award Number: 9727534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen I. Goldberg goldberg@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              program provides continued support for studies on the energetics and  
              mechanisms of organometallic reactions relevant to the functionalization   of
              alkanes by Dr. Karen I. Goldberg, Department of Chemistry, University   of
              Washington.  This project involves studies on the Pt(II)/Pt(IV) couple   as a
              general model for d8 square planar and d6 octahedral compounds as   well as for
              the catalytic potential of this couple for alkane   functionalization.  
              Mechanistic and kinetic investigations of oxidative   addition of C-H and C-C
              bonds to Pt(II) and reductive elimination of C-X   (X = heteroatom, H, or C)
              bonds from Pt(IV) will be carried out.    Mechanistic studies will also be
              performed to determine the ideal   ligand/metal environment required to promote
              the oxidation of Pt(II)   alkyls by water or alcohols to form Pt(IV) alkyl
              hydroxides or alkoxides   and hydrogen.  The reactivity of Pt(IV) alkoxides
              will also be explored   as representative of high valent late transition metal
              alkoxides.  The   reactivity of an open coordination site on Pt(IV) will be
              examined.  Such   a site is necessary for reductive elimination reactions and
              may also be   useful for functionalization.  Possible coordination and
              insertion of   small organic molecules and C-H activation by the open site will
              be   explored.    This project will give fundamental information on the
              activation and   functionalization of alkanes and provide possible new
              transition metal   catalysts for this important reaction.  Alkanes represent a
              considerable   portion of our natural gas and petroleum resources. The
              potential of   these enormous reserves for use in large scale chemical
              syntheses is   limited by the very unreactive nature of the alkane C-H and C-C
              bonds.    Transition metals have been shown to be capable of activating the C-H
                bonds in alkanes and homogeneous transition metal catalysis is viewed as   a
              promising solution to the conversion of alkanes selectivity into more   usable
              organic products, such as the conversion of methane into methanol.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
