Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Performance Analysis Methodology for the
               Future Wireless Communicatin Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9727221

Award Number: 9727221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kishor S. Trivedi kst@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 5942,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9727221  Trivedi    This  award provides funds to permit Dr. Kishor S. Trivedi, 
              Department of Computer Science, Duke University, to  pursue  with  Professor 
              MyungWhan  Choi,  Department  of  Computer  Science  and Engineering, Sogang
              University, Seoul,  Korea,  for  24  months,  a  program  of  cooperative 
              research  on  performance  analysis methodology for the  future  wireless 
              communication  system.  The objective of this collaborative  research  project 
              is  to develop new performance  analysis  methodology  including Stochastic
              Reward Net (SRN)  models,  advanced  modeling  techniques, and a  model 
              specification  language.   New SRN models which are suitable  for  various 
              dynamic   channel  allocation  (DCA)  schemes  and  handoff  processes  will 
              be  developed.   These  advanced  modeling  techniques  will  handle  both
              non-Markovian  behavior  and  largeness  of  models arising from the 
              complexity  of  the  systems being modeled.    Efficient  handoff  is very
              important for  cellular  mobile  communication  systems  because  the  number 
              of   handoffs  increases as the cell size become smaller for high capacity 
              systems.   Designers  of  such systems  need  accurate  and  timely 
              performance analysis for the efficient  design  and  implementation  of future
              wireless communication  networks.  The  requested  support will allow the
              proposer's  research  group to interact with a group of researchers in Korea,
              who  have  similar research goals.  Both research groups have  a  long  history
              of research in performance analysis and  will  greatly benefit from the ability
              to collaborate through the  exchange  of junior and senior researchers.  This 
              research  adds an international dimension to an ongoing project under  NSF 
              Grant  No. EEC-9714965 which supports the  Center  for  Advanced    Computing  
               and    Communication,    an    NSF  Industry/University Cooperative Research 
              Center,  at  Duke  University.  This project is relevant to the objectives  of 
              the  U.S.-Korea Cooperative Scie nce Program which seeks  to  increase  the
              level of cooperation between U.S. and  Korean  scientists and engineers through
              the exchange of scientific  information,  ideas,  skills, and  techniques  and 
              through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This  project  will
              provide international training and experience for  two  U.S.  graduate students
              in an important area  of  research.  Korean participation is supported by the
              Korea Science  and  Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
