Title       : Dissertation Research: Late Woodland Subsistence and the Transition to
               Agriculture in the Northeastern United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9727083

Award Number: 9727083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8329               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Dewar dewar@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Dewar, Mr. David George will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will address the question of the development of
              agriculture among prehistoric Native Americans in the United States. With the
              advent in recent years  of techniques to radiocarbon date single seeds and the
              application of scanning electron microscopy to examine plant structure and
              determine domestic status, our understanding of the advent and effects of
              agriculture in North American has been transformed. It was previously believed
              that the first domestic plants in the Eastern part of the continent were maize
              and squash which diffused northwards from Middle America. With the adoption of
              maize agriculture, archaeologists believed, societies significantly changed.
              More recent work however has revealed a substantially different picture. In
              many parts of the East, domestication of local plants preceded the appearance
              of maize by perhaps a millennium. Plants such as sunflower, goosefoot and
              squash were, likely through accident, domesticated and incorporated into local
              diet. Both the presence and affects of these domesticates varied locally and in
              many instances - in contrast to archaeological predictions - had very little
              effect on social complexity or lifestyle.       Although it is quite possible
              that the Northeastern United States participated in this process, extremely
              little relevant research has taken place in this area. It is clear that by
              1,000 AD domestic maize was present at some sites, but little is known about
              the domestication of local species either earlier or later. With National
              Science Foundation support Mr. Geroge will examine this question. He has
              located large samples of botanical remains recovered by controlled excavation
              from secure archaeological contexts and will analyze these to determine the
              species present and their relative frequencies. He will section and study
              potential domestic status through scanning electron microscope examination. He
              will also submit samples for AMS radiocarbon dating to establish a secure
              chronological context and to examine change in plant use over time. Through
              comparison of the Northeast pattern with data collected in other parts of the
              continental United States, it will be possible to gain insight into prehistoric
              Native American subsistence adaptations and the interplay between subsistence
              and social complexity.       This research will shed new light on the
              relationship between human populations and environment and how this changed and
              developed over an extended period of time. It will provide data of interest to
              both archaeologists and ecologists and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
