Title       : A New Thermodynamic Formalism for Neuronal Ensemble Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a9727739

Award Number: 9727739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. So paso@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Schiff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Gluckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1271,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-27739 SO, SCHIFF, GLUCKMANN. An understanding of synchronous activities
              within an ensemble of neurons is essential in the study of neuroscience.  It is
              important to understand and characterize both the computation within an
              ensemble, as well as the information flow between different ensembles within
              the brain.  In the so called "binding problem", when spatially disparate
              neurons must coordinate to compute aspects of sensory perception, synchrony is
              essential. Traditionally, these issues have been addressed using the concept of
              identical synchrony (IS) which assumes that two or more ensembles of the brain
              are performing the same activities in locked time step with each other. 
              However, in ensembles with generic nonlinear components, of which neuronal
              ensembles are most certainly included, more complex coherent behaviors should
              arise.  Consequently, our concept of dynamical coherence beyond identical
              synchrony must be broadened.  Chaos theory broadly encompasses the study of
              such nonlinear dynamical systems.  A major theoretical advance in this field
              was the recognition that seeming erratic behaviors from these nonlinear systems
              could be effectively characterized by a set of special unstable equilibrium
              states.  In a cartoonist view, these so called unstable periodic orbits (UPOs)
              are hills and valleys of an abstract dynamical landscape.  As the system
              progresses in time, the state of the systems can be described by a trajectory
              within this dynamical landscape constructed with the UPOs.  For coupled systems
              (neurons), the arrangement and symmetry of these hills and valleys reflect the
              varying degree of dynamical coherence exhibited within the system. Most
              importantly, analogous to statistical mechanics in physics, these UPOs form a
              framework of microscopic states for the system and their structural changes
              afford a description for the topographical changes within this dynamical
              landscape.  A thermodynamical description based on these UPOs for the various
              possible dynamical coherent states might then be constructed.  Theoretical
              tools developed will be applied to quintessential examples of neuronal coupling
              from our archived biological data: two coupled neurons and two ensembles of
              neurons.  Results from this project will both theoretically broaden our
              understanding of coupled nonlinear oscillators, including neurons, coupled
              mechanical and electronic devices, etc., and will serve as the initial attempt
              to experimentally characterize the grammatical code used between ensembles of
              neurons. 


