Title       : A Model for Physics Education in Physics Departments: Improving the Teaching of
               Physics from Elementary through Graduate School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a9727648

Award Number: 9727648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500990            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillian C. McDermott lcmcd@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stamatis Vokos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula R. L. Heron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7300,7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The project is the fourth and fifth years of a five-year multi-faceted
              program conducted by the Physics Education Group in the Physics Department of
              the University of Washington.  The program consists of a group of interrelated
              projects that focus on undergraduate course improvement, teacher preparation
              and enhancement, and university faculty development.         The overall goals
              explicitly identified in the original proposal are: (1) to expand our knowledge
              of how students learn physics, (2) to increase student learning in the
              introductory university physics course, (3) to prepare (K-12) preservice and
              inservice teachers to teach science as a process of inquiry, and (4) to improve
              the teaching effectiveness of college and university faculty.  In addition, a
              fifth activity has evolved into a major goal:  (5) national dissemination of
              the work in research, curriculum development and instructional innovation.     
                 The project is working toward the first goal by continuing the investigation
              of student understanding in physics.  It is working toward the second and third
              goals by using results from this ongoing research as a guide in developing
              instructional materials for introductory physics students and for preservice
              and inservice teachers.  It is working toward the fourth goal by developing a
              model program for preparing physics graduate students and post-doctoral
              research associates for their teaching responsibilities as future faculty and
              by giving talks and conducting workshops for new and experienced faculty on
              physics education research and its use as a guide in the development and
              assessment of curriculum.   It is working toward the fifth goal by publishing
              articles about the work and by conducting seminars and workshops for university
              faculty and precollege teachers to promote the use of Tutorials in Introductory
              Physics and Physics by Inquiry, two major curriculum development projects. 
              Tutorials in Introductory Physics is intended to supplement the lectures and
              textbook of a stan dard introductory course.  The tutorials are designed to
              engage students at a sufficiently deep intellectual level to develop the
              concepts and reasoning skills necessary to achieve a functional understanding
              of the material.  Physics by Inquiry is a laboratory-based curriculum designed
              to be used by college and university faculty to prepare precollege teachers to
              teach physics and physical science as a process of inquiry.
