Title       : Microtubule Associated Proteins in Mitosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2000     
File        : a9727818

Award Number: 9727818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Sloboda rds@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sloboda  9727818    The goal of this project is to understand the role of a
              protein termed p62 in two key processes of cell division, mitosis and
              cytokinesis.  Cell division is an essential feature of life: it is the process
              whereby all organisms reproduce themselves and whereby multicellular organisms
              develop from a single-celled zygote.  Cytokinesis is the process in which the
              cell cleaves itself into two separate cells.  Mitosis is the complex process
              immediately preceding cytokinesis, in which the chromosomes of the dividing
              cell are separated and equally apportioned into the regions destined to become
              the daughter cells.  A cytoskeletal framework is erected by the cell in order
              to accomplish these tasks.  For mitosis, the framework is called the mitotic
              spindle because of its appearance under the microscope, and it consists
              primarily of microtubules.  For cytokinesis, in animal cells the framework
              consists of highly organized actin microfilaments directly under the plasma
              membrane in the cortex of the cell.  Prior work from Dr. Sloboda's laboratory
              has implicated the p62 protein in both cytokinesis and in the anaphase A stage
              of mitosis (the stage in which the separated chromosomes move away from the
              middle of the dividing cells, toward the poles, or pointed ends, of the mitotic
              spindle apparatus).  The protein is physically closely associated with the
              spindle, and mitosis can be inhibited at the start of anaphase by
              microinjection of antibodies specific for p62.  An essential feature of
              anaphase A is the disassembly of microtubules, and a drug known to prevent
              microtubule disassembly, taxol, affects mitosis in a manner analogous to the
              anti-p62 antibodies. Thus, p62 appears to play some role in allowing or
              mediating the mitotically-regulated disassembly of microtubules.  The protein
              is also concentrated in the cortex of dividing cells, and has been shown to
              undergo phosphorylation when the cortex is induced to contract.  The cDNA for
              p62 from sea urchin eggs has been cloned and sequenced,  and the protein has
              been expressed in bacteria.      For the purposes of this project, additional
              reagents (purified p62 and additional antibodies) will be developed.  Purified
              p62 will be used for in vitro studies of its effect on microtubule stability,
              binding to the mitotic apparatus, and cortical contraction.  The information
              obtained from these studies will be combined with information from experiments
              in intact cells, using antibodies to localize and to inhibit the functions of
              p62.  Site directed mutagenesis will be used to alter the phosphorylation sites
              in p62 to determine the role(s) of these sites in these processes.  Also, p62
              homologues will be sought in other systems that offer the opportunity of
              genetic manipulation.      The general hypothesis underlying this project is
              that p62 plays a pivotal role in mitosis, particularly during anaphase A, not
              only by allowing microtubule disassembly to occur but also by inducing the
              activity of the cleavage furrow.  Understanding the characteristics of p62 and
              the functional interactions of p62 with other components of the machinery of
              mitosis and cytokinesis will lead to a greater understanding of these
              critically important cellular processes.
