Title       : Dissertation Research: Micro and Macroscopic Architecture of the Human Mid-shaft
               Femur: A Quantitative Study of Variability with Age and Gender
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9727689

Award Number: 9727689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11292              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Bromage tbromage@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5912,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Bone shape and microstructure are influenced by the mechanical loads they
              experience during life.  Their study is thus important to the reconstruction of
              past human behavior and adaptation.  However, such research is limited by a
              knowledge of variability in modern humans.  Novel microscopy and imaging
              techniques will be employed to study bone architectural variability in the
              human mid-shaft femur.  Factors investigated will include collagen fiber
              orientations within bone, the mineralization and density of the bone tissue,
              the histological organization of bone, and the cross-sectional geometry of the
              femur.  These factors will be examined by means of quantitative analysis of
              images derived from both light and scanning electron microscopy.  As all of
              these factors contribute to the overall architecture of the bone, and potential
              compensatory relationships are expected to exist between them.  These
              relationships will be quantified, along with their variability with age and sex
              using a large adult autopsy sample.   This intra-population study of
              variability in bone architecture will provide important data for the study of
              age-related bone diseases such as osteoporosis.  The techniques used, and the
              data obtained in this study, will provide a basis for future comparative
              research on variability of bone organization among contemporary populations,
              both adult and juvenile, as well as among archaeological and fossil samples. 
              Such research will, in turn, encourage new hypotheses concerning the role of
              environment, nutrition, biomechanics, and evolutionary history on bone
              architectural variability.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
