Title       : Polar Hydrophobicity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9727176

Award Number: 9727176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. DiMagno sdimagno1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,   Profesor
              Stephen DiMagno, of the Department of Chemistry at the   University of Nebraska
              - Lincoln, is developing `polar hydrophobicity` in   the design of fluorinated
              hosts and guests for molecular recognition.    Through the synthesis and study
              of heavily fluorinated carbohydrate   analogs incorporating multiple CF2 (for
              CHOH) substitutions, Professor   DiMagno tests the hypothesis that preorganized
              sites and bound guests are   `harder` than equivalent structures in solution
              due to the decreased   importance of energetic terms arising from electron
              polarization.  The   polar hydrophobic effect results from the peculiar
              physical   characteristics of the carbon-fluorine bond, which is at once both  
              extremely polar and hydrophobic.  Since the polar characteristics of the   C-F
              bond dominate in crystalline or organized phases while hydrophobic   effects
              are more important in solution, both enthalpic and entropic   factors may be
              more favorable for binding fluorinated analogs than   natural substrates. 
              Thus, these studies are expected both to demonstrate   the use of polar
              hydrophobicity as a tool for the design of hosts and   guests and to contribute
              to the general understanding of molecular   recognition and hydrogen bonding. 
              The specific recognition and binding of one molecule by another forms the  
              basis of a myriad of chemical and biochemical phenomena.  With the   support of
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor   Stephen DiMagno,
              of the Department of Chemistry at the University of   Nebraska - Lincoln, is
              developing the concept of `polar hydrophobicity`   in order to design new
              classes of `hosts` and `guests` for molecular   recognition.  Professor
              DiMagno's studies focus on the peculiar physical   characteristics of the
              carbon-fluorine bond, which is at once both   extremely polar and highly
              hydrophobic (water-hating).  Through the study   of sugar derivatives in which
              polar and hydrophilic (water-loving) groups   are replaced by fluorine atoms,
              Professor DiMagno obtains information   about the roles of polarity and
              hydrophobic interactions in molecular   recognition events, gaining both
              practical knowledge about the design of   new `hosts` and `guests` for general
              molecular recognition studies as   well as detailed information about the
              biological recognition of natural   substrates.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
