Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Density Inhomogeneties in Supercritical
               Fluids and Their Effect on Solute Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9727361

Award Number: 9727361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Tucker sctucker@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Susan Tucker is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue her studies of density   inhomogeneities in
              supercritical fluids and their effects on solute   reactions.  Supercritical
              fluids are industrially important as   environmentally benign solvents for
              carrying out chemical reactions.    Tucker will investigate, using molecular
              dynamics modeling, the way in   which various density inhomogeneities affect
              reaction dynamics.  More   specifically she will seek to answer the following
              questions: 1) How do   solvent density inhomogeneities affect solute reaction
              dynamics?  2)   Which are the relevant processes controlling the reactive
              event?  3)   Under what conditions are enhanced solute-solute distributions
              expected?    and  4) What influence will these distributions have upon solute
              reaction   dynamics?  Supercritical fluids have recently received widespread
              attention as   potential solvents for use in industrial chemical processes,
              even though   reactivity in these solvents is not yet well understood.  The
              excitement   over supercritical fluid solvents arises because the solvating
              properties   of these fluids may be altered dramatically and continuously with
              modest   changes in temperature and pressure.  This tunability suggests that it
                may be possible to conduct a wide variety of chemical reactions in  
              environmentally benign solvents such as supercritical water or carbon  
              dioxide.  Tucker's work seeks to understand the unique features of  
              supercritical fluid solvation at the molecular level.  This understanding   can
              lead to an improved understanding of how supercritical fluids can be   more
              widely employed in environmentally benign industrial syntheses.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
