Title       : Bacteriophage Mu Transposition and the Role of Gyrase Binding Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9727991

Award Number: 9727991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Pato martin.pato@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pato  9727991  The bacterial virus Mu, by virtue of its being both a virus and a
              transposon, is unusual among transposons in its large size and its high
              frequency of transposition. Amplification of the 37.2 kb Mu DNA during the
              lytic cycle occurs by a series of replicative transposition events which take
              place within the bacterial nucleoid, despite the constraints imposed by the
              complex structure of that body. Concerns about potential problems with
              synapsing the ends of prophage DNA within the nucleoid, an early step in the
              transposition process, led to studies which uncovered a strong gyrase binding
              site (SGS) in the center of the Mu genome that is required for efficient
              replication.  An extensive search was undertaken to find chromosomal or plasmid
              sites which could replace the SGS in Mu replication. No other sites have been
              found, focusing attention on what is unusual about the SGS. This project
              focuses on two important questions raised by the model: 1) How does the Mu site
              promote synapsis of the Mu prophage ends and 2) Why is a novel mechanism
              required for promoting the synapsis?  The first question will be addressed by
              determining what is special or unique about the Mu site.  A detailed genetic
              and biochemical analysis of the SGS and of other strong gyrase binding sites is
              being performed with the goal of defining the elements of the SGS that are
              responsible for its ability to function in Mu DNA replication. The second
              question is being addressed by exploring the factors, such as the binding of
              transposase molecules to the ends of a Mu prophage, that are responsible for
              the long delay in Mu replication in the absence of the SGS.  These studies are
              designed to provide insights into the mechanism of viral DNA replication and
              the importance of DNA structure in biological function. Of particular interest
              is the role of DNA topology in the modulation of function.
