Title       : LT: In-Situ Generation of Hazardous Reactants for Chemical Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1998      
File        : a9727137

Award Number: 9727137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49955              (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Roberts groberts@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727137  McConica  The chemical industry frequently deals with hazardous 
              chemicals by adopting alternative technologies that avoid  the use of such raw
              materials.  This is an attractive  strategy, but it is not universally
              applicable.  The  alternative processes can be major generators of 
              environmentally-harmful waste, and can involve materials  that are only
              marginally less hazardous.  Thus, other  options are needed.  This proposal
              examines a novel approach  to the problem of using reactive and hazardous
              chemicals: in-  situ generation.  Successful development of this concept  will
              create important new options in the area of environ-  mentally-benign chemical
              synthesis.    Formaldehyde is an example of a hazardous and costly  chemical
              that has traditionally been avoided in chemical  synthesis.  It is a suspected
              or probable' man carcinogen,  and it is so reactive that it cannot be stored or
              shipped in  pure form.  However, a number of important chemicals could  be
              produced with much less pollution and with greater safety  via formaldehyde
              than by their current commercial processes.  For example, substitution of
              formaldehyde-based processes  for the technologies currently used to produce
              methyl  methacrylate and styrene could eliminate the use of about 8  billion
              pounds of benzene and about 250 million pounds of  hydrogen cyanide annually,
              and could eliminate about 1  billion pounds of ammonium bisulfate waste and
              about 100  million pounds of aluminum trichloride waste annually, in  the
              United States alone.    The recent development of high-temperature slurry
              reactors  in our laboratory, coupled with steady progress in the  catalysis and
              reaction engineering of polystep reactions,  permits a new approach to
              utilization of hazardous  chemicals.  In essence, the hazardous chemical will
              be  generated and consumed in situ in a single reactor.  For  example, it is
              known that formaldehyde can react with methyl  propionate over various
              heterogeneous catalysts in the  temperature range of 300 to 400' C to form
              methyl  methacrylate.  It should be possible to simultaneously  dehydrogenate
              methanol to formaldehyde in the same reactor,  using a different catalyst.  The
              coupling of these two  reactions would result in the synthesis of methyl 
              methacrylate from methanol and methyl propionate.  Similarly, styrene could be
              synthesized from methanol and  toluene.  The key is to employ a slurry reactor
              containing a  physical mixture of a methanol dehydrogenation catalyst and  a
              catalyst for the formaldehyde-consuming reaction, with the  rates of the two
              reactions properly balanced.    This research will focus on in-situ
              formaldehyde generation,  i.e., the dehydrogenation of methanol to
              formaldehyde, in a  high-temperature slurry reactor.  Emphasis will be placed
              on  understanding the effect of catalyst composition and  structure, and the
              reactor design and operating variables,  on the kinetics and selectivity of the
              reaction.  This  knowledge will provide a sound fundamental basis for  coupling
              in-situ formaldehyde generation with various  formaldehyde-consuming reactions.
                 The proposed research program has the potential to produce a  major advance
              in environmentally-benign chemical synthesis,  since the novel concept of
              in-situ generation should have  broad applicability as an enabling technology
              for process  substitution.  The proposed research will also provide an 
              important scientific advance, i.e., a more fundamental basis  for the a priori
              design of catalyst systems for polystep  reactions in slurry reactors.  ***
