Title       : Polymeric Ultrathin Film Multilayered Modulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9196012

Award Number: 9196012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Kowel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Nonlinear polymeric films offer great promise for very fast opto-              
              electronic devices.  While further research is needed to obtain still          
              more efficient nonlinear performance in robust, inexpensive materials,         
              it is very important to proceed with device research.  In particular,          
              it is crucial to investigate the appropriateness of current materials          
              for device applications.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The best materials now offer electro-optical coefficients comparable           
              to the best inorganics.  Polymer thin films are attractive because             
              they can be readily deposited on semiconductors and metals to create           
              novel device structures.  Such applications are beyond the                     
              capabilities of the standard inorganic materials.  However, still              
              larger electro-optic coefficients will be needed to obtain useful              
              effects in such thin films.  Thus, this proposal addresses the need            
              for interferometric structures which rely on multiple-pass optical             
              structures to provide large enhancement of the electro-optical                 
              coupling.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              If significant improvements in molecules and film quality are not              
              forthcoming, such multiple-pass devices may be the only practical use          
              in electronics of the organic and polymeric nonlinear materials.  If           
              such improvements are obtained, interferometric devices will still             
              offer much larger sensitivity than single pass devices, providing              
              enhanced performance.                                                          
                                                                                             
              A variety of multilayer film structures will be analyzed, fabricated           
              and tested.  Particular attention will be paid to global optical               
              interconnects between integrated circuit processors and memory.
