Title       : Cooperative Interactions of Gene-Regulatory Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9196154

Award Number: 9196154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Fried   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to identify protein-DNA and                  
              protein-protein interactions that regulate the assembly of                     
              the prokaryotic transcriptional initiation complex, and to                     
              gain and understanding of their roles in the control of its                    
              activity.  The functions of the E. coli RNA polymerase,                        
              lactose (lac) repressor and cyclic AMP receptor protein (CAP)                  
              at the lactose promoter-operator region will be investigated.                  
              The individual activities of these proteins within this                        
              region have been the subjects of a significant amount of                       
              research, and are well characterized.  What is lacking at                      
              present is an understanding of how they interact to regulate                   
              transcription.  To address this crucial issue, studies will                    
              be carried out to:  1. determine the effects of each protein                   
              on the lac promoter binding affinities, stoichiometries and                    
              sites of interaction of each of the others; 2. measure the                     
              effects of each protein on the association and dissociation                    
              kinetics of each of others; 3. characterize the                                
              transcriptional activity of each complex containing RNA                        
              polymerase in terms of: (a) isomerization state- whether                       
              "open" or "closed"; (b) its abortive initiation kinetics; (c)                  
              the ratio of abortive to productive initiation and (d) the                     
              ratio of transcriptional initiation at each of the two                         
              overlapping lac promoters (P1 and P2).  4. determine the                       
              effects of extra-promoter regulatory sequences on the                          
              composition, stability and activity of complexes of CAP, lac                   
              repressor and RNA polymerase at the lac promoter in vitro and                  
              on the induction of transcription in vivo.                                     
                                                                                             
              Because each protein has at least two high affinity binding                    
              sites within the lac promoter, several different binding                       
              arrangements and transcriptional activity states may exist                     
              for a given binding stoichiometry.  For this reason, specific                  
              aims 1 and 3 will be carried out in a concerted manner,                        
              allowing correlation of the protein stoichiometry, binding                     
              site occupancy and transcriptional activity of each complex. //
