Title       : Modelling and Simulation of Acoustical Impedance of the Respiratory System
               (Engineering)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1991    
File        : a9196128

Award Number: 9196128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janie M. Fouke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The description of respiratory mechanical behavior is complicated by           
              the elasticity of the upper airways and trachea.  From the principles          
              of conservation of mass and momentum and the acoustic image of the             
              upper airways and trachea, a model of these airways will be derived            
              that incorporates the elastic behavior of the airway walls.  With this         
              model, contribution of the large airways to the overall system                 
              impedance will be calculated.  The respiratory system is inherently            
              nonlinear.  Its mechanical properties change with operating point and          
              during the breathing cycle.  Changes in the level of respiratory flow          
              and/or changes in the neural control message to the system may be              
              responsible for this.  Dr. Fouke will estimate these "time-varying"            
              impedances in order to study the underlying respiratory control                
              mechanisms during the breathing cycle.                                         
                                                                                             
              The instructional and interactive components contain three elements.           
              Dr. Fouke will teach a new course in the biomechanics of the pulmonary         
              system for undergraduate and graduate students, serve as coadvisor for         
              the Society of Women Engineers, and organize a seminar series                  
              featuring prominent women scientists and engineers from across the             
              nation.  The unique feature of this seminar series is that it will be          
              videotaped and offered as part of the Corporate Classroom                      
              teleconference educational program available to companies in the New           
              Hampshire and Masschusetts area.  This program last year served over           
              400 students in 40 locations, and will therefore have significance             
              both to Boston University and the greater corporate community.                 
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide          
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in         
              the disciplines of science supported by NSF and  (2) to encourage              
              women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing                
              greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in              
              industry, government, and academic institutions.  By encouraging the           
              participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the          
              Nation's future scientific vitality.
