Title       : A Naturalistic Study of Mathematics Teaching with Hispanic Bilingual Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1990  
File        : a9196124

Award Number: 9196124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 10,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lena L. Khisty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Education of Hispanic students, particularly in mathematics,               
              continues to be a pressing issue.  Language factors such as bilingualism       
              and limited-English proficiency play important roles in Hispanic               
              achievement in general; however, the influence of language factors on          
              the development of mathematical meanings for this population has yet to        
              be studied in detail.  The purpose of this project is to investigate           
              linguistic factors (Spanish and English) which help or hinder the              
              acquisition of mathematical knowledge and understanding.                       
                                                                                             
              This project will conduct an ethnographic study of mathematics teaching        
              in four elementary classrooms with students of varying levels of English       
              proficiency.  The objective is to gather contrastive data based on             
              teacher-student interaction during mathematics instruction.  Data              
              analysis will be guided by theoretical frameworks drawn from research on       
              mathematics teaching, on teacher discourse and the development of              
              meaning, and on bilingual learners.  The results will be disseminated to       
              both researchers and practitioners and will contribute to our                  
              understanding of the teaching of mathematics in general and the                
              improvement of instruction for Hispanic students, in particular.
