Title       : Localization and Identification of Cytoplasmic Determinants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1991   
File        : a9196041

Award Number: 9196041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keia' L. Thompson                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Early embryonic development is thought to be mediated by                  
              determinants present in the egg cytoplasm, but these substances                
              have yet to be characterized.  In this proposal we continue our                
              studies on cytoplasmic determinants involved in endodermal                     
              alkaline phosphatase (AP), muscle and embryonic axis development               
              in the ascidian Styela.  The possibility that AP determinants                  
              consist of maternal AP mRNAs, which are localized in the egg and               
              translationally activated after segregation to the endodermal                  
              cells will be examined by in situ hybridization with a cloned AP               
              probe.  The spatial distribution of muscle and axial determinants              
              will be examined by UV microbeam irradiation of the egg and                    
              microsurgical deletion of cells from the early embryo.  The                    
              general class of molecules to which the muscle and axial                       
              determinants belong will be investigated using a combination of                
              UV action spectrum analysis and a bioassay involving                           
              microinjection of fractionated cytoplasmic components of normal                
              eggs into eggs whose ability to develop axis or muscle has been                
              impaired by localized UV irradiation.  The potential role in axis              
              determination of a maternal mRNA encoding a 25 kd protein, a                   
              component that is absent in axis deficient embryos, will also be               
              investigated by UV irradiation and in vitro translation.  It is                
              anticipated that new information will be obtained concerning the               
              localization and identity of determinants involved in three                    
              different developmental decisions.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                   One of the most important mechanisms regulating the control               
              of early embryogenesis is the segregation of developmental                     
              information, "determinants" or "morphogens," to various regions                
              of the embryo during early development.  It is believed that                   
              these morphogens determine the fate of specific cell lineages and              
              guide them to differentiate into their final tissue such as                    
              muscle, nerve and gut.  The molecular nature of these                          
              determinants has not yet been determined.  Dr. Jeffery has made                
              important contributions to this area and is now on the verge of                
              identifying those molecules necessary for muscle and gut                       
              development as well as for the establishment of the dorsal-                    
              ventral axis itself.
