Title       : US-PRC Collaborative Research on Aseismic Hybrid Protective Systems for Tall
               Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1991     
File        : a9196089

Award Number: 9196089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jann N. Yang jnyang@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1499,9231,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is to carry out a collaborative                                   
              research on aseismic hybrid protective                                         
              systems for tall buildings between The George                                  
              Washington University (GWU) and the Harbin                                     
              Architectural and Civil Engineering Institute                                  
              (HACEI) of China under the US-PRC Protocol                                     
              for Scientific and Technical Cooperation in                                    
              Earthquake Studies.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Aseismic hybrid protective system consists of                                  
              a combination of a base isolation system and                                   
              small active control devices which is most                                     
              suitable for tall buildings.  While many                                       
              studies have been carried out separately in                                    
              each area of base isolation system and active                                  
              control system, there are serious limitations                                  
              for each individual applications.  A hybrid                                    
              system can be used advantageously to ensure                                    
              the structural integrity of seismic-excited                                    
              tall buildings.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Theoretical studies will be carried out at                                     
              GWU for various combinations and                                               
              configurations of hybrid systems, including                                    
              different base isolation systems and                                           
              different small active control devices.                                        
              Experimental tests will be conducted at HACEI                                  
              on a scaled model structure mounted on                                         
              different types of base isolation systems and                                  
              implemented by small active control devices.                                   
              Various contol algorithms developed for                                        
              hybrid systems will be used.  Results of                                       
              experimental tests will be correlated with                                     
              the corresponding analytical/numerical                                         
              solutions.  Discrepancies in the correlation                                   
              as well as physical and practical limitations                                  
              in system design and instrumentation will be                                   
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research has the potential to provide an                                  
              effective engineering seismic protection                                       
              system for tall buildings and large                                            
              structures.
