Title       : Further Studies in the Microstructure of Financial Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1991  
File        : a9196061

Award Number: 9196061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76581              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Gale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project has two main objectives.  The first is to understand              
              why commonly used securities do not contain the kinds of                       
              contingencies that theory suggests are needed for efficient risk-              
              sharing.  In particular, we do not observe securities, such as                 
              income bonds, that make payoffs contingent on readily available                
              accounting information.  The project explores a number of                      
              possible explanations for these phenomena.  The second objective               
              is to extend earlier work by the investigators on the incentives               
              to introduce new securities and the principals that should guide               
              their design, to get a deeper understanding of the market                      
              institutions that promote efficient innovation.  The project                   
              emphasizes the question of why there is a tendency to standardize              
              contracts or securities.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This pathbreaking work is opening up a new and important line of               
              research in financial economics and it could eventually change                 
              the way markets are studied.  Economic theorists have shown                    
              empirically that markets are incomplete and theoretically that                 
              this incompleteness can lead to inefficient decisions and market               
              instability.  But most of the past research starts by assuming                 
              incomplete markets, while this project shows that it is possible               
              to explain the specific features of incomplete financial markets               
              (e.g., no income bonds, use of a few standard securities) as the               
              consequences of rational behavior under uncertainty.  The                      
              research also promises useful new insights into the relationship               
              between managerial incentive contracts and stock prices.  The                  
              types of general equilibrium models developed by these                         
              investigators for the study of the microstructure of financial                 
              markets could eventually be used to study other types of                       
              incomplete markets.
