Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1991    
File        : a9196181

Award Number: 9196181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Evans evans@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Primary emphasis of this mathematical work will be                        
              directed at three problem areas: nonlinear transport equations,                
              regularity theory in the calculus of variations, and geometric                 
              properties for motion hypersurfaces by mean curvature.  All, in                
              one way or another, are concerned with nonlinear problems in                   
              analysis.                                                                      
                   Nonlinear transport is modeled by relatively simple                       
              partial differential equations (e.g. scalar conservation laws                  
              or the porous medium equation).  The goal here is to use the                   
              newer concept of viscosity solution and expand its role from                   
              spaces metrized by maximum norms to the Lebesgue space of                      
              integrable functions, in an effort to understand solutions.                    
              The key is the introduction of weak solutions of differential                  
              operators satisfying an accretive condition, with the                          
              expectation that an interpretation of non-smooth solutions                     
              will result.  A long-term goal of this work is that of                         
              analyzing the hydrodynamical limit of stochastic interacting                   
              particle systems.                                                              
                 A second line of research concerns the question of partial                  
              regularity for vector-valued problems in the calculus of                       
              variations - in particular, for problems of nonlinear                          
              elasticity.  The basic issue here is that of performing                        
              variations within the constraint which requires that the                       
              determinant of the differential be positive.  Work will proceed                
              first with more tractable questions involving minimizers of                    
              convex integrands for mappings between manifolds.                              
              Considerable activity is presently under way investigating                     
              geometric problems of motion by mean curvature.  The associated                
              partial differential equations, which give the motion of level                 
              sets (of a manifold) moving normally at a velocity proportional                
              to the mean curvature, may have solutions with singularities.                  
              The first concern of this work will be to show that the level                  
              sets are smooth except possibly for negligible singular sets.
