Title       : SGER: A Negotiated Transition to Democracy: Data Collection for an Archive
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1990       
File        : a9196030

Award Number: 9196030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20200              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Stark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is supported through the Small Grants for Exploratory               
              Research mechanism.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This project documents the negotiated transition to democracy in               
              Hungary.  The researchers focus on the unprecedented negotiations in           
              which the ruling communist party reached agreements with                       
              representatives of opposition parties and trade unions to establish            
              the conditions for competitive political parties, contested                    
              elections, and parliamentary governance.  These intensive roundtable           
              negotiations, involving several hundred bargaining sessions (in                
              plenary, committee, and subcommittee meetings), were conducted from            
              June 13th to September 17th, 1989.                                             
                                                                                             
              A complete reconstruction of the negotiating process requires                  
              interviews with the main participants supplemented by reports from             
              social scientists who observed the process.  This project involves             
              the use of existing tape recordings, minutes, and other summaries of           
              various bargaining sessions, as well as in-depth interviews with               
              those who participated in the process.  All materials will be                  
              cataloged and archived for use by other social scientists interested           
              in studying the transition to democracy in Hungary.                            
                                                                                             
              The project should add considerably to our understanding of how a              
              democratic political system with representative institutions and a             
              vital public sphere is constructed.
