Title       : REU: Avian Polyandry and Lifetime Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9196050

Award Number: 9196050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis W. Oring oring@uns.scs.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research will make a major contribution to                           
              understanding lifetime reproductive success in birds (LRS).  An                
              understanding of LRS is essential for understanding how natural                
              selection alters the nature of birds over evolutionary time.  In               
              order to do this work it is essential to establish the precise                 
              parentage of offspring.  This will be accomplished with a                      
              technique that is also used in human parentage determination --                
              DNA fingerprinting.  The proposed work will assess parentage                   
              among members of a focal population and integrate these findings               
              with existing calculations of LRS.                                             
                   This work is also of importance to the conservation of                    
              shorebirds -- many of which are endangered or threatened.                      
              Shorebirds are of increasing concern to conservationists for two               
              reasons: (1) many share common breeding habitat with waterfowl, a              
              group for which there is intense single-purpose management, and                
              (2) shorebird populations are highly vulnerable as the birds                   
              migrate to and winter in areas of the world where shoreline                    
              habitats are undergoing explosive development.  Knowledge of                   
              population dynamics and reproductive output, therefore, is                     
              essential for the making of wise conservation decisions.
