Title       : U.S. -Philippines Cooperative Research: Geochemical Investigation of ARC Magmas
               from Camiguin Island, Southern Philippines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9196017

Award Number: 9196017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paterno R. Castillo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Paterno R.                          
              Castillo, Division of Marine Geology and Geophysics,                           
              University of Miami,  to pursue with Dr. Raymundo S.                           
              Punongbayan, Philippine Institute of Volcanology and                           
              Seismology, for a period of 24 months, a program of                            
              cooperative research on the arc magmas from Camiguin                           
              Island, southern Philippines.  The main objectives of this                     
              study are to (1) investigate the apparently regular cycle                      
              of vulcanism on Camiguin Island, (2) identify the most                         
              probable differentiation mechanisms responsible for this                       
              pattern of igneous activity, (3) constrain the source                          
              composition of magmas erupted from Camiguin and Balatukan                      
              (on nearby Mindanao Island) volcanoes, (4) compare and                         
              contrast the magma source composition of Camiguin and                          
              Balatukan with those of volcanic centers in the eastern and                    
              western arcs of northern Philippines, and (5) model the                        
              long-term history of the suprasubduction mantle beneath the                    
              Philippines to determine whether it was mid-ocean ridge                        
              basalt, ocean island basalt, or sub-continental type.                          
                                                                                             
              The collaborators expect the results of this project to                        
              lead to a better understanding of the nature of Camiguin                       
              volcanoes and, hopefully, to predict future volcanic                           
              activity on the island.  In addition, results of the                           
              project will help earth scientists gain a comprehensive                        
              understanding of the source of island arc magmatism.  The                      
              present project will allow these highly respected                              
              scientists to combine their talents and interests for                          
              mutual benefit.  This project is relevant to the objectives                    
              of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks                     
              to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.                              
              scientists and engineers and their counterparts in                             
              developing countries through the exchange of scientific                        
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through                         
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
