Title       : The Social Structuring of Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1990   
File        : a9196080

Award Number: 9196080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 31,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Raffalovich l.raffalovich@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This study addresses the problem of labor-market stratification,               
              examining the unequal distribution of earnings across occupations. The         
              goal is to document trends in wage inequality, and to examine possible         
              structural factors that might explain changes in the way wages are             
              distributed.  Despite the importance of this issue, much of                    
              contemporary scientific research focuses on individual abilities and           
              work experience to explain earnings differentials, neglecting the              
              effects of structural labor market characteristics.  In contrast, Dr.          
              Raffalovich plans to use pooled cross-sectional time-series data on            
              employment and earnings in the United States from 1967 through 1981 to         
              determine the impact of structural factors on wage inequality.                 
              Moreover, he also will examine how changes in the occupational and             
              industrial composition of the national labor force may foster shifts in        
              earnings inequality over time.  Using Current Population Survey data as        
              well as other government archival sources Dr. Raffalovich will document        
              trends in wage inequality over the 1967-1981 period, and evaluate the          
              effects of such factors as economic growth, industrial concentration,          
              unionization, unemployment and capital intensity.  For example, this           
              study will test whether an increase in capital intensity will shift            
              employment from high earnings to low earnings occupations.                     
                                                                                             
              This focus on change in wage inequalities as related to changes in             
              labor force composition is especially useful, given the recent shifts          
              that have occurred in occupations and industries, especially the growth        
              of the service sector of the U.S. economy and the substitution of              
              capital for labor.  By keying in on change, rather than wage inequality        
              at but one point in time, this study will contribute substantially to          
              our understanding of the dynamics of social stratification in the              
              contemporary United States.
