Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Volcanological and Geochemical Studies at
               Vulcano, Pantelleria, and Sabatini, Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1990    
File        : a9196184

Award Number: 9196184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Sheridan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Central Admin
	      State University Plaza
	      Albany, NY  122460001    518/434-7111

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will provide funds for Prof. Michael F. Sheridan of                 
              Arizona State University to travel to Italy to conduct field work              
              and collaborative research at three different Quartenary volcanos              
              in Italy with his Italian counterparts, Prof. L. La Volpe (Bari),              
              L. Civetta (Naples), and G. Cavaretta (Rome).  The general                     
              objective of the proposed research is to achieve a better                      
              understanding of the physics of volcanic activity through                      
              geochemical investigations at the proposed sites.  The specific                
              objectives are:  1) to reconstruct the volcanic history of Vulcano             
              in Sicily, following a field investigation of the oldest exposed               
              stratigraphic sequence; 2) to interpret explosive volcanic                     
              phenomena recorded in the products of eruptive cycles younger than             
              50,000 years on Pantelleria (Straight of Sicily), using the                    
              variation in volatile species and light trace elements measured by             
              the ion microprobe; and 3) to investigate the geochemistry of boron            
              and other light elements in the hydrothermal minerals of the                   
              Sabatini Volcanic District (Latium).                                           
                                                                                             
              The activity planned at Vulcano is important for its likely                    
              contributions to the basic science of volcanology vis a vis                    
              volcanic hazards.  The work at Pantelleria is of potential                     
              scientific value since it promises, through the application of ion             
              microprobe analysis, to yield important analytical data on the                 
              volatile and light element content of glass inclusions and                     
              phenocrysts, thus providing information on the volatile                        
              concentrations of the magmatic reservoirs of the volcano.  The                 
              proposed research project will take advantage of the combined                  
              skills and expertise of the U.S. and Italian investigators, who                
              have worked together effectively as a team in the past, in the                 
              conduct of preliminary field work at the volcanic sites and the                
              completion of laboratory analysis in Naples and Arizona State                  
              University.
