Title       : Translational Control of T4 Phage Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9196239

Award Number: 9196239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim D. Karam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane School of Medicine
	      
	      New Orleans, LA  70118    /   -

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this project is to elucidate the                      
              biological roles and mechanism of action of a translational                    
              repressor protein that is encoded by the regA gene of                          
              bacteriophage T4 in infected Escherichia coli host.  The regA                  
              protein selectively inhibits translation of a subset of                        
              phage-induced mRNAs including its own message (autogenous                      
              translational repression).  In previous years we cloned the                    
              regA gene, overproduced its protein product, purified the                      
              protein, purified the protein, and characterized some of its                   
              activities in vivo and in vitro.  Some of our main results                     
              include: precise transcriptional mapping of the regA gene,                     
              localization of the target for autogenous control to the                       
              translation initiation region of the mRNA, localization of                     
              regA-protein-binding sites on several regA-regulated mRNAs,                    
              discovery of a role for regA protein in transcription                          
              termination downstream of the regA gene, and discovery of an                   
              mRNA structure that enhances translation.  In the work                         
              proposed here we will investigate the roles of nucleotide                      
              sequences in the leader segment of the mRNA for regA protein                   
              in control of synthesis of the protein.  Several mRNA target                   
              sites for regA protein binding (including the autogenous                       
              target) are being mapped precisely by the use of in vitro                      
              manipulations by which nucleotide replacements are made in                     
              specific sequences within the ribosome-binding domains of the                  
              regA regulated mRNAs.  The effects of these in vitro-                          
              generated mutations on sensitivity to regA protein are being                   
              assessed by in vivo and in vitro translation/repression                        
              assays.  In addition we are examining the role of regA                         
              protein in transcription termination at "CUUCGG" hairpin                       
              structures in intercistronic regions and attempting to                         
              identify the breakdown products of the mRNAs that the regA                     
              protein represses.  A pilot study is underway aimed at                         
              identifying proteins, nucleoproteins, and RNA species that                     
              interact with regA protein and influence its activity in                       
              vivo.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The work in this proposal should provide us with deeper                        
              insights into the as yet poorly understood processes by which                  
              a cell controls and coordinates its overall rates of DNA,                      
              RNA, and protein synthesis.
