Title       : Building of a Confocal Scanning Differential Polarization Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1991  
File        : a9196062

Award Number: 9196062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos J. Bustamante   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The present application is a request for renewal of funding on a               
              two-year Biological Instrumentation Grant for the construction                 
              and testing of a Confocal Differential Polarization Scanning                   
              Microscope.  The basic optical and electronic design and building              
              of this instrument has been completed in our laboratory.  This                 
              microscope has already shown its enormous potential as an                      
              analytical tool in the study of complex Biological systems                     
              in-situ.  Using this instrument, we have been able, for the first              
              time, to resolve spatially the long-range chiral domains in which              
              the Light Harvesting Complex II is organized in the chloroplast                
              grana.  We request funding for an additional period of three                   
              years to extend the capabilities of the present instrument to                  
              carry out:                                                                     
                                                                                             
              a) Microspectro-polarimetric measurements at a given location in               
              the object.  Presently, the microscope can spatially resolve the               
              optical (linear and circular) anisotropy of the object to within               
              the diffraction limits of the light, at a fixed wavelength of                  
              illumination.  The building of the proposed instrumentation will               
              allow us to locate a microscopic domain of interest in the                     
              studies object and to obtain the Circular Dichroism and linear                 
              Dichroism spectra of that localized domain:                                    
                                                                                             
              b) Luminescence Depolarization Imaging.  Using the advantages of               
              confocal epi-dillumination optics and the extended sensitivity of              
              polarization modulation and synchronous demodulation, we propose               
              to develop the instrumentation to spatially resolve the molecular              
              dynamics of luminescence-labelled species.  This instrumentation               
              will be applied first to imaging the rotational dynamics of IgE                
              receptors in mast cells.
