Title       : U.S. - Mexico Cooperative Research: Volcanic Risk Evaluation of the Colima and
               Popocatepetl Volcanoes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1992   
File        : a9196190

Award Number: 9196190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Sheridan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will support a group of U.S. researchers headed by Prof.            
              Michael F. Sheridan of the Arizona State University (ASU) to                   
              collaborate with a group of Mexican researchers under Professor                
              Ana Lillian Martin of the Institute of Geophysics of the National              
              Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM).  The investigators intend              
              to study volcanic activity in Mexico with special emphasis on the              
              region where the Colima and Popocatepetl volcanoes are located.                
              In the process, they plan to produce a volcanic risk map and a                 
              report to reduce potential volcanic disasters.  More specifically,             
              the researchers will: (1) conduct a literature search of all                   
              historic records; (2) gather field data on the stratigraphy and                
              distribution of products; (3) determine radiometric dates of                   
              critical events; (4) formulate a conceptual model of volcanic                  
              patterns; (5) determine the probability of various types of                    
              volcanic events in future eruptions; (6) estimate the distribution             
              of products using computer models of activity; (7) create volcanic             
              risk maps illustrating the results; and (8) publish a monograph                
              with all the pertinent information necessary to explain the risk               
              map.                                                                           
                                                                                             
              Mexican researchers have designated Colima to be the prime target              
              for risk mitigation but both volcanoes under study are considered              
              dangerous.  The numerical models proposed for this study are                   
              presently being installed at the Institute of Geophysics of UNAM.              
              ASU will provide Mexican researchers with the technology used in               
              the creation of hazards maps and in the analysis of landsat TM                 
              images.  Ultimately, the proposed exchange will lead to a better               
              understanding of the complex problem of volcanic activity in                   
              Mexico and elsewhere.
