Title       : Molecular Phylogenies of Parasitic Flowering Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1993   
File        : a9196134

Award Number: 9196134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Nickrent nickrent@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Evolutionary relationships among parasitic flowering plants               
              are very poorly known because of frequent morphological                        
              reductions in floral and vegetative features.  The group of                    
              parasitic plants that will be examined in this project by Dr.                  
              Daniel Nickrent of University of Illinois is called the                        
              Santalales, an order that includes sandalwood, the familiar                    
              Christmas mistletoe, and several less familiar aerial and root                 
              parasites.  Evolutionary relationships within representatives of               
              several families in the order will be determined by comparison of              
              DNA sequences that code for ribosomal RNA (rDNA).  This will be                
              accomplished by using a new technique called PCR which allows for              
              amplification of the amount of DNA in a sample, thus providing a               
              high enough concentration for sequencing.  Generation of rDNA                  
              sequences is rapid and efficient and provides a large number of                
              characters (nucleotide bases) useful in determining                            
              relationships.                                                                 
                   In addition to representatives of the five families in the                
              Santalales, sequences of other plants doubtfully included in this              
              order will be determined to ascertain their correct taxonomic                  
              placement.  This second group of parasites includes the enigmatic              
              and spectacular Rafflesia which has the largest flower among all               
              flowering plants, as well as some tiny-flowered parasites                      
              originally (and incorrectly) classified with the fungi.                        
              Representatives from other orders thought to be related to these               
              parasites will also be sequenced thus providing information                    
              relating to the origin of parasitism in the flowering plants.
