Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9196145

Award Number: 9196145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Shleifer sheifer@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Dr. Andrei Shleifer under the National          
              Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards Program.           
              The objective of this program is to provide research support to the            
              Nation's most outstanding and promising young science and engineering          
              faculty.  The awards are intended to improve the capability of U.S.            
              academic institutions to respond to the demand for highly qualified            
              science and engineering personnel for academic and industrial research         
              and teaching.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will allow the investigator to pursue his research in the           
              areas of microeconomics, financial economics, and development theory.          
              One of the broad research questions central to his scholarly                   
              interests is how capital markets work.  Despite the empirical successes        
              of the current theory of capital markets, there are many observable            
              phenomena that are inconsistent with the assumptions of the theory.            
              Were the theory true, corporate takeovers would not take place or they         
              would be inconsequential, all investors would hold very similar                
              portfolios, and returns on markets would be less volatile and changes          
              in asset prices would correspond to changes in economic fundamentals.          
              Dr. Shleifer's work has helped us to understand how monopolistic and           
              imperfectly competitive elements can be incorporated into our theories         
              of capital markets.  He has contributed to an explanation of the               
              crucial role of large shareholders in the market for corporate control         
              and to a model of the role of noise traders.  The research promises to         
              explain a great deal about speculation, volatility, and the efficiency         
              of capital markets.  Dr. Shleifer's work has been and will continue to         
              be very effective in establishing an important synergy between                 
              fundamental research and related problems of practical significance to         
              U.S. business and industry.
