Title       : Taxonomy of Careproctus (Liparidedae, Pisces) of the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9196172

Award Number: 9196172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 30,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Stein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NMFS Natl Systs Lab
	      Smithsonian Institution
	      Washington, DC  20560    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The fish family Liparididae is a widely distributed, benthic taxon             
              in temperate and cold waters of the Northern and Southern                      
              Hemispheres.  Recent studies show that there may be as many species            
              in the Southern Ocean as in the Bering Sea, previously considered              
              an area of highest species diversity and primary center of                     
              distribution.  Liparidids are probably the most species-rich family            
              in the Southern Ocean, contrary to the traditional view giving this            
              position to the endemic southern family Nototheniidae.  The most               
              species-rich liparidid genus is Careproctus, which has the broadest            
              depth range of 50 to 7200 m.  It includes about 18 undescribed                 
              Antarctic species and is the only group of the Southern Ocean                  
              liparidids not recently reviewed taxonomically.   The immediate                
              goals of the proposed research are the identification, description             
              and redescription of Careproctus species occurring in the Southern             
              Ocean.  Standard taxonomic methods will be used, but emphasis will             
              be on a search for previously unused distintive characters in the              
              liparidid genus.  The identification and description of all                    
              Antarctic liparidids will permit studies leading to better                     
              understanding of the zoogeography and history of the Antarctic                 
              ichthyofauna, comparison of the Antaractic liparidid fauna with                
              that of the Bering Sea, and may help explain why and how the family            
              achieved its bi-polar distribution and high species diversity.                 
              Accurate species descriptions will be of great assistance in                   
              studying the changes which occur during adaptation to deep-sea                 
              life, the ecology of the Southern Ocean and adjacent waters, and               
              the distribution and zoogeography of Antarctic fishes.
