Title       : The Role of Multiple Adenosine Receptors in the CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1991   
File        : a9196069

Award Number: 9196069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Scott Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The use of adenosine analogs as therapeutic agents for epilepsy                
              and stroke has attracted increasing attention in recent years.                 
              In the central nervous system, adenosine serves as a powerful                  
              neuromodulator and has been shown to act as an endogenous                      
              anticonvulsant in certain regions of the brain.  Two general                   
              classes of adenosine receptors have been identified (i.e. A1 and               
              A2) and evidence has been presented for the existence of at least              
              one additional type of receptor.  While the powerful inhibitory                
              action of adenosine A1 receptors on neuronal activity has been                 
              well characterized over the last decade, little is known of the                
              physiological role of non.A1 receptors in the CNS.                             
              Electrophysiological studies (see below) indicate that non.A1                  
              sites do indeed have a significant impact on electrophysiological              
              responses in the hippocampus.  These experiments will utilize                  
              intracellular and extracellular recording techniques to define                 
              and characterize the functional role(s) of adenosine non.A1 sites              
              in the CNS.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Lee has also demonstrated that A1 receptors are distributed                
              differentially in the hippocampus and that non.A1 sites are                    
              associated with presynaptic elements in the stratum lucidum of                 
              CA3 and with postsynaptic elements in the stratum pyramidale of                
              CA1.  These differences permit meaningful experiments examining                
              regions enriched in non.A1 sites which are associated with known               
              structural elements (i.e. presynaptic or postsynaptic).  The                   
              first goal of this research project is to define the                           
              physiological impact of non.presynaptic sites in the CA3 region.               
              The second goal of these studies is to verify that the observed                
              effects are receptor mediated and to characterize the type(s) of               
              receptor mediating the effects.  The third goal is to ascertain                
              whether activation of protein kinase C blocks non.A1 effects, as               
              has been described for other electrophysiological actions of                   
              adenosine in the hippocampus.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The experiments should provide the first direct evidence                       
              regarding the electrophysiological function of adenosine non.A1                
              sites in the CNS.  In addition, the studies should characterize                
              the type(s) of receptor (i.e. A2 or another) mediating non.A1                  
              responses.  The results of these studies will greatly enhance our              
              understanding of the adenosine neuromodulatory system and will                 
              furnish critical information for the evaluation of specific                    
              therapeutic agents designed to target individual components of                 
              this system.
