Title       : REU: Exploiting Conserved and Variable Regions of the Mitochondrial Genome for
               Evolutionary Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9196213

Award Number: 9196213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine M. Simon csimon@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Current evolutionary research focuses on problems associated              
              with genetic changes that accompany the formation of new species               
              and the maintenance of the integrity of species in the face of                 
              hybridization with closely related species.  In order to                       
              understand processes involved in genetic differentiation, a                    
              pattern of evolutionary relationships must be constructed and the              
              traits under study must be viewed with reference to this pattern.              
              Evolutionary relationships have in the past proven difficult to                
              construct for newly formed (very closely related) species but new              
              techniques are available which allow the collection of data from               
              the most variable DNA gene regions.  These techniques are used in              
              this research.                                                                 
                   The insect species known as the periodical cicadas have                   
              proved to be ideal study organisms to address problems of                      
              evolutionary tree construction and species divergence; they are                
              easy to work with and the six species have a unique set of                     
              distributional patterns within which are various degrees of                    
              spatial isolation, temporal isolation, and genetic variability.                
              Results from previous work established higher level evolutionary               
              relationships, identified differences in genetic variability                   
              among species, discovered areas where hybridization is likely,                 
              and provided genetic evidence for life cycle plasticity which has              
              important implications for evolutionary theory.                                
                   The proposed research will examine suspected areas of                     
              hybridization among otherwise isolated groups and will extend                  
              phylogenetic analyses to the closely related, unstudied year                   
              classes which we suggest represent incipient species.  What is                 
              learned about the usefulness of particular gene regions for                    
              constructing evolutionary relationships will be directly                       
              applicable to the study of relationships among other animals and               
              plants and will lead to a better understanding of rates and                    
              mechanisms of evolution at the DNA level.
