Title       : Hunger and Satiety Produced by Simple Sugar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9196142

Award Number: 9196142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula J. Geiselman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most current theories of hunger predict that glucose should be                 
              satiating.  None would predict that glucose or other simple                    
              sugars could act as hunger or appetite stimulants, yet the                     
              hunger- and appetite-producing effects of simple sugars have been              
              demonstrated experimentally.  For example, Dr. Geiselman has                   
              shown that, when glucose was slowly infused into the duodenum,                 
              rabbits decreased their subsequent food intake, as would be                    
              expected.  However, when glucose was rapidly infused into the                  
              duodenum, the rabbits nearly doubled their food intake.                        
                                                                                             
              Dr. Geiselman's research is attempting to determine why glucose                
              sometimes is satiating and at other times acts to produce hunger.              
              She will carry out experiments designed to determine the hormonal              
              and metabolic mechanisms that produce satiety in response to slow              
              infusions of glucose into the duodenum and hunger in response to               
              fast infusions of glucose into the duodenum.                                   
                                                                                             
              Dr. Geiselman's research will provide insight into the basic                   
              physiological mechanisms that control food intake and, more                    
              specifically, that relate sugar intake to hunger motivation.  Dr.              
              Geiselman hypothesizes:  (1) that glucose is satiating when it is              
              followed by a moderate rise in insulin level that is insufficient              
              to produce hypoglycemia, (2) that glucose stimulates further                   
              hunger when it is followed by a great elevation in insulin level               
              that is sufficient to produce hypoglycemia, and (3) that the                   
              hunger-stimulating effect of glucose occurs when glucose is                    
              readily converted to fat.
