Title       : Excavation of a Hominoid Locality in the Miocene Siwalik Sequence of Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1992   
File        : a9196211

Award Number: 9196211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47200              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Kelley jkelley@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is to excavate the most productive hominoid-                 
              bearing locality in the Miocene Siwalik sequence of Pakistan.                  
              This locality, in the uppermost Nagri Formation (ca. 9 million                 
              years old), has produced almost half of all the postcranial                    
              remains of Sivapithecus recovered from the Siwaliks.  Unlike the               
              cranial remains, these show few if any of the derived features of              
              the extant orang-utan, Pongo.  The most recently recovered                     
              specimen, a humeral diaphysis, is most similar to what can be                  
              presumed to be the primitive condition for catarrhines.  It may                
              well be that Sivapithecus lacked a feature that is universally                 
              considered to be a shared derived feature of the extant great                  
              apes and humans, a medially torsioned humeral head.  As                        
              Sivapithecus is the only fossil hominoid that can plausibly be                 
              placed on the lineage of one of the extant apes, knowledge of its              
              postcranial morphology is critical for testing assumptions about               
              the morphology and inferred positional behaviors of the last                   
              common ancestor of the hominoid clade.  Previous recoveries from               
              this locality indicate that the probability of excavating                      
              further, relatively complete postcranial elements of Sivapithecus              
              is good.
