Title       : ROW: Expression and Sorting of the Myelin Protein Po
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1991    
File        : a9196087

Award Number: 9196087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie T. Filbin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The formation of myelin by the Schwann cell requires the precise               
              organization of a number of specific proteins.  The long-term                  
              goals of this research are to understand how the Schwann cell                  
              delivers these proteins to the correct surface of the bipolar                  
              Schwann Cell.  The immediate goals are to examine how the Schwann              
              cell regulates the expression of one such protein, Po                          
              glycoprotein, when the external environment is changed.  Because               
              studies in vivo suggest that post-translational control of Po                  
              expression is important, the role of the sugar moieties in the                 
              expression of this glycoprotein will be investigated.  To carry                
              out these studies an abundance of Po is required.  This will be                
              accomplished by transfecting Schwann cells with the cDNA for Po                
              followed by gene amplification.  Furthermore, the transfected Po               
              will be distinguished from the endogenously synthesized Po by                  
              attaching to the former an identifier/reporter peptide sequence.               
              To ensure that Po with the reporter peptide is expressed/sorted                
              in the same way as its endogenous counterpart, both will be                    
              characterized in transfected Chinese Hamster Ovary cells, prior                
              to the studies with Schwann cells.  Ultimately, the expression of              
              Po-reporter will be monitored in Schwann cells in relation to the              
              addition of axolemma and/or extracellular matrix to the culture                
              before and after treatment specific inhibitors of glycosylation.               
              Results from these studies can then be applied directly to                     
              Schwann cells in vivo and help elucidate the initial steps of                  
              myelinogenesis at the molecular level.
