Title       : Nonlinear System Design: Adaptive Feedback Linearization with Unmodeled Dynamics
               (Supplement: NSF-UC-NASA Workshop onNonlinear Control, Santa Barbara, CA.,
               April 5-7, 1990)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1991      
File        : a9196166

Award Number: 9196166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar V. Kokotovic petar@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed study of geometric-asymptotic properties of nonlinear             
              dynamic systems with parametric and dynamic uncertainties is aimed at          
              the development of a design methodology for robust adaptive feedback           
              linearization.  An analysis of the effects of uncertainties (Section           
              3) will reveal whether nonadaptive state-feedback (Section 4) or               
              observer-based (Section 5) designs will guarantee robustness, and when         
              an adaptive feedback linearization approach (Section 6) is more                
              appropriate.  New problem formulations in each of these areas motivate         
              the development of a unified geometric-asymptotic-adaptive                     
              methodology.  It is shown that the phenomenon of controller and/or             
              observer peaking, which has been noticed but not thoroughly studied in         
              the linear system theory, is of fundamental importance for robust              
              nonlinear feedback design.  Among the dangers of nonadaptive high-gain         
              loops is a possible interference of peaking with uncertain                     
              nonlinearities that can result in a drastic decrease of the stability          
              region.  A fuller understanding of geometric-asymptotic properties             
              will show when this type of interference can be avoided.                       
                                                                                             
              Adaptive parameter updates reduce the effects of parametric                    
              uncertainties and avoid the need for high-gain loops.  At present they         
              are restricted to systems with known nonlinearities, when a                    
              "certainty-equivalence" form of feedback linearization is applicable.          
              A crucial trade-off between adaptive and nonadaptive designs is to be          
              made vis-a-vis unmodeled dynamics, which are known to cause                    
              instabilities in some linear adaptive systems.  Robustness of                  
              nonlinear adaptive designs will be improved by algorithm modifications         
              based on current research in linear adaptive control.
