Title       : Insect Herbivores and Plant Succession: Interactions and Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9196240

Award Number: 9196240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Althea Ball                             
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine E. Bach bio_bach@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will investigate the effects of insect              
              herbivory on rates and patterns of species replacement during                  
              primary plant succession  on sand dunes.  The research will focus              
              on a specialist beetle, Altica bimarginata, and the willow, Salix              
              cordata.  An integrated set of field and greenhouse experiments                
              will examine both the effects of plant successional stage on                   
              rates of herbivory and effects of herbivores on plant                          
              successional processess, as well as provide critical tests of the              
              underlying mechanisms.                                                         
                   To study how herbivore abundance varies between and within                
              plant successional stages, field experiments will examine how                  
              attributes of host plants and the surrounding plant community                  
              influence herbivory.  The role of genetic differences between                  
              plants in influencing rates of herbivory will be addressed with a              
              reciprocal transplant study.  Herbivore exclusion experiments                  
              will examine the role of herbivory in influencing plant                        
              successional patterns.  The importance of surrounding plant                    
              neighbors in influencing succession and how herbivores affect                  
              succession will be studied with plant neighbor removal                         
              experiments.  Greenhouse  experiments varying the level of                     
              herbivory will examine what aspects of host plant fitness are                  
              affected by herbivory.                                                         
                   Although herbivory is known to strongly affect plant fitness              
              and competitive interactions, the role of herbivory in                         
              influencing plant succession has been largely ignored.  By                     
              focusing on both the effects of plants on insects and the effects              
              of insects on plants, the interactive nature of insect-plant                   
              dynamics in successional systems will be elucidated.  These                    
              contributions are of central importance to insect and plant                    
              ecology, as well as understanding of communities and factors                   
              controlling species diversity.
