Title       : Statistical Methods for Multidimensional Scaling and Non- Linear MIMIC Models in
               Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9196102

Award Number: 9196102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry E. Brady hbrady@bravo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dimensional thinking is a mainstay of political discussion.                    
              Journalists identify political candidates as on the left or on the             
              right of the ideological spectrum.  Voters describe politicians as             
              close to them or far away from them.  Politicians take sides, defend           
              positions, move towards some groups, and move away from others.  As            
              political events unfold, politicians, voters, and issues are often             
              described by using these kinds of geometric and spatial terms.                 
                                                                                             
              Not surprisingly, psychologists have found that most people, not just          
              sophisticated political analysts, often conceptualize and describe the         
              social and political world in spatial and geometric terms.  This               
              provides a key to understanding voting behavior, public opinion, and           
              many other forms of political behavior, but to be truly useful, we must        
              have a better understanding of what people mean when they say that one         
              politician is close to another or that they feel closer to one issue           
              position than another.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This project aims to develop a better understanding of how people think        
              about politics by developing statistical methods for uncovering the            
              dimensional structure of people's choices, opinions, and judgments.            
              For example, the project will develop statistical methods and computer         
              programs for relating peoples' rankings of political candidates to             
              their underlying opinions and beliefs about the characteristics of             
              these candidates.  Preliminary research has shown that peoples' choices        
              can be explained partly by a remarkably small number of underlying             
              dimensions.  The methods to be developed in this research will enable a        
              clearer interpretation of why this small number of dimensions explains         
              so much.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              These methods should make it possible to get a clearer understanding of        
              the major concerns which motivate voters and other people who make             
              political choices.  In addition, since similar methods have been widely        
              applied to understanding economic choices, it seems likely that the            
              methods developed in this project will be useful in areas outside              
              political science.
