Title       : PYI: The Electrophysiology of Human Attention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9196011

Award Number: 9196011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Comer                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Barth dbarth@clipr.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9227,9251,
Abstract    :
                   This action recommends a Presidential Young Investigator                  
              Award for Dr. Daniel Barth.                                                    
                                                                                             
                   Dr. Barth's primary research interest is in the mechanisms                
              regulating brain cell excitability and their role in normal and                
              pathological human cortical function.  For his dissertation he                 
              conducted a series of studies to explore the neuromagnetic                     
              fields produced outside of the head by both normal sensory                     
              processing and pathological epileptic discharge.  This work                    
              used a newly developed superconducting biomagnetic sensor                      
              called the Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID)                 
              to map extracranial magnetic fields.  From these neuromagnetic                 
              maps, Dr. Barth demonstrated that it was possible to accurately                
              localize restricted electrical brain currents within the                       
              cranium.  Dr. Barth pioneered the use of neuromagnetometry to                  
              study human focal epileptic disorders.  Neuromagnetic field                    
              maps were effectively used to determine the location of an                     
              epileptic focus within the brain for neurosurgical evaluation,                 
              and to noninvasively study dynamic interactions between brain                  
              regions during epileptic seizure discharge.                                    
                                                                                             
                      Dr. Barth's neuromagnetic investigations also extend to                
              animal studies where he is exploring the neurophysiological                    
              basis of brain magnetic fields and using this knowledge to                     
              study slow and rapid changes in cellular electrical currents                   
              that may underlie changes in cortical excitability.  Here, the                 
              response of the brain to sensory and direct cortical                           
              stimulation are under investigation as well as the brain's                     
              response to drugs that induce or reduce focal epilepsy.                        
                                                                                             
                      Dr. Barth presently holds a joint appointment in the UCLA              
              Departments of Neurology and Psychology, with neuromagnetometry                
              laboratories in both departments.  His work has included the                   
              improvement of mathematical models for interpreting human                      
              neuromagnetic fields, for localizing pathological brain                        
              activity and studying multiple simultaneously active brain                     
              regions.  Dr. Barth is continuing his investigation of the                     
              physiological basis of slow changes in brain excitability in                   
              animals and relating this work to recent neuromagnetic studies                 
              of information processing in the human brain.
