Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singly Generated Dual Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9196043

Award Number: 9196043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Pearcy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1262      MODERN ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this project is to accumulate more knowledge               
              leading to a better understanding of the structure of bounded                  
              linear operators acting on a complex Hilbert space of infinite                 
              dimension. In the past ten years much progress has been made in                
              this direction by employing the concept of the dual algebra                    
              generated by a single operator. Professor Pearcy and others have               
              made an extensive analysis of the predual of such a dual algebra,              
              and this has led to considerable progress on the dilation theory               
              of contraction operators, and on the invariant subspace problem.               
              Professor Pearcy plans to continue this program of mathematical                
              research, focusing now on the the class of contraction operators               
              having spectral radius one.                                                    
                   The kind of mathematics to be pursued here is operator                    
              theory. Operators may be thought of, very roughly, as enriched                 
              (real or complex) numbers. One can do arithmetic with operators                
              just as with numbers, except that multiplication of operators                  
              depends in general on the order in which the factors are taken,                
              and not every non-zero operator has an inverse. Furthermore,                   
              numbers are inherently one-dimensional, whereas operators                      
              generally act on an infinite-dimensional space. The notion that                
              physical quantities are more realistically represented by                      
              operators than by numbers lies at the heart of quantum mechanics,              
              a subject whose development provided much of the original impetus              
              to operator theory.
