Title       : REU: Fitness and Gene Flow in a Polymorphic Alpine Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1990  
File        : a9196058

Award Number: 9196058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Candace E. Galen galenc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In flowering plants reproductive success is measured not                  
              only by the number of seeds produced in an individual's own                    
              fruits, but also by the number of seeds sired in fruits of other               
              plants.  This second component of reproduction has been coined, "              
              male reproductive success," because it reflects a plant's ability              
              to disperse pollen or male gametes to other receptive individuals              
              in the population.  Few studies have measured male reproductive                
              success in natural plant populations.  Consequently, we know very              
              little about the characteristics that make certain individuals                 
              more successful male parents than others.  This issue is central               
              to our understanding of the evolution of floral traits and                     
              functional sex ratios in plant populations.  The proposed                      
              research will use protein markers (isoenzymes) to monitor                      
              paternity in experimental populations of the alpine plant,                     
              Polemonium viscosum.  In this way it can be determined whether                 
              male reproductive success is influenced by extensive variation in              
              flower size, pollen production and nectar production in this                   
              species.                                                                       
                   The proposed research has important implications for crop                 
              improvement and management.  First, our ability to prevent                     
              contamination of crop seed by pollen of related weed populations               
              depends on our knowledge of factors controlling pollen donation.               
              Next, spread of valuable genetic improvements through crop                     
              populations can be accomplished most readily if genes for such                 
              improvements are associated with others enhancing paternal                     
              success.  Third, introducing superior pollen donors into stands                
              of orchard or seed crops should improve yield with little                      
              economic cost and no environmental damage.  The proposed research              
              will provide information basic to reaching these goals.
