Title       : Reporter Epitope Technique for Determining the TransmembraneOrientation of a
               Membrane Protein Polypeptide Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9196053

Award Number: 9196053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Lindstrom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              To understand how a membrane protein, such as the cholinergic                  
              works, it is important to know which parts of its polypeptide                  
              chain are oriented across the membrane.  The best way to do this               
              would be x-ray crystallography, but this has not yet been                      
              possible for membrane proteins as large as nicotinic receptors.                
              Sequencing of cDNA clones for membrane protein subunits provides               
              a great deal of structural information.                                        
                                                                                             
              One approach to determining the transmembrane orientation of a                 
              polypeptide chain is to make antibodies to synthetic peptides                  
              with the sequence of an interesting part of the polypeptide chain              
              thought to be exposed on one side of the membrane or the other.                
              Then, if these antipeptide antibodies are highly specific, and if              
              they recognize the native protein, determining to which side of                
              the membrane antibodies bind determines the transmembrane                      
              orientation of that sequence.  The Dr. Lindstrom has developed                 
              libraries of monoclonal antibodies to nicotinic acetylcholine                  
              receptors from fish electric organs.  The amino acid sequences to              
              which some of these antibodies bind, their epitopes, have been                 
              precisely determined.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research project will use monoclonal antibodies to a                      
              epitope sequence inserted into the membrane protein to determine               
              the transmembrane orientation of the epitope when the modified                 
              DNA is expressed into Xenopus oocytes.  The method will allow                  
              Dr. Lindstrom to study nicotinic acetylcholine receptors from                  
              human muscle and chicken and human brain.  If the technique is                 
              successful, it should allow rapid determination of the                         
              transmembrane orientation of parts of the polypeptide chain of                 
              any membrane protein for which the cDNA is available without the               
              cost, time, effort, and risk of failure of synthesizing peptides,              
              making antibodies to the peptides, and determining their                       
              specificity, before testing with the native protein.
