Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Probability and Statistics Applied tothe Theory of
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1990   
File        : a9196036

Award Number: 9196036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter W. Arzberger                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32800              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Steele Steele@Wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project will explore seven explicit conjectures in three              
              broad areas of probabilistic analysis of algorithms, empirical                 
              processes and random graphs.  Several connections between these                
              apparently different areas will be clarified and used in the                   
              solutions of the conjectures.  Karp's probabilistic polynomial                 
              time algorithm for the traveling salesman problem, leads to                    
              considerations of random graphs with special properties.  Thus                 
              the central limit theorem and the large deviation theory of the                
              traveling salesman problem have connections with quantities of                 
              interest in the random graph theory such as minimal spanning                   
              trees, and minimal matchings.  Some of the new techniques used                 
              include the theory of Sobolov inequalities and the Efron-Stein                 
              inequality.  Theory of random trees is developed by putting                    
              specific probability distributions on the trees with n vertices.               
              It will be shown that the use of Harper's method leads to a                    
              richer theory of random trees.  Harper's method in turn leads to               
              connections with the empirical process of lines.  The novelty of               
              the research is its problem-driven approach and the elucidation                
              and exploitation of the interconnections of seemingly divergent                
              fields.
