Title       : Genetic Analysis of the Transposable DNA Element IS2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9196151

Award Number: 9196151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Musso   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Specific sequences of DNA which can move within the genome have                
              been identified in bacteria and eukaryotes.  These transposable                
              DNA elements not only move themselves but also facilitate a                    
              variety of spontaneous mutations which can alter the structural                
              organization and often the expression of a cell's genetic                      
              information.  While the resulting genetic diversity may prove                  
              beneficial in an evolutionary sense, some transposon-induced                   
              mutations may be quite detrimental as when oncogenes are                       
              activated and cells become transformed to a neoplastic state.                  
              Among the simplest transposable elements are the bacterial                     
              insertion sequences (IS elements).  This laboratory will focus                 
              studies on one such element, IS2, which is present in the                      
              chromosome of Escherichia coli K-12 but absent from E. coli C.                 
              IS2 can transpose to new sites causing either decreased or                     
              increased expression of genes adjacent to the newly inserted IS2               
              element.  Our studies have identified two regions within IS2 that              
              encode factors required for, or regulating, both transposition                 
              and excision of IS2.  These results suggest that IS2 may                       
              transpose by a conservative mechanism involving excision (with                 
              survival of the donor "chromosome") and reintegration of IS2 at a              
              new genetic locus.  We will focus our studies on testing this                  
              hypothesis: to identify the presumptive protein products and the               
              role for each in IS2 excision and/or transposition.  In addition               
              we will examine how the relative level of expression of the IS2                
              encoded proteins may be regulated at transcriptional or                        
              translational levels.
