Title       : Design of Robust Adaptive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9196178

Award Number: 9196178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 10,  1991     
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar V. Kokotovic petar@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1454      SYSTEMS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      Robust adaptive control is one of the most promising and most          
              active research areas in systems and control theory.  During the last          
              two years major causes of nonrobust behavior have been discovered and          
              means to counteract instability mechanisms have been recommended.  A           
              sharp stability-instability boundary can now be determined using a             
              signal dependent criterion.  To extend the validity of this linearized         
              result, the concept of a slow integral manifold is proposed.  This             
              concept will be used as a nonlinear geometric-asymptotic tool in the           
              research.  The goal of this research is to employ a priori information         
              about the plant and signals in order to reduce the complexity of the           
              adaptive controller and thus improve its robustness.  This is to be            
              achieved by removing matchability and positive realness assumptions            
              and allowing problem specific reduced parameterizations.  A pseudo-            
              gradient approach will be developed to guarantee local convergence.            
              The practically guaranteed region of convergence will then be                  
              maximized by nonlinear geometric -asymptotic methods, including an             
              analysis of in-manifold and off-manifold bounds.  A preliminary                
              pseudo-gradient scheme is described as a possible starting point for           
              more general designs.
