Title       : JVNC Regional Network Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1992       
File        : a9196007

Award Number: 9196007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Caviness                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira H. Fuchs fuch@tsar.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
               Established in May 1986, the present JvNCnet provides high                   
              bandwidth communications and network services to 23 institutions               
              using an approximate star topology.  This proposal requests                    
              continuing support for the JvNCnet in order to take advantage of               
              recent advances in networking technology which provide a unique                
              opportunity for a redesign of both the topolgy and equipment.                  
              This support will help the JvNCnet achieve higher overall                      
              performance, improved management, additional growth, and                       
              substantially lower cost per network connection.                               
                This new technolgy will allow the JvNCnet to consist of a                    
              "backbone" and "local links."  The backbone will operate at 1.5                
              million bits per second (T-1 speed), and will extend from                      
              Pennsylvania to Rhode Island through a series of links extending               
              through telephone company offices in Altoona, PA; Philadelphia,                
              PA; Trenton, NJ; Newark, NJ; New York, NY, Stamford, CT; Boston,               
              MA; and Providence, RI.  A unique feature of the proposal is the               
              colocation of routers and communications equipment in the central              
              offices of the long distance carrier.                                          
                The backbone and local link topolgy permits organized growth of              
              this regional network in the area of eastern Pennsylvania, the                 
              State of New Jersey, and the New England States.  New and old                  
              institutions may be connected to the network at the nearest                    
              local office of the carrier.  Overall service to users is a                    
              function of the bandwidth of the local link and the backbone                   
              which may be upgraded as required.***//
