Title       : US-Italy Cooperative Research: Simulation Studies of QuantumSystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1990  
File        : a9196078

Award Number: 9196078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Malvin H. Kalos kalos@tc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support Professor Malvin Kalos of New York                     
              University in a research collaboration with Professor L. Reatto of             
              the Universita degli Studi di Milano, Italy.  The investigators                
              intend to continue their studies in the computational quantum                  
              mechanics of solid and liquid helium.  Our current understanding of            
              low density solid and of the liquid-solid phase transitions of                 
              highly quantum systems is still incomplete.  Both experimentally               
              and theoretically, such transitions are strongly affected by                   
              quantum effects.  Using variational calculations and a Green's                 
              function Monte Carlo (GFMC) method, the investigators have obtained            
              important results about liquid-solid transitions and about basic               
              properties of two-dimensional liquid and solid helium which will be            
              extended through this collaboration.                                           
                                                                                             
              The proposed work is complementary: the U.S. side will contribute              
              the methodology of computational many-body theory, especially as it            
              applies to quantum problems in their ground states and finite                  
              temperature.  The Italian side will work on theoretical and                    
              analytical results based on the numerical results obtained by the              
              U.S. researchers.  Given this degree of complementarity, it is                 
              likely that the collaboration will lead to increased understanding             
              of quantum effects of liquid-solid transitions and materials.
