Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Reproductive Biology ofthe Genus
               Rhododendron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9196046

Award Number: 9196046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carole Ganz                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1989       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9430               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth G. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Profs.                  
              Elizabeth G. Williams of the University of Kentucky, Lexington and             
              Barbara F. Palser of Rutgers University, with Drs. John L. Rouse and           
              R. Bruce Knox of the University of Melbourne, Australia.  The                  
              investigators will study the pollination and fertilization processes           
              of Rhododendron.  The process of fertilization will be examined using          
              both light and electron microscopy, and the pistil molecules involved          
              in control of pollen tube growth will be identified.                           
                                                                                             
              The project combines the skills and facilities of the investigators,           
              with Drs. Rouse and Knox providing samples for pollen bioassays and            
              electron microscopy facilities in their own laboratories; and Drs.             
              Williams and Palser contributing skills in microscopy and in the               
              experimental techniques of plant genetics and reproductive biology.            
              This research will advance our knowledge of the means by which                 
              fertilization is controlled by the female organ of the flower,                 
              leading, ultimately, to an ability to manipulate the reproductive              
              processes of flowering plants to control seed setting and to facilitate        
              hybridization in plant breeding programs.
