Title       : Genetic Analysis of Distributive Pairing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9196219

Award Number: 9196219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $538098             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Scott Hawley rshawley@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In order to understand meiosis at a mechanistic level we are                   
              dissecting a simple meiotic process which occurs in Drosophila                 
              melanogaster.  This process, known as distributive pairing,                    
              involves the pairing and segregation of chromosomes in the                     
              absence of exchange.  We have characterized two loci which                     
              impair this system, namely the Axs locus, required for                         
              chromosome pairing, and nod which is essential for a chromosome                
              modification event that ensures disjunction.  We have cloned                   
              and sequenced much of the nod locus and have executed a                        
              chromosome walk in the Axs region.  We now propose to dissect                  
              the nod locus by mapping and sequencing seven nod mutations as                 
              well as nod-cognate clone from Drosophila simulans.  In order                  
              to ascertain whether the nod+ gene product belongs to a member                 
              of a known family of proteins or represents a novel function,                  
              we will determine the primary amino acid sequence of the nod+                  
              gene product by cDNA sequencing.  We also propose a                            
              transcriptional analysis to determine when in oocyte                           
              development the nod locus is expressed.  Antibodies produced                   
              against the nod gene product will allow us to determine the                    
              cellular localization of the nod+  protein.  We also propose a                 
              genetic screen for mutations in loci which interact with the                   
              nod locus.  Finally, we propose to clone and sequence the Axs                  
              locus.  The analysis of this locus will provide crucial                        
              insights into the physical basis of pairing.  These studies                    
              will provide basic molecular information regarding meiotic                     
              pairing and segregation.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This is a continuation of support for investigation into the                   
              mechanisms of chromosome pairing, a crucial step in the                        
              transmission of genetic information from one generation to the                 
              next.  The work to be done under this award carries to the                     
              molecular level the genetic analysis begun with the previous                   
              award.
