Title       : Digitally Corrected Oversampling Data Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9196199

Award Number: 9196199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor C. Temes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research involves the development of faster and more              
              accurate analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog data converters.              
              The converters studied are of the interpolating type, which                    
              effectively trade conversion speed for accuracy.  That is, in                  
              interpolating type converters, the use of a multibit (rather than              
              a single-bit) front end in an interpolating converter can lead to              
              a higher resolution for a given speed or a higher conversion speed             
              for a fixed resolution.  However, a multibit front-end requires an             
              analog component accuracy which cannot be achieved without                     
              complicated and expensive trimming and or randomizing techniques.              
              A novel digital self-calibration and correction technique which                
              achieves the requisite accuracy of the multibit system without any             
              trimming or randomizing, using only a simple additional digital                
              stage is being developed in this research.  The work involves an               
              architectural study of the novel system, development of the circuit            
              blocks needed and design, fabrication and testing of several fully             
              integrated converters based on the novel principle.  This new                  
              approach should lead to faster and or more accurate converters than            
              any of the currently available ones.  Such converters will lead to             
              further developments in important applications such as digital                 
              radio and television, digital audio, ISDN, radar, etc.
