Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Breeding Improved Pasture Legumes from
               the Cross Trifolium ambiguum x T. repens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1990      
File        : a9196045

Award Number: 9196045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 2,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth G. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will enable collaborative research between Dr. Elizabeth            
              G. Williams of the University of Kentucky and  Dr. Warren M.                   
              Williams and John Vanden Bosch of the Grasslands Division,                     
              Department of Scientific and Industrial Research located at                    
              Palmerston North, New Zealand.  These researchers will produce                 
              interspecific genetic hybrids between white clover and kura clover             
              in order to construct breeding populations of advanced generation              
              hybrids and backcrosses to both parents.  White clover, Trifolium              
              repens, is a major pasture legume in both the U.S. and New                     
              Zealand.  While this clover has the ability to withstand heavy                 
              grazing if moisture is adequate, thus improving the quality of                 
              grasslands both with respect to digestible energy and protein, and             
              in terms of symbiotic nitrogen fixation, unfortunately its use is              
              limited by a lack of persistence under lowered moisture                        
              conditions.  Kura (Caucasian) clover, Trifolium ambiguum,                      
              possessess a vigorous underground perennial root and rhizome system            
              and is both more drought resistant and shows resistance to a number            
              of different viruses which affect white clover.                                
                                                                                             
              The University of Kentucky staff will focus their activity on the              
              generation of new hybrids through a seed embryo rescue technique               
              which they have developed along with chromosome doubling and tissue            
              culturing of hybrid materials.  Virus testing studies will also be             
              conducted in the U.S.  The New Zealand investigators will focus                
              their work on X-irradiation to enhance genetic exchange, the                   
              development of further advanced generation hybrids, and the                    
              selection for fertility and agronomic performance of the new hybrid            
              materials.  The collaboration between the U.S. and New Zealand                 
              investigators, working in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres,               
              enables a doubling in the growing of experimental hybrid clover                
              crops each year.
