Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Theory for Certain Nonlinear Elliptic
               Equations Involving Derivatives of Rearrangements of Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1990    
File        : a9196040

Award Number: 9196040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Stredulinsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work will focus on the regularity theory for a class of                   
              nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations and associated               
              variational problems involving derivatives of the rearrangement                
              of solutions.  The equations, known as Grad differential                       
              equations, are a widely used model in the nuclear fusion                       
              community. In addition, questions concerning convex                            
              symmetrization and interpolation and certain free boundary                     
              problems will be treated.  These questions arise from models of                
              quasi-static equilibrium of confined toroidal plasmas in                       
              thermonuclear fusion and from rotational fluid flow.  From a                   
              purely mathematical standpoint their analysis involves                         
              interesting and important problems in the study of rearrangements              
              of a function, convex symmetrization, free boundary problems and               
              regularity theory for nonlinear nonlocal variational problems.                 
                   The main emphasis will be on variational problems which can               
              be approximated by sequences of multiphase free boundary                       
              problems. Recent work has established convergence criteria for                 
              such approximation schemes as well as various regularity results               
              for certain solutions.  A new approach for establishing                        
              analyticity of weak solutions for convex domains is planned.                   
              Part of this effort involves the study of generalizations of                   
              Schwarz symmetrization to convex domains as well as other methods              
              for decreasing functionals like the Dirichlet norm.  //
