Title       : Measurements and Modeling of the Behavior of Charring Polymers in Fires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1998    
File        : a9101585

Award Number: 9101585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Serio mserio@AFRInc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0304040   Fire                                    
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The high loss of life and property in fires each year in the U.S.              
              underscores the need for additional research on fires and fire                 
              safety.  Natural and synthetic organic polymers are most                       
              frequently the materials which are primarily responsible for the               
              propagation of fires.  The Phase I objective was to demonstrate                
              the feasibility of applying the FG-DVC computer model, which                   
              includes the processes of depolymerization, crosslinking, and the              
              formation of char, tar, and gases, and the TG-FTIR technique,                  
              which integrates a thermogravimetic analyzer (TGA) with an FT-IR               
              for evolved gas analysis, to the measurement and modeling of the               
              degradation of polymers under conditions of interest in fires.                 
              Because of the importance of charring polymers as flame resistant              
              materials, the primary emphasis in Phase I was on phenol                       
              formaldehyde resin, which is a commercially important example of               
              a charring polymer.  The main conclusions from this effort can be              
              summarized as follows:  1) The FG-DVC model can be generalized to              
              predict kinetics, product evolution, tar yields, and tar                       
              molecular weight distributions for phenol formaldehyde and other               
              charring polymers over a wide range of conditions; 2) the TG-                  
              FTIR method can provide information on several aspects of polymer              
              combustion behavior:  kinetics, degration mechanisms, char                     
              formation, gas toxicity, gas and char heating value, tar                       
              formation, and flame retardance.  3) In order to further develop               
              the FG-DVC model as a submodel for a charring polymers in a fire               
              model, a need was identified for a new experiment to provide                   
              information on the thermal and radiative properties of a charring              
              surface.  This need can be met by a new version of the TG-FTIR                 
              experiment, to be developed in Phase II, which includes both FT-               
              IR emission and transmission spectroscopy.  The ultimate goal of               
              the combined Phase I and Phase II programs is the development of               
              a laboratory scale methodology for assessing the relative                      
              flammability as a function of polymer structure and fire                       
              conditions.  The product would consist of an integrated software               
              and hardware package which utilized the TG-FTIR analysis method                
              and modifications of this method and the FG-DVC model as key                   
              components.
