Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Oscillations in Functional Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9101718

Award Number: 9101718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harlan W. Stech   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns the development of numerical methods                
              designed to assist the computer-aided analysis of nonlinear                    
              oscillation problems.  The investigator undertakes work on the                 
              computation of normal forms for certain infinite dimensional                   
              systems, and a study of the relationship between that and a                    
              Lyapunov-Schmidt based technique developed by the investigator                 
              for the analysis of Hopf bifurcation problems.  The use of                     
              symbolic manipulation software is expected to play an important                
              role in this local analysis.  Simultaneously and complementarily,              
              the investigator will undertake significant modifications and                  
              improvements of existing simulation and numerical curve tracking               
              software that he has developed.                                                
                   The issues addressed and techniques proposed are selected to              
              promote the analysis of problems typified by systems possessing                
              "time-delay" effects.  Such so-called functional differential                  
              equations are important in their own right, and provide a                      
              transition towards analyzing analogous questions in problems from              
              fluid dynamics.  Specific problems include models of chugging in               
              liquid propellant fuel rockets (where the time delay corresponds               
              to the time it takes to vaporize fuel), oscillations in coupled                
              (Josephson Junction) semiconductors, and pattern formation in                  
              diffusive chemical reactions.  Both the analytic and                           
              computational aspects of this research are motivated by the goal               
              of making the mathematical analysis of certain dynamical systems               
              more accessible to nonspecialists in the field.
