Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Analysis of Receptor Aggregation on Cell
               Surfaces and its Effects on Cell Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9101969

Award Number: 9101969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla Wofsy wofsy@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will work in collaboration with                
              both experimental and theoretical biologists in the area of cell               
              surface receptors.  Biological cells sense their environment                   
              primarily through the interaction of cell surface receptors with               
              specific extracellular ligands.  These molecular interactions                  
              serve as signals, initiating cell responses to hormones,                       
              neurotransmitters, immune response mediators and other molecules.              
              The planned work is the mathematical component of                              
              theoretical/experimental collaborations aimed at identifying                   
              particular cell signals and response pathways.  These models are               
              essential for the understanding of the biology, because the                    
              mechanisms cannot be observed directly.  The mathematical tools                
              will involve the analysis of spatial data.                                     
                   The principal investigator will work in collaboration with                
              both experimental and theoretical biologists in the area of cell               
              surface receptors.  The planned work is the mathematical                       
              component of this collaboration which is aimed at identifying                  
              particular cell signals and response pathways.  These models are               
              essential for the understanding of the biology, because the                    
              mechanisms cannot be observed directly.  The mathematical tools                
              will involve the analysis of spatial data.
