Title       : FASEB Summer Conference: Positive Control of Transcription Initiation in
               Prokaryotes, " July 14-19, 1991, at Saxons River, Vermont"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1991      
File        : a9101317

Award Number: 9101317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary N. Gussin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sankar Adhya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Garges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial funding for a 1991 FASEB Summer                    
              Research Conference on "Positive Control or Transcription                      
              Initiation in Prokaryotes," to be held July 14-19 at the Vermont               
              Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont.  The conference is under the                  
              auspices of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental               
              Biology (FASEB).  The format for the conference will be the same               
              that is used by the Gordon Research Conferences and others FASEB               
              conferences.  There will be a keynote session, nine major sessions             
              with invited speakers, and poster sessions.  The general topics to             
              be included are: Dissection of the Biochemistry of Transcription               
              Initiation; Activator-RNA Polymerase Interactions; Two-component               
              Systems (sensors and effectors); Activator Paradigms; and DNA                  
              protein Interactions.  The purpose of the meeting is to bring                  
              together geneticists, biochemists, and physical biochemists to                 
              exchange information.  There have been dramatic advances in the                
              field of transcription activation in the last few years, not only              
              in well-studied Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, but               
              also in important pathogens such as Bordetella pertussis and Vibrio            
              cholerae.  Although the topic of positive control of transcription             
              initiation in prokaryotes is often one session in other meeting,               
              this will be the only meeting devoted entirely to its discussion.
