Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Modeling in Somatosensory Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1992     
File        : a9101498

Award Number: 9101498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58512              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A long term goal is to develop a quantitative understanding               
              of mechanical-to-electrical transduction in the somatosensory                  
              system.  The model system proposed for this research proposal is               
              the receptor Pacinian corpuscle, mainly because it is the most                 
              extensively studied skin receptor.  The Pacinian corpuscle is an               
              encapsulated nerve ending in the skin and other tissues.  In a                 
              previous study a capsule model for the transmission of strain to               
              the receptor membrane was developed.  The aims of the proposed                 
              research are to:  (i) extend the capsule model to make it more                 
              anatomically realistic; (ii) develop a receptor membrane model                 
              involving a transduction current model of a strain-sensitive                   
              conductance, which accounts for the known cytoplasmic extensions,              
              and which is coupled to the capsule model through a strain                     
              variable;  (iii) initiate development of a model for the skin                  
              with receptors;  (iv) examine solution behavior analytically of                
              the generalized cable model developed for the receptor's                       
              membrane.  The research is in collaboration with M.H. Holmes, an               
              expert in biomechanical modeling, and S. Bolanowski, Jr., a                    
              leading experimentalist in Pacinian corpuscles.  Aspects of the                
              research should be useful in analyzing other mechanoreceptors.                 
                   The sense-of-touch, or tactile, system is not well                        
              understood in comparison to the vision and auditory systems, and               
              that lack of knowledge hinders the development of artificial                   
              sense-of-touch systems that can be immensely useful in developing              
              prosthetic devises for the old and handicapped young, as well as               
              more obvious uses in robotics.  A meaningful part of this is to                
              understand how various skin receptors work.  Information                       
              extracted out of studies of receptors will be used in an                       
              integrated model of the tactile system to be developed in future               
              studies.  Another goal in developing quantitative models of                    
              various aspects of the sense-of-touch system is to test various                
              hypotheses about tactile processing that cannot be obtained                    
              experimentally.  The modeling approach should suggest new                      
              physiological experiments to try.
