Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Quantum Mechanical Study of Photodissociation
               Dynamics in Three Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9101673

Award Number: 9101673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet R. Waldeck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Quantum Mechanical Study of                       
              Photodissociation Dynamics in Three Dimensions                                 
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Program for Long-& Medium Term                         
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve                       
              months of research abroad at research centers of proven                        
              excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for                    
              joint research, and the use of unique or complementary                         
              facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                      
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral                            
              research visit by Dr. Janet Waldeck of the University of                       
              Pittsburgh with Dr. Moshe Shapiro of the Weizmann Institute                    
              of Science, Rehovot, Israel.  The researchers plan to                          
              develop a fully three-dimensional quantum mechanical method                    
              for calculating photodissociation branching ratios.  An                        
              understanding of the natural photodissociation dynamics is                     
              essential to devising experimental schemes by which                            
              electronic branching can be controlled.  Recently, Dr.                         
              Shapiro developed a theory for coherent control of reactions                   
              which relies on the fact that control over reaction yield                      
              can occur via quantum interference induced by using several                    
              independent optical routes to the same energy E.  In order                     
              to apply their findings more readily to experimental                           
              spectra, they will examine the conditions under which                          
              quantum features found in the collinear case of coherent                       
              control survive 3D averaging.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover interna-                      
              tional travel, dependent's allowance, local travel abroad                      
              and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S.                       
              home institution.
