Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conley Index Theory and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1992      
File        : a9101412

Award Number: 9101412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin M. Mischaikow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator is developing methods for studying the                   
              structure of isolated invariant sets that are applicable to a                  
              wide variety of problems, e.g., travelling waves for                           
              reaction-diffusion systems, dynamic phase transition,                          
              magnetohydrodynamic shock waves, delay equations, to name a few.               
              More specifically, it is concerned with deriving algebraic                     
              invariants that describe invariant sets, determining how they can              
              change through bifurcations, and determining which geometric                   
              topological structures are imposed on the invariant sets by the                
              algebraic invariants.                                                          
                   The guiding philosophy behind these methods comes from the                
              fact that many differential equations that arise as models of                  
              biological, chemical, or physical systems share the following                  
              three characteristics:  (1) they are derived from idealized                    
              descriptions of complicated phenomena, (2) they are parameterized              
              systems and exact values of the parameters are not known,                      
              (3) they are nonlinear.  Thus, from the point of view of                       
              applications, describing the global and robust structure of the                
              solutions to these differential equations is of great importance.              
              At the same time, it is well known that nonlinear systems undergo              
              tremendously complicated bifurcations (e.g., the appearance                    
              of chaotic dynamics).  Therefore, any general theory must rely on              
              tools that are indifferent to the fine structure of the invariant              
              sets, e.g. the Conley index theory.
