Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in the Science Microfabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1991      
File        : a9101144

Award Number: 9101144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold G. Craighead hgc1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              The National Nanofabrication Facility (NNF) at Cornell University              
              is an interdisciplinary center, whose primary role is to provide               
              resources and technical expertise to researchers in                            
              microstructure science, particularly in the areas of advanced                  
              lithographies, nanostructure physics, scanning tunneling                       
              microscopy for fabrication and analysis, optoelectronic and                    
              electronic applications, microfabrication applications to                      
              biology, and related areas.  NNF provides equipment, training ,                
              and expertise to leading edge research in a "hands-on"                         
              environment where the user is responsible for the conduct of that              
              research.  NNF has a program of discrete projects under the                    
              supervision of academic mentors at Cornell whose research is                   
              associated with the Facility.  The proposed period of performance              
              takes particular advantage of ongoing NNF educational activities               
              as well as interaction with other REU programs campus-wide.                    
              Ongoing NNF educational activities include general laboratory                  
              orientation; wet chemical safety orientation; and "NanoCourses".               
              Several events are planned to encourage interaction with other                 
              REU Students on campus, and some NNF participants will work in                 
              teams or in collaboration with students in other programs.  All                
              students are required to present their project results at a                    
              concluding all-campus Forum and to prepare a final report.  NNF                
              again is targeting women and minority undergraduates, and schools              
              with small-to-medium-sized programs presumed to have limited                   
              laboratory facilities.  The program goals are for a total of 12                
              participants, at least 9 of whom are not regularly enrolled at                 
              Cornell, and 6 are women or underrepresented minorities.
