Title       : Process Sequence Design in Metal Forming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9101199

Award Number: 9101199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shiro Kobayashi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   This project is a continuation of the prior project on                    
              Process Design in Metal Forming.  A goal of research in                        
              manufacturing is to accomplish proper design and control of                    
              processes for producing required parts most economically.  One of              
              the most important aspects of process design in metal forming is               
              design of preforms and process sequence. In the prior project,                 
              the application of the new approach to preform design in complex               
              forming processes has been investigated.  The approach used                    
              capability of forward simulation and backward tracing of a                     
              forming process by the finite element method.  Significant                     
              accomplishments were the development of the finite element method              
              and implementation of the backward tracing procedure for three                 
              dimensional deformation processes.  The results of these                       
              investigations demonstrate that it is possible to design preforms              
              without resort to designer's experience.  In the prior project,                
              the design criterion considered was a geometrical requirement for              
              the final product.  For process sequence design, additional                    
              requirements must be introduced in the design process.  Thus, the              
              objective of the research is to develop the methodology for                    
              systematic process sequence design, considering quantitatively                 
              requirements for material formability, defects-free metal flow                 
              and economic die manufacturing, in addition to the geometrical                 
              requirement.                                                                   
                   Many industrial parts are formed sequentially by multiple                 
              dies, each of which contributes to the final shape change.  The                
              project will provide analytical tools for designing the required               
              dies, which are now designed by trial and error, based on                      
              experience.
