Title       : Dissertation Research: Life History Responses to Fire in a Clonal Herb,
               Pityopsis graminifolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9101171

Award Number: 9101171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9396               (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Platt billmaggie1@home.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is not well understood how disturbances such as frequent, low-              
              intensity (e.g. sublethal) fire have influenced life history                   
              evolution in plants.  Pityopsis graminifolia is a fire-adapted,                
              clonal perennial herb that inhabits frequently burned sandhills                
              in Southeastern longleaf pine savannas.  The reproductive biology              
              of this species differs in two sandhill communities in which it                
              has been studied despite the fact that fire results in little                  
              adult mortality or seedling establishment in either community.                 
                                                                                             
              The proposed study has two major objectives.  It will first examine            
              how low intensity fires change the favorability of environmental               
              conditions in these two sandhill populations of P. graminifolia.               
              Specifically, if and to what extent fire reduces the cost of                   
              flowering and vegetative reproduction (e.g. clonal growth) in this             
              stress-tolerant species by increasing the availability of nutrients            
              in each of these communities will be examined.  The impact of                  
              floral herbivory and seed predation following fire in each of these            
              sites will also be examined. The significance of their impact in               
              light of the phenotypic variation in reproductive behavior                     
              exhibited by this species following fires in each of these sandhill            
              communities will be assessed.  Results may indicate how fluctuating            
              environmental conditions during the life of a plant influence life             
              history evolution.  The second goal of the study is to address how             
              the dynamics of flowering and clonal growth respond to fires that              
              differ in their historical, evolutionary importance (e.g. growing              
              season vs. dormant season fires).  In particular, whether the more             
              profuse flowering and fruiting of shorter duration following                   
              historically important growing season fires reduces the impact of              
              floral herbivory and/or seed predation in this species will be                 
              assessed.  Evidence of this kind could provide insight regarding               
              the adaptive significance of growing season vs. dormant season                 
              sublethal fires in longleaf pine savannas.
