Title       : U.S. - U.S.S.R. Joint Research in Topological Fluid Dynamicsat Institute for
               Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9101737

Award Number: 9101737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30600              (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Langer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. James S. Langer, Director of the Institute for                             
              Theoretical Physics, University of California - Santa                          
              Barbara, and Dr. George M. Zaslavsky, Head of the                              
              Department of Analytical Studies, Space Research                               
              Institute, Moscow, U.S.S.R., have organized a cross-                           
              disciplinary program in Topological Fluid Dynamics that                        
              will involve pure mathematicians and astrophysicists as                        
              well as fluid dynamicists.  Leadership will be shared with                     
              Dr. Keith Moffatt of Cambridge University and Dr. Michael                      
              Tabor of Columbia University.  The Soviet delegation                           
              will include Drs. Alexander Chernikov and Michael                              
              Natenzon from the Space Research Institute and Dr. A.                          
              Mikhailov from the Landau Institute of Theoretical                             
              Physics.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The principal activity of the Institute for Theoretical                        
              Physics (ITP) is to organize and operate research                              
              programs in which visiting scientists can interact over                        
              an extended period with a sizable fraction of the                              
              world's most active scientists in the research area.                           
                                                                                             
              An outstanding cross-section of leading topologists,                           
              theoretical and computational fluid dynamicists working                        
              on problems involving fundamental mechanisms of vorticity                      
              dynamics and turbulence, plasma physicists with expertise                      
              in problems of magnetic field topology and reconnection                        
              processes, and experts in Lagrangian chaos will meet                           
              from August - December 1991.  The participation of the                         
              group of Soviet scientists will enhance the vitality and                       
              international nature of this program.                                          
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in                        
              the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to combine complementary efforts                         
              and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and                        
              competence in the field of basic scientific research on                        
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of                           
              benefit.
