Title       : Ontogenetic Changes in Trophic and Competitive Relationshipsand Their Control of
               the Development of Benthic Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1993   
File        : a9101815

Award Number: 9101815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Osman osman@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The time immediately following the metamorphosis and settlement                
              of benthic organisms is critical to their ability to become part               
              of the existing community.  Because of their small size and                    
              simpler morphology, juveniles endure more intense interactions                 
              with a wider spectrum of species.  In addition, tremendous                     
              changes in the ecological relationships between species can                    
              occur between life-history stages and the importance of these                  
              ontogenetic changes in relationships is unknown.  This project                 
              will focus on the settling and juvenile stages of 7 dominant                   
              species within subtidal marine epifaunal communities along the                 
              coast of southern New England.  The study sites chosen exhibit                 
              extreme (1 to 2 orders of magnitude) differences in larval                     
              settlement, and each has a distinct group of dominant species.                 
              Experiments will be conducted to test processes that have the                  
              demonstrated potential to alter the importance of predation to                 
              recruitment, i.e. differences in larval settlement and                         
              competitive interactions involving juveniles.  Finally, we will                
              examine how relationships change with life-stage.  The                         
              importance of any event occurring during juvenile life-history                 
              stages will be judged relative to phenomena occurring during                   
              larval settlement and within the adult community.
