Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematic Investigations in the Basidiomycete Genus
               Coprinus Phylogeny, Character Evolution, and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9101201

Award Number: 9101201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rytas Vilgalys fungi@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Hopple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Phylogenetic systematics can offer great insights into evolution               
              but until recently has rarely been applied to fungi because                    
              traditional morphological characters are few in number and are                 
              thought to have often evolved in a convergent or parallel manner.              
              With the advent of molecular methods to generate independent data              
              and modern systematic approaches for phylogenetic analysis of all              
              types of characters it has become possible to make progress in                 
              understanding the evolutionary history of fungi.                               
                                                                                             
              The objectives of the proposed research are to produce a broad-                
              scale phylogeny for the genus Coprinus (Pers.:Fr.) S.F. Gray and               
              use this phylogeny to study the manner in which fungal characters              
              have evolved.  Multiple character sets will be generated from                  
              morphological, molecular, and developmental sources.                           
              Morphological characters will be drawn from the study of macro-                
              and microscopic characters of fresh and dried basidiocarps and                 
              living mycelia grown in the laboratory.  Restriction site maps,                
              DNA sequences, and gene organization will constitute the                       
              molecular characters.  Developmental data will consist of                      
              observations made on thin sections of fruitbodies.  Data sets                  
              will be analyzed together and separately using cladistic                       
              methodologies to determine a consensus phylogeny.  Character                   
              evolution will then be studied by individually mapping characters              
              onto the consensus phylogeny.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research will 1. elucidate evolutionary patterns in fungal                
              morphology and development, 2. provide a better understanding of               
              which fungal characters are informative in a phylogenetic sense                
              and at what  taxonomic levels, 3. provide a phylogenetic                       
              hypothesis for an important genus of fungi, and 4. serve as a                  
              model for the study of evolution through the integration of                    
              multiple data sets analyzed through a cladistic framework.
