Title       : Dissertation Research: Adding Natural Enemies to a Virus- Plant Interaction in
               an Agricultural System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9101084

Award Number: 9101084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison G. Power agp4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Saponara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In order to develop and evaluate control strategies for insect-                
              vectored plant pathogens, in agroecosystems, both vector                       
              population dynamics and behavioral ecology must be understood.                 
              While many studies have examined insect population dynamics and                
              mortality due to natural enemies, few have studied the impact of               
              natural enemies on the movement behavior of insect vectors.  This              
              is true despite demonstrations that both predaceous and parasitic              
              natural enemies can affect vector movement, that the resulting                 
              change in vector movement behavior can increase disease spread,                
              and despite the ongoing USDA project to release natural enemies                
              for aphid control in grains throughout the Western US.  We will                
              compare the impact of a predator (Coccinella septempunctata a                  
              beetle) and a parasitoid (Aphidius sp., a wasp) of the major                   
              aphid vector (Rhopalosiphum padi) on the spread of barley yellow               
              dwarf virus which affects small grains worldwide.  This study                  
              will develop mechanistic models of insect-vectored plant disease               
              and compare model predictions with experimental results.  There                
              are no mechanistic models of insect-vectored plant disease, and                
              such models will assist in evaluating the disease consequences of              
              biological control strategies using easily observed behavioral                 
              parameters of the organisms involved.  The research will test                  
              model hypotheses by confining natural enemies in plots of oats in              
              the field and measure aphid movement, aphid mortality, and                     
              disease incidence.
