Title       : Development Processes in Maya Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1991       
File        : a9101006

Award Number: 9101006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49302              (Estimated)
Investigator: June C. Nash JuneNash@midwau.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to the Department of Anthropology at               
              City College of the City University of New York to continue a                  
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site Project which will                
              involve undergraduates in the study of contemporary socio-                     
              cultural change among the highland Maya and Mexican national                   
              communities of Chiapas, southeastern Mexico.  The PI, who has                  
              studied work and gender in Latin America for the past thirty                   
              years, will direct the project.  Students will live with families              
              in Indian villages during a part of the week, coming in to the                 
              research center in the city of San Cristobal de las Casas for                  
              seminars, Maya language lessons, and discussion with the PI.                   
              Group trips to handicraft production cooperatives, experimental                
              agricultural stations, and government offices will take place                  
              periodically in accord with the research needs of the project.                 
              Students will learn basic censusing techniques, extensive                      
              interviewing and oral narrative accounts, participant                          
              observation, and apprenticeship training to learn the                          
              socialization process in handicraft production.  They will write               
              daily diaries and submit a summary report at the end of the                    
              project.  The observations of students located in families in                  
              different communities will add up to an account of coping                      
              strategies in the debt crisis Mexico is undergoing.  The PI will               
              be assisted by colleagues presently working in Chiapas who have                
              devoted their scholarly careers to investigations of indigenous                
              culture in the area.
