Title       : Dissertation Research: The Relative Roles of Host Quality and Enemy Free Space
               in Determining the Host Preferences of a Generalist Herbivore, Vanessa cardui
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9101002

Award Number: 9101002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5363               (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis D. Coley coley@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana A. Garrigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A central question in the study of plant-insect interactions is                
              why herbivorous insects tend to restrict their feeding to a                    
              limited range of hosts.  The goal of the proposed research is to               
              address this question of specialization by comparing a generalist              
              herbivore's performance on several possible hosts in terms of                  
              both host quality and the rate of attack by natural enemies.                   
              Preliminary investigations have demonstrated that Vanessa                      
              cardui's growth is poor on its preferred host relative to other                
              available hosts, suggesting that host quality is relatively less               
              important than other ecological factors in determining its host                
              preferences.  The potential role of natural enemies in                         
              determining host preferences has been forcefully stated but                    
              remains relatively depauperate of experimental study.  The                     
              possibility of  a latitudinal gradient in importance of natural                
              enemies is suggested and will be investigated by comparing                     
              variation in V. cardui's host preferences and the rate of attack               
              by natural enemies in several sites.  A generalist herbivore has               
              been chosen for this study to obtain an unobscured view of the                 
              herbivore's performance on a variety of hosts before the                       
              herbivore has had significant time to adapt to its host in                     
              multiple dimensions.
