Title       : Implementation and Analysis of Proof Techniques Employing Negation Normal Form
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1993      
File        : a9101208

Award Number: 9101208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil V. Murray nvm@cs.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              This is a research project in computational logic.  The areas of               
              research stem directly from the analysis of the structure of formulas          
              in negation toward several research topics.  Substantial experimental          
              results at the propositional level, preliminary experimental results           
              at the first order level, and certain theoretical results indicate             
              that the most important of these may be path dissolution, a rule of            
              inference that is strongly complete at the ground level.  Exploration          
              of this and related inference mechanisms will be continued, largely            
              through experimentation.                                                       
                                                                                             
              One major thrust of the investigation will be to further the                   
              implementation of the path resolution and semantic graph techniques            
              developed earlier.  A sophisticated ground system and a first order            
              system are now operational; the latter is a solid platform on which            
              techniques proposed below will be tested:  link selection; computing           
              prime implicants; backtracking; theory links and dissolution; and              
              star chains.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              While abstract proof-theoretic questions are of interest in their own          
              right, the development of performance enhancements for the theorem             
              proving system is also a major motivation.  A number of such                   
              enhancements will be investigated.  Among them are: improved                   
              efficiency of existing inference mechanisms; improved proof search             
              with existing mechanisms; and development of new inference techniques          
              that alter the search space itself.                                            
                                                                                             
              Specifically, system development will be enhanced through                      
              investigation of: dissolution, analytic tableaux, and the                      
              distributive law; dissolution versus resolution; quantifier                    
              duplication, proof length, and cycles; algorithms for computing prime          
              implicants; and induction and equality.
