Title       : Advanced Polymeric Materials: Process Induced Internal Stresses in Laminated
               Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9101648

Award Number: 9101648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Seferis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   This research is to develop both experimental and analytical              
              methods to determine internal stresses induced in laminated                    
              composite structures during processing.  Through these internal                
              stress characterizations, a methodology will be developed that                 
              can provide a basic understanding for controlled processing and                
              performance of composites.  Both thermosetting and thermoplastic               
              polymer matrices reinforced with continuous fibers, that are                   
              potential candidates for structural materials in the electric                  
              power industry, will be examined using well established as well                
              as novel lamination processes.  As an integral part of this                    
              study, several process monitoring techniques will be evaluated;                
              these techniques could also be used for on-line, long term                     
              durability monitoring.  Internal stress analysis will be studied               
              on macroscopic as well as microscopic (micro-mechanical) scale                 
              considering both time dependent (kinetic) and time independent                 
              (thermodynamic) effects.  Through the experimental and analytical              
              approach, an attempt will be made to characterize composite                    
              system molecular and morphological structural features that are                
              influenced and/or give rise to the internal stresses developed                 
              during processing, leading to full property characterization.                  
                   It is anticipated that the results derived from this study,               
              in conjunction with previous developments, will provide a basic                
              methodology for process analysis of laminated composites that may              
              also provide fundamental information in screening new materials                
              and processes for load bearing structural application of                       
              composites in real manufacturing operations focused on the needs               
              of the electric power industry.
