Title       : REU: Ecosystems Studies at the H.J.Andrews Experimental Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9101262

Award Number: 9101262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Beatty beattyj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew R. Moldenke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Biology Department at Oregon                  
              State University for a ten-week program that will provide ten                  
              undergraduates in biological sciences with research experiences                
              in ecosystem studies at the Andrews Experimental Forest.  This is              
              a site which involves several interdisciplinary projects,                      
              including the NSF sponsored Long-Term Ecological Research                      
              Program.  Students will learn and develop skills as they interact              
              and work closely with scientists from several disciplines on                   
              individual projects within the larger coordinated studies.                     
                                                                                             
              To foster student development and monitor what careers they                    
              pursue after they complete the program, a 4-phase program is                   
              planned:  an overview phase which explains integrated ecosystem                
              studies, an apprenticeship phase to develop skills, a personal                 
              research phase, and an evaluation and follow-up phase.  According              
              to their interests, students will join a collaborating scientist               
              for the second and third phases.   The principal investigator of               
              this award will coordinate the program, organize the overview                  
              phase, field trips, and seminars, integrating the students and                 
              collaborating scientists, facilitate progress toward independent               
              questioning, and evaluating results.                                           
                                                                                             
              Students will be housed at the field station with other                        
              researchers, an arrangement that encourages after hours                        
              discussions and helps break the barriers between disciplines.                  
              The project will place promising students at a scenic research                 
              site with an interdisciplinary team of scientists to produce good              
              science and develop an enthusiasm for biological research.
