Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "The Structure and Function Theory of Homogeneous Domains
               in Cn"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1991     
File        : a9101747

Award Number: 9101747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kevin Clancey                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Penney rcp@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor Penney will study a certain class of domains in                 
              complex n-space which are homogeneous under a real Lie group.  This            
              class is the family of Koszul domains which are defined by                     
              requiring that a certain bilinear form be non-degenerate.  This                
              form gives the domain the structure of a pseudo-Kahlerian manifold.            
              One problem for study is the eigenvalue problem for the Laplace-               
              Beltrami operator.  This has been done in the rank one case and                
              Professor Penney will extend this to higher rank.  This will                   
              necessitate more work on the structure of such domains in the                  
              higher rank case.  Professor Penney will also continue his                     
              collaboration with B. Currey on the geometric description of double            
              coset spaces for solvable Lie groups.                                          
                   Group theory is basically the theory of symmetry.  To take a              
              simple example, when the system in question is invariant under a               
              change in the position of the origin of space, the group of                    
              translations naturally arises.  While groups are abstract objects,             
              particular situations demand concrete realizations or                          
              "representations" of the symmetry group. Professor Penney will be              
              studying representations of groups acting on certain domains in                
              complex n-dimensional space.
