Title       : Measurement of Intracrystalline Diffusion in Molecular SieveZeolites by the
               Tracer-Pulse Method - Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1991     
File        : a9101620

Award Number: 9101620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald P. Danner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The measurements of equilibrium and diffusional                                
              parameters of gases in microporous solids is very important                    
              for the design of many separation and catalytic processes.                     
              These properties are measured by use of the pulse                              
              chromatography method, which is unique  in that it is a                        
              macroscopic method that operates under equilibrium conditions.                 
                                                                                             
              Comparison of the tracer pulse results with previously                         
              published NMR diffusion coefficients is used to determine the                  
              origin of discrepancies commonly observed between the two                      
              techniques.  Equilibrium isotherms and diffusion data for the                  
              ethane-silicalite system are measured at various temperatures                  
              and loadings, allowing investigation of the effect of adsorbed                 
                                                                                             
              phase concentration on the micropore diffusion coefficient.                    
              The effect of co-adsorbed molecules on the diffusional                         
              behavior of ethane in ideal and nonideal adsorbed mixtures is                  
              investigated by a modification of the original tracer pulse                    
              technique.  Equilibrium  isotherms for each component of the                   
              binary mixtures are also measured by the 'concentration-tracer                 
                                                                                             
              pulse' method.  Since industrial applications always involve                   
              multicomponent systems, a study if diffusion in mixtures is of                 
                                                                                             
              great interest.  Finally, two variations of perturbation                       
              chromatography (tracer and concentration pulse) are used to                    
              investigate the validity of the Darken equation at various                     
              adsorbed concentrations.  The tracer-pulse chromatography                      
              apparatus is unique in this respect, since other experimental                  
              techniques are not able to measure both the transport and self                 
                                                                                             
              diffusion coefficients.
