Title       : Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry of Reproduction in the Family Tenebrionidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1991     
File        : a9101008

Award Number: 9101008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Wietstock   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin A. Grimnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alma College
	      614 West Superior
	      Alma, MI  488011511    517/463-7111

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biochemistry at                 
              Alma College to initiate a summer undergraduate research                       
              experience for eight students.  A substantial portion of                       
              participants will be recruited from Stillman College, a                        
              historically black institution.  Participants will learn modern                
              methodology in the areas of molecular genetics and insect                      
              reproductive biochemistry of flour beetles in the family                       
              Tenebrionidae.  Students will progress from work on a common                   
              project (polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) to independent                    
              investigations involving techniques such as:  ELISAs, Western                  
              blotting, immunohistochemistry, DNA purification, DNA                          
              compositional analysis, genomic library preparation and                        
              screening, and gene sequencing.  Special attention will be given               
              to enabling the students to become expert in a few techniques                  
              while understanding the ramifications of all techniques used in                
              the project.  Each student will be responsible for integrating                 
              all data generated through the above techniques for a particular               
              species under their care culminating in a written report.  Weekly              
              meetings involving all participants will maximize scientific data              
              exchange, and cooperation among research peers.  In addition to                
              the laboratory component, participants will be exposed to                      
              scientists as role models during site visits to local industrial               
              and academic locations.  Additional scientists will be brought to              
              Alma College for in-depth discussions concerning scientific                    
              careers and their professional preparation.  As a part of the                  
              follow-up process, contact with students will be maintained and                
              assistance will be offered with career choices throughout the                  
              subsequent academic year.
