Title       : Development of a Molecular Probe for Investigating Cell- Surface Enzyme Activity
               in Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1992     
File        : a9101886

Award Number: 9101886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy Lee cindy.lee@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1670,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Nitrogen is one of the nutrients essential for phytoplankton                   
              growth.  The rate of nitrogen recycling can determine the rate                 
              of primary production.  One of the major pathways of nitrogen                  
              cycling in the sea is the uptake of N by phytoplankton for                     
              incorporation into the amino acids and nucleic acids required                  
              for life.  Traditionally, marine scientists have thought that                  
              phytoplankton obtain the N they require from inorganic nitrogen                
              compounds.  However, dissolved organic nitrogen compounds make                 
              up a larger reservoir of N in seawater than do inorganic                       
              nitrogen compounds.  Previously, field studies have indicated                  
              that amino acids and other organic nitrogen compounds are not                  
              taken up to any significant extent by phytoplankton.  It has                   
              been recently suggested that some phytoplankton can oxidize                    
              amines and amino acids using a cell-surface enzyme.  Oxidation                 
              of amino acids produces hydrogen peroxide, an x-keto acid, and                 
              ammonium.  The ammononium is then transported across the                       
              phytoplankton cell membrane for use as a N source.  The x-                     
              keto acid is released to the surrounding seawater where it can                 
              be taken up by bacteria.  If the ability to oxidize amino acids                
              by mechanism is widespread among phytoplankton, it has profound                
              implications for our understanding of the cycling of amino                     
              acids in seawater and the competition between phytoplankton and                
              bacteria for these compounds.  This project will develop a                     
              series of fluorescent molecular probes to simulate amino acids                 
              and amines in seawater.  Loss of the probes (by algal                          
              oxidation) from seawater can be monitored quickly and                          
              sensitively by high performance liquid chromatography with                     
              fluorescent detection.  Using these synthesized probes, the                    
              importance of phytoplankton oxidation of amines and amino acids                
              by this novel mechanism will be tested in the field.
