Title       : Picosecond and Nanosecond Pulse Shaping for State-Selective Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9101544

Award Number: 9101544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $534600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren S. Warren wwarren@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                 Professor Warren is supported by a grant from the                           
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to use shaped laser                    
              pulses to orient or align molecules in a molecular beam, to                    
              generate population inversion in low-temperature crystals, and                 
              to localize energy in a bond by a photon-locking experiment.                   
              One of the thrusts of the research program is the development                  
              of techniques to efficiently populate an electronically excited                
              state with a single laser, or to transfer population to highly                 
              vibrationally excited levels of the ground state with two                      
              lasers.  The motivation for this work is the study of                          
              collisional dynamics which require selective excitation to                     
              monitor velocity changing collisions.  Complete population                     
              transfer enhances the signal and minimizes interferences.                      
              Success in transferring large fractions of the thermal                         
              distribution into high vibrational states will be useful for                   
              exploring the kinetics of chemical reactions.  One goal is to                  
              design radiation fields which drive diatomic molecules in their                
              ground state to a superposition of rotational states such that                 
              the diatomic molecule is oriented in the laboratory.  A                        
              demonstration of the effect of modulating the dissociation rate                
              of the IBr molecule  by Stark shifting previously stable levels                
              with specific frequency-swept pulse shapes will be the first                   
              step towards applying this technique to polyatomic molecules.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              By preparing specially tailored pulses of light, it is possible                
              to produce simple and interpretable states of molecules.  These                
              techniques will be used by Prof. Warren  to control their                      
              alignment in a molecular beam and even their orientation in the                
              laboratory, and to modulate the rate at which they break apart                 
              into fragments.
