Title       : Japan Long-Term Visit: Micromagnetic Analysis of the Staticsand Dynamics of
               Magnetization in Thin Ferromagnetic Films with Applications to Magnetic
               Memories and Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9101198

Award Number: 9101198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88611              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat B. Pant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Solid State Elec Ctr
	      
	      Plymouth, MN  55441    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1456,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 12 month long-term visit by                          
              Dr. Bharat B. Pant of the Solid State Electronics Center at                    
              Honeywell, Inc. to visit Japan for a cooperative research                      
              project involving Professors Kimihide Matsuyama and Ichiro                     
              Sasada of the Department of Electrical Engineering at Kyushu                   
              University and Professor Jiro Yamasaki of the Department of                    
              Electrical Engineering at Kyushu Institute of Technology.                      
              The proposed research involves modeling of the response of                     
              long strips of ferromagnetic film used in magnetoresistive                     
              sensors.  In these sensors a change in the sensed field                        
              produces a change in the resistance of the strip.  The                         
              research will be targeted towards two types of devices which                   
              use magnetic thin films, i.e. verticle Bloch line memory and                   
              thin film magnetic sensors.  The work proposed is of both a                    
              theoretical and computational nature.  The research will be                    
              carried out in conjunction with Professor Matsuyama's                          
              verticle Bloch line memory effort, Professor Sasada's work in                  
              the use of amorphous ferromagnetic ribbons as torque sensors                   
              and Professor Yamasaki's research into experimental investi-                   
              gations of the dynamics of magnetization in thin films.                        
                                                                                             
              The proposed research has significant scientific as well as                    
              practical value.  It will provide an important contribution                    
              to our basic theoretical and experimental understanding of                     
              the statics and dynamics of magnetism in thin films.                           
              Research resulting from this project could improve the                         
              ability to design thin film magneto-resistive sensors which                    
              are currently being studied for use in magnetic recording                      
              disk files. This could have an important economic impact on                    
              the disk drive industry.  All of the researchers are experts                   
              in their specific areas.  Both Kyushu University and the                       
              Kyushu Institute of Technology have ongoing experimental                       
              efforts taking place in this area.  Kyushu University is well                  
              advanced in experiments in vertical Bloch line memory and                      
              amorphous magnetic films.  Since Honeywell has no experimental                 
              effort in this area it is advantageous for Professor Pant to                   
              carry out his research at this University.  It is believed                     
              that the collaborations will be very successful and that this                  
              research will result in continued cooperation among the                        
              researchers.
