Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research: Self-Diffusion, Electrophoresis and Local
               Electrostatic Potentials of Glycosaminoglycans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9101058

Award Number: 9101058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tomas E. Gergely                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne F. Reed wreed@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a U.S./Brazil collaborative                                
              effort in biophysics between Wayne Reed of the                                 
              Physics Department at Tulane University, and Mario                             
              Politi and Iolanda Cuccovia of the Chemistry                                   
              Department at the University of Sao Paulo and Dino                             
              Zanette of the Federal University of Santa Catarina,                           
              both in Brazil.  The project will use the                                      
              Brazilians' expertise in synthetic chemistry and the                           
              American expertise in physical chemical                                        
              experimentation and theory to carry out                                        
              fluorescence-based measurements on a family of                                 
              important biological macromolecules                                            
              (glycosaminoglycans).  These experiments should                                
              provide data on the electrophoretic mobility, self-                            
              diffusion and local electrostatic potentials of                                
              these molecules.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The ultimate goal of the project is to relate                                  
              aspects of connective tissue biofunctionality, such                            
              as swelling pressure and compressibility, to the                               
              molecular properties of glycosaminoglycans.  This                              
              interdisciplinary effort will utilize synthetic                                
              chemical strategies to produce physical probes of                              
              macromolecular behavior.  Data on such behavior can                            
              then be correlated with modern theories of                                     
              diffusion, electrophoresis and electro-                                        
              thermodynamics in polymer physics, with                                        
              structure/functional theories in macromolecular                                
              biophysics, and with compressibility data and models                           
              in biomechanics.  They will also provide the basis                             
              and stimulus for the development of new models and                             
              theories in these interdisciplinary areas.
