Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Fourier Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9101298

Award Number: 9101298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan T. Greenleaf allan@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will study                     
              several problems associated with singular integrals and Fourier                
              integrals.  In particular, he will formulate classes of canonical              
              relations that apply to examples from integral geometry and                    
              isospectral deformations, and he will prove composition calculi                
              and sharp L-2 estimates for Fourier integral operators associated              
              with them.  The principal investigator will also look into the                 
              local solvability of systems of first-order pseudodifferential                 
              operators.  Finally he will obtain sharper estimates for                       
              degenerate pseudodifferential operators with singular symbols,                 
              and he will apply these results to degenerate Radon transforms.                
                   A number of problems in theoretical and applied analysis                  
              concern the inversion of an operation or a transformation.  For                
              example, the desired solution of a problem may be transformed                  
              into an equation that involves integrals or integral operators,                
              and then in order to obtain the solution, one must invert the                  
              transformation, that is, solve the integral equation.  In this                 
              project the principal investigator will analyze two classes of                 
              integral operators, in order to provide sharp estimates for the                
              solutions they represent.  One application of this work is to the              
              estimation of solutions of X-ray tomography problems.
