Title       : Dissertation Research: Tree Size at Reproductive Onset and Leaf-level
               Photosynthesis in Malaysia Primary Rainforest Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1991  
File        : a9101118

Award Number: 9101118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6820               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean C. Thomas  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research project explores relationships between tree              
              species size, measured as the height at onset of reproduction,                 
              and leaf-level photosynthetic light response.  A positive                      
              relationship between adult tree size and maximal light-saturated               
              photosynthetic rate (Pmax) among primary rainforest trees is                   
              predicted.  This prediction derives from a general correlation                 
              across environments between light levels and maximum rate of                   
              photosynthesis, and the presence of a strong, predictable light                
              gradient through the rainforest canopy.  Recent studies of                     
              physiological acclimation to sun and shade conditions suggest                  
              that photosynthetic acclimation is relatively limited in primary               
              tropical rainforest trees.  If this is so, Pmax values measured                
              for saplings should be similar to Pmax values for adult trees,                 
              and the proposed allometric relationship should be detectable                  
              from photosynthetic measurements on saplings.                                  
                                                                                             
              Measurement will be made of maximal light-saturated                            
              photosynthetic rate (Pmax) for saplings of 35 species for which                
              size and structural allometric data have been gathered.                        
              Differences in Pmax between saplings and mature trees of selected              
              species will be assessed.  Each genus included in the study spans              
              a wide size range, from understory treelets to canopy-level                    
              trees, making possible tests of phylogenetic differences.                      
                                                                                             
              This study represents the first attempt to examine photosynthetic              
              physiology of tropical rainforest trees in an allometric context.
