Title       : Reasoning Usefully about Mental States During Discourse Understanding: A
               Metaphor Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9101354

Award Number: 9101354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281712             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Barnden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Helmreich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6856,9216,
Abstract    :
              This Artificial Intelligence project investigates part of the                  
              problem of discerning the coherence relationships within natural               
              language discourse.  The relationships of interest are between                 
              discourse components that describe or presuppose mental states                 
              (propositional attitudes).  The mental states can be those of the              
              speaker, listener, or any person mentioned by the discourse, and               
              can be states of belief, intention hope, desire, etc.  The focus               
              of this work is on descriptions that rely implicitly of explicity              
              on commonsense models of the mind that people often deploy, such               
              as the prevalent model of a mind and its beliefs as respectively               
              a physical container and some physical objects within it.                      
              Commonsense models are frequently relied upon in mental-state                  
              descriptions and are important factors in discourse coherence                  
              relationships, yet previous detailed work on representing and                  
              reasoning about mental states has largely skirted the issues.                  
              This research relates strongly, however, to work by psychologists              
              and linguists on metaphor and metonymy, because the commonsense                
              models are metaphorical and metonymy is often involved as well.                
              The project includes the development of a prototype AL discourse-              
              interpretation system, as well as major data collection                        
              activities:  collection of information about mental-state                      
              language through experiments with human subjects, and through                  
              semi-automated examination of diverse natural language texts,                  
              including definitions and examples in machine-readable                         
              dictionaries.  Annotated compendia of examples from these texts                
              will be produced.  The project is also concered with the                       
              relationship between mental-state descriptions in English and                  
              those in other language, notably Spanish, with a view to                       
              contributing to machine-translation work at our laboratory.
