Title       : Improved Aequorin for Ca Assay in Functioning Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9101712

Award Number: 9101712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osamu Shimomura shimomur@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The photoprotein aequorin, first isolated by the P.I. in 1962, has             
              been widely used as a calcium indicator in living cells.  The                  
              preparations of aequorin used in the past were undefined mixtures              
              of many isoaequorins.  Recently, three categories of improved forms            
              of aequorin were prepared in this laboratory:  1)  homogeneous                 
              isoaequorins isolated from heterogeneous aequorin, 2)  recombinant             
              aequorin prepared by molecular cloning, and 3) semi-synthetic                  
              aequorins obtained by replacing the functional group of various                
              aequorins with various synthetic analogs.  Semi-synthetic aequorins            
              have highly advantageous properties in measuring intracellular                 
              calcium but are not yet fully utilized.  The main objective of this            
              project is to improve the usability of the new types of aequorin.              
              Studies planned include:  1) detailed investigation concerning the             
              calcium triggered luminescence of semi-synthetic aequorins, to                 
              improve the effective utilization of these aequorins; 2)                       
              development of a new ratio method of measuring calcium, employing              
              semi-synthetic aequorins; 3) development of a method to produce                
              stabilized preparations of aequorin that are more convenient to                
              transport and use.  In addition, sufficient amounts of various                 
              kinds of aequorin will be produced for distribution to cell                    
              biologists and physiologists for their use in research.                        
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will be a variety of improved                     
              luminescent probes for measurement of free calcium within living               
              cells.  These probes, in combination with modern techniques of                 
              computer assisted light microscope imaging, will ultimately make               
              it possible to visualize and quantitate the movement of calcium                
              into and out of cells and between intracellular compartments during            
              the response of a cell to a physiological signal.
