Title       : Problems in Operator and Matrix Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9988579

Award Number: 9988579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leiba Rodman lxrodm@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugo J. Woerdeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ilya M. Spitkovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

Professors Rodman, Spitkovsky and Woerdeman will continue their
              study of a
variety of problems in operator and matrix analysis and their
              applications
in science and engineering.  These include: (1) Completion of
              Triangular
Operators, (2) Interpolation, (3) Indefinite Inner Product Spaces,
              (4)
Almost Periodic Factorization, (5) Orthogonal Polynomials of
              Several
Variables and Generalizations.  For completion problems, invariants
              and
semiinvariants of the triangular group action will be studied and
              then
used in the Jordan form and operator spectrum assignment problems.
              Normal
completions and positive definite 2D Toeplitz completions will also
              be
looked into.  Multipoint interpolation for matrix valued functions will
              be
developed, and further advances in interpolation of matrix and
              operator
functions with symmetries will be obtained. Applications of
              non-stationary
interpolation will be explored. Classification of normal
              operators on
indefinite inner product spaces will be developed, and
              generalized further
to a spectral theory for sets of commuting J-selfadjoint
              operators. Study
of polar decomposition and J-spectral factorization will be
              continued. The
PIs will also continue their research on positive and
              contractive
extension problems for almost periodic matrix functions in
              several
variables, with additional emphasis on the computational aspects. 
              The
related issues include invertibility and Fredholmness criteria
              for
Toeplitz operators with almost periodic matrix symbols, finite
              section
methods for these operators on Besikovitch spaces, and
              explicit
factorization of almost periodic matrix functions in one and
              several
variables. Orthogonal polynomials of several variables, 
related
              minimizing polynomials, and their connections with Riemann-Hilbert problems
              will be investigated with the use of the new band method developed by the PIs
              recently.

The proposed research concerns classical areas of analysis and
              operator
theory. The choice of topics is both influenced by and aimed
              to
applications. For example, the expected results in the theory
              of
orthogonal polynomials for several variables and related
              completion
problems will be used in filter design, compression and analysis
              of
images, texture modeling, and multivariate stochastic processes. 
              
Classical (Wiener-Hopf) factorization has been used as a powerful tool
              in
integral equations, partial differential equations and 
diffraction
              theory. The PIs will continue their study of its natural generalization 
to
              almost periodic matrix valued functions (of one and several variables)
              which
arises in consideration of integral equations on finite intervals
              and
related problems in inverse scattering and other parts of
              mathematical
physics. Another example concerns polar decompositions 
of
              operators acting on Krein spaces motivated by linear optics of polarized light.
              
Interaction with scientists and engineers is anticipated. In addition, the
              PIs will
also involve undergraduate students in their research.



