Title       : Augmenting the Periphery with Large-Scale Visual Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9988712

Award Number: 9988712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $577191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth D. Mynatt mynatt@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory M. Corso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Blair MacIntyre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to explore and evaluate the addition of visual
              peripheral displays to human-computer interfaces.  Through a series of
              laboratory experiments, in conjunction with usability evaluations and field
              trials of system prototypes, the PI will conduct an in-depth exploration of how
              peripheral information can be used effectively in an office setting.   The PI
              and her team will design and build an interface that uses projected visual
              displays to extend the user's virtual workspace past the confines of his/her
              desktop monitor, and then use it to augment an office environment in a way that
              supports current working practices. The emphasis on supporting current work
              practice, with its resulting inclusion of desktop computers, is in sharp
              contrast to visions of tomorrow's world where the desktop computer is replaced
              by either a plethora of computing devices (ubiquitous computing) or a single
              personal head-worn display that superimposes information over the wearer's view
              of the world (wearable augmented reality).   The PI posits that her approach,
              coupled with a set of carefully designed laboratory experiments, will lead to a
              deep understanding of the issues involved in deploying peripheral displays in
              realistic environments.   This research is expected to have several important
              outcomes.   It will lead to techniques for determining and modeling a user's
              working contexts, especially the ranking and clustering of documents within
              those contexts;  these will enable the user to easily shift between tasks,
              quickly regaining the last state of previous efforts and maintaining an
              awareness of documents used in the past.  This research will also lead to
              techniques for visually presenting peripheral information, perhaps as visual
              montages designed to take advantage of peripheral perception mechanisms by
              conveying the salient portions of a piece of information, including its
              surrounding context, while remaining unobtrusive.   Finally, the research will
              provide insight into the design of a 3D peripheral space that augments the use
              of traditional desktop terminals, with emphasis on the division of this space
              into logical groups based on the relevance and familiarity of the material, and
              the dynamic behavior of the space as material becomes more or less relevant to
              the current task. 

