Title       : A Wide-Field Deconvolution Microscope for Cell and Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a9988767

Award Number: 9988767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred D. Sack   (Principal Investigator current)
              Berl R. Oakley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Desh Pal S. Verma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harald Vaessin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine E. Beattie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsonwin Hai  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Sack
A Wide-Field Deconvolution Microscope for Cell and Developmental
              Biology

Deconvolution microscopy provides superior spatial resolution
              (especially at high magnification) that is ideal for co-localizing multiple
              fluorescent probes in fixed and living cells in three dimensions. A wide-field
              deconvolution microscopy facility will be established at Ohio State University.
               The system will be configured around a Zeiss Axiophot 2 microscope with
              motorized stage, a high-resolution cooled CCD camera, and integrated software
              for image acquisition and deconvolution.  
Current core users will focus on
              the cell and developmental biology of plant, neurobiological and fungal
              material.  Specific projects include: (1) the molecular functions of genes
              controlling cell proliferation, terminal differentiation, and axonal outgrowth
              in the Drosophila nervous systems, (2) the cell biology and regulation of plant
              vesicular trafficking and cytokinesis, (3) the functions and localization of
              g-tubulin in Arabidopsis and Aspergillus, (4) genes and mechanisms controlling
              stomatal patterning and development in Arabidopsis, (5) the molecular genetic
              regulation of axonal outgrowth in zebrafish, (6) functional interactions
              between plant nuclear matrix proteins, and (7) the differential spatial
              regulation of protein and mRNA localization within mouse Purkinje
              cells.
Deconvolution imaging is highly likely to advance the understanding of
              the function and localization of specific proteins in several model systems. 
              This facility will enhance interactions between cell and developmental
              biologists in the College of Biological Sciences, the Plant Biotechnology
              Center and the Neurobiotechnology Center.  It will also contribute
              substantively to the training of post-doctoral researchers, graduate students
              and undergraduate students.

