Title       : Power Management for Computing Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9988527

Award Number: 9988527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett D. Fleisch brett@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2876,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Brett D. Fleisch, University of California, Riverside

PROJECT
              ABSTRACT:
This research examines architectures, hardware, software, and
              algorithmic
techniques to  conserve energy in a distributed system cluster. 
              The research focuses on
improvement for better energy conservation. The
              research encompasses 1) monitoring and analysis and 2)
improvement for better
              energy conservation including local optimizations and cluster-wide
              
optimizations.  For 1), the research will quantify power consumption costs
              for 
various configurations of networked systems.  The research will gather
              and observe traffic in cluster systems that affects energy consumption and
              performance.  For 2), the research will consider both local optimizations and
              cluster-wide optimizations that will improve energy conservation. For local
              optimizations, there will be
low level improvements in device management,
              base-level communication algorithms, 
system daemons, drivers and systems
              applications. For cluster-wide optimizations, 
the research will consider a
              global process manager (GPM) similar to a load 
balancer that will move
              applications between sites based on criteria that includes 
both performance
              and power savings.  

The expected outcome of the research could suggest
              model topologies, networking technology, and 
software modifications for
              energy efficient distributed systems of the future.  Lastly, the research could
              
lead to improved algorithms for conventional systems software to operate in a
              more power-efficient 
manner. 

