Title       : Studies in Algebraic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9988459

Award Number: 9988459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Stanley RSTAN@MATH.MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will continue his research in enumerative and algebraic
              combinatorics.  He feels that there are many opportunities for strengthening
              the myriad connections between combinatorics and other branches of mathematics.
               He will investigate how recent breakthroughs in the theory of total positivity
              can be applied to open problems concerning such topics as counting faces in
              cubical polytopes and counting stable sets in clawfree graphs.  The
              investigator will also continue his research on the combinatorial properties of
              convex polytopes that have arisen in such areas as statistical inference and
              the representation theory of semisimple Lie algebras.  In particular, he will
              investigate further some convex polytopes related to Kostant's partition
              function.  He will in addition pursue a number of miscellaneous problems
              arising in the work of Kac, Kontsevich, Varchenko, and others.

The field of
              combinatorics was first systematically investigated in the 1960's and only
              recently has reached a high level of maturity.  It is an area of mathematics
              that has close connections with many other subjects, ranging from algebra,
              geometry, and statistics within mathematics, andcomputer science, high-energy
              physics, chemistry, and most recently biology without.  The investigator's
              primary interest is the development of connections between combinatorics and
              other areas of mathematics.  He will investigate a number of problems that
              would continue the development of the connections between combinatorics and
              other branches of mathematics and that would lead to the development of tools
              that could be used by scientists outside of mathematics.

