Title       : Real analytic geometry and model theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a9988855

Award Number: 9988855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78246              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Miller miller@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Miller proposes to continue his research on the model theory of
expansions of
              the field of real numbers, concentrating on further
developing the model
              theory and analytic geometry associated with
o-minimal, and certain other
              well-behaved, expansions of the field of
real numbers. He intends to do this
              by applying techniques from
descriptive set theory and  geometric measure
              theory in addition to the
model-theoretic and analytic-geometric techniques
              usually associated
with o-minimality. In turn, Miller hopes to apply
              model-theoretic
techniques to questions in descriptive set theory and
              geometric measure
theory. Miller has also begun to collaborate with applied
              mathematicians
and control engineers on applications of model theory to hybrid
              control
systems, and intends to continue.


Many results of so-called
              classical mathematics are very general; they
apply to a wide variety of input,
              so to speak, so we must expect to have
to deal with a correspondingly wide
              variety of output.  However, we
could hope that if the input is, in some
              respect, particularly well
behaved, then the output would be similarly well
              behaved. This turns out
to be true in many important cases, but to see this 
              usually requires
new, more constructive proofs of classical results, as well
              as a deeper
understanding of the good properties of the input. Before we can
              even
begin such projects, though, we need some way of deciding
              which
mathematical objects (inputs) should be considered as well behaved,
              and
which should be considered as troublesome. This can be a
              difficult
matter. The theory of o-minimal structures on the real field,
              a
sub-discipline of mathematical logic, has been developed in large part
to
              deal with this issue. This has been a rapidly-developing area for the
last
              decade, with many contributions from---and cooperation
between---several
              branches of mathematics and logic. Applications, and
potential applications,
              of these developments have been found in areas
as diverse as theoretical
              economics, neural-net learning theory, and
hybrid control systems.

