Title       : Compiling Knowledge for Tractable and Embedded Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9988543

Award Number: 9988543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adnan Darwiche darwiche@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Knowledge compilation has been emerging recently as a new direction of research
              for dealing with the computational intractability of general propositional
              reasoning.  In this approach, the reasoning process is split into two phases:
              an off-line compilation phase and an on-line query-answering phase.   In the
              off-line phase the propositional theory is compiled into some target language,
              which is typically a tractable one. In the on-line phase, the compiled target
              is used to efficiently answer a (potentially) exponential number of queries.  
              The main motivation behind knowledge compilation is to push as much of the
              computational overhead as possible into the off-line phase, in order to
              amortize that overhead over all on-line queries.    Another motivation behind
              compilation is to produce very simplistic on-line reasoning systems, which can
              be embedded cost-effectively into primitive computational platforms, such as
              those found in consumer electronics.

The focus of this research is on a new
              compilation target language, known as Decomposable Negation Normal Form (DNNF)
              which is universal (contrary to Horn theories), supports more polynomial-time
              operations than Horn theories and prime implicates, is more space-efficient
              than OBDDs, and is very simplistic as far as its structure and algorithms are
              concerned.  Therefore, DNNF represents a new, interesting point on the
              four-dimensional structure of universality, tractability, efficiency and
              simplicity.   The class of polynomial-time DNNF operations is sufficient to
              fully implement relatively complex AI applications, such as model-based
              diagnosers and universal planners.    Moreover, its space-efficiency
              establishes a very significant bottom-line for the effectiveness of DNNF-based
              compilations, given the current success of the OBDD community in compiling
              quite complex propositional theories.

There are four major objectives of
              this proposal. The first, and most central objective, is to push the DNNF
              compilation envelope along three dimensions:   to develop algorithms that
              generate much smaller DNNF compilations than is currently possible;    to
              develop a DNNF compiler which can incrementally change a DNNF compilation in
              light of incremental changes to the underlying theory;    and to develop the
              theory of approximate DNNFs, which can be used to answer only a predetermined
              class of queries.   The second objective is to pursue the applicability of
              DNNFs to the compilation of universal planners, an objective which is made
              possible by recent advances on satisfiability-based planning.    The third
              objective is to develop a hardware implementation of some DNNF operations using
              Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) in order to permit the compilation of
              certain diagnosis and planning applications into hardware.   The fourth
              objective of this proposal is to conduct an investigation on some of the
              theoretical underpinnings necessary to fully understand the relationship
              between DNNF and other tractable forms, such as Horn theories and
              OBDDs.

This project will make a strong impact on the theory and practice of
              propositional reasoning in intelligent systems.   On the theoretical side, it
              will shed new light on the compilability of propositional reasoning and on the
              relationship between various target compilation languages, such as OBDDs, Horn
              theories and prime implicates.    On the practical  side, it will yield on-line
              reasoning systems which are more tractable than is currently  possible, and
              will enable the migration of certain AI applications (diagnosis and planning in
              particular) onto platforms with primitive computational resources.  This may
              provide a solid foundation for embedded intelligence, as exercised in the
              powerful framework of propositional reasoning.

