Title       : Exploiting Object Relationships for More Deterministic Management of Distributed
               Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9988250

Award Number: 9988250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66141              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig E. Wills cew@cs.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Caching and replication of objects on the Internet and the World Wide Web are
              frequently used techniques to reduce latencies for clients accessing these
              objects while reducing network and server load.  This work investigates the
              potential of managing objects where servers supply more complete information to
              client caches and use the information to manage replicated content.  The idea
              is to exploit composite objects, which group a set of distinct objects where
              each object has a uniform type and change characteristic.  Relationships
              between these objects can be "compiled" at a server into information that the
              server can pass to clients.  Such information ranges from explicit expiration
              times for caching/replicating a list of objects to invalidations based on the
              object membership in a volume of related objects.

A client/server
              environment consisting of objects with different types and relationships will
              be used to test the approach.  It is expected to yield more effective and
              predictable caching as well as drive placement and removal of replicated
              content, particularly when combined with client access counts.  The work will
              have continued impact as distributed object environments continue to grow in
              size with increasing diversity in the type of objects grouped together and
              served.

