Title       : Multiscale Hierarchical Analysis of Protein Structure and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9988519

Award Number: 9988519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $898999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Elber ron@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              L. P. Chew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon M. Kleinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Shalloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapid growth in the number of experimentally determined protein structures
              has accentuated
the need for theoretical and computational methods that can
              make this data useful. The proposed
research aims to provide tools for
              important applications in computational molecular biology, such
as protein
              engineering and structure-based drug design, as well as scientific explorations
              of
structure-function relationships. This goal can be achieved through the
              ability to predict the
conformational changes that occur when proteins and
              ligands interact. Protein engineering to alter
enzyme specificity or to
              enhance stability under adverse conditions can also benefit from a
predictive
              understanding of the motions involved in protein folding, unfolding, and
              catalysis. An
attack on this wide range of challenging problems requires
              algorithmic breakthroughs, enormous
computing power, and powerful techniques
              for visualization.

Computational molecular biology uses information at the
              atomic level to study biologically
relevant phenomena. Interpolating from the
              behavior of individual atoms to the collective behavior
of complex biological
              molecules such as proteins presents a significant theoretical
              and
computational challenge. Unfortunately, the available computational
              methods to study protein
dynamics over long ranges of time are far from
              satisfactory due to a number of severe difficulties,
including: (1) The time
              scales involved in theoretical/computational prediction span an
              enormous
range: about fifteen orders of magnitude. (2) The conformation space
              of relevant protein shapes has
very large dimension (> 10000) and the
              corresponding energy functions are quite jagged, making
calculations expensive
              and difficult. (3) Algorithms for comparing/manipulating molecular shape
are
              expensive in terms of both implementation difficulty and computational
              time.

To resolve these difficulties the investigators are applying a variety
              of ideas centered on the
theme of multiscaling: for time scales, for energy
              landscapes, and for measuring structural
similarity at different levels of
              resolution. Algorithm development in the proposed area requires a
unique blend
              of interdisciplinary expertise that is found within this team of investigators.
              The team
includes a theoretical chemist who is an expert in protein dynamics,
              a theoretical physicist who is an
expert in molecular biology and biophysics,
              and three computer scientists who bring expertise in
geometric and
              combinatorial algorithms at both theoretical and experimental levels. This
              combined
expertise is reinforced by a supportive interdisciplinary environment
              and excellent parallel
computing resources.

This research has three primary
              goals: (1) to broaden the range of time-scales for which
meaningful Molecular
              Dynamics simulations of proteins are possible; (2) to improve
              our
understanding of protein conformation space and the associated energy
              functions through the use
of hierarchical multiscaling techniques; and (3) to
              enable the processing of proteins-as-shapes to
proceed as easily as proteins
              are now processed as strings (over the 20-symbol alphabet of amino
acids).
              Advances in these areas will significantly improve protein understanding,
              allowing
computational experiments involving protein dynamics over wide ranges
              of time. Such improved
computational abilities can potentially lead to
              important advances in the understanding of biology
and the design of medicinal
              drugs.
