Title       : Solving Crossing Number Problems With Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9988525

Award Number: 9988525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhad Shahrokhi farhad@cs.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A drawing of a graph is a one-to-one placement of the vertices and edges into
              the plane so that the edges become continuous curves.  Many important problems
              in theory of VLSI and computational geometry can be stated as graph drawing
              problems.  For instance, the problem minimizing the number of edge crossings,
              or the crossing number problem, has been extensively studied in theory of VLSI.
               Moreover, a class of interesting problems in discrete and computational
              geometry exhibit structures which can viewed as variations, generalizations and
              extensions of the notion of crossings.  Some of these problems can be
              reformulated as problems concerning cliques, independent sets and the chromatic
              numbers of the intersection graphs of drawings.  In addition, automatic
              generation of drawings is customary in many scientific areas in which
              diagrammatic representations are used.
Most of these problems are
              computationally difficult, and therefore it only makes sense to focus on the
              design of approximation algorithms for solving them.  Unfortunately, geometric
              properties of many such problems are not well understood, and additional
              research is needed to investigate the design of new and effective approximation
              algorithms, or to sharpen and improve the performance of the existing
              algorithms for solving them.

This project is aimed at studying a collection
              of problems that arise in drawings of graphs in the plane.  The theoretical
              goal is to develop new structural results and theoretically efficient
              approximation algorithms that can produce provably near optimal solutions.  The
              experimental goal is to implement these algorithms and test and document their
              effectiveness in practice.  

