Title       : Analysis of Uncertainty in Local and Telecollaborative Virtual Reality
               Applications in Design and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9988136

Award Number: 9988136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pat Banerjee banerjee@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for a framework for estimating, in advance, the
              probability of the user's ability to successfully execute an operation on an
              object in a virtual reality environment (e.g. picking, placing, pressing,
              holding, drive-through, fly-through), given the current positional and temporal
              uncertainties based on design (controllable) and noise (uncontrollable) factors
              in the environment.  The positional and temporal uncertainties are
              characterized.  For positional uncertainty analysis a six-element pose vector 
              (three for position and three for orientation along three cartesian coordinate
              axes) is used, and for temporal uncertainty a six-element state vector (three
              for position and three for  velocity) is used.  A 6x6 covariance matrix, which
              is the expectation of the square of the difference between the pose or state
              estimate and the true vector, is proposed to characterize the uncertainty.  A
              useful interpretation of the covariance matrix can be obtained by assuming that
              the errors are jointly Gaussian.  The research project is to iteratively
              predict the covariance matrix and correct it by fusing new sensor measurements
              as they arrive by minimizing the geometric volume of the ellipsoid of
              uncertainty among all possible linear combinations of sensory
              information.

If successful, the results of this research will improve the
              understanding of nominal object size threshold for virtual environments,
              nominal user interaction speed threshold, and probability densities of virtual
              analysis task outcomes, which can then be used to more accurately estimate the
              cost projections.  A utility function for expressing user attitude in virtual
              environment in light of the embedded uncertainties is possible based on the
              results.  The uncertainty analysis will be able to address design factors such
              as: object boundary  interpretation errors, real environment-virtual
              environment mapping/registration errors, blind spots and occlusions, and low
              frame rate errors and errors that occur because of  fast movement of user or
              object.

