Title       : Meta-logical Frameworks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a9988281

Award Number: 9988281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Pfenning fp@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Formal deductive systems play a central role in the areas of programming
              languages
and logics. Firstly, they are used to define languages and their
              semantics at a very
high-level of abstraction (e.g., type systems or
              operational semantics). Secondly,
they form the basis for the implementation
              of algorithms pertaining to languages
(e.g., type inference or
              interpretation). Thirdly, they provide a common basis for
the study of
              meta-theory of programming languages and logics (e.g., preservation of
types
              under evaluation).

Motivated by the tremendous variety of deductive systems
              of interest in com-
puter science and logic, general meta-languages for their
              specification have been
investigated by the author and others. These
              meta-languages are often referred to
as logical frameworks. When they emphasis
              is placed meta-theoretic reasoning they
have been called meta-logical
              frameworks. The primary objective of the proposed
work is to further the
              theory and practice of logic-independent, computer-assisted
formal reasoning
              and meta-reasoning.

This is a renewal of the current NSF Grant CCR-9619584.
              Prior relevant work
by the proposer and the results from the current grant
              include the design and im-
plementation of the logic programming language Elf
              based on the logical framework
LF, released in September 1998 under the name
              Twelf. Extensive case studies have
confirmed the wide range of applicability
              of the methodology underlying Twelf and
its extension to a linear type theory.
              The primary emphasis of the work proposed
under this renewal will be
              applications in education and research, and the practical
and theoretical
              issues suggested by these applications.
