Title       : Low-Energy Datapath Design for Programmable Digital Signal Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9988262

Award Number: 9988262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keshab K. Parhi parhi@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research concentrates on design of low-energy application-specific
              datapaths, low-energy schedules, and design tradeoffs with respect to number of
              datapaths, level of pipelining and scheduling approaches. Applications are to
              datapath design for low-energy implementation of digital signal processing and
              cryptography systems using programmable digital signal processors. A VLIW (very
              long instruction word) type programmable DSP (PDSP) is assumed. In such a PDSP,
              different datapaths can be independently activated through the VLIW instruction
              word. This research seeks modifications of datapaths in existing PDSP and
              design of new datapaths that do not exist in current PDSPs for low power
              implementations. The emphasis here is on simultaneous datapath and scheduling
              or software co-selection. It is important not only to design the best datapaths
              but also to design best scheduling approaches to reduce switching activity in
              the datapaths to reduce energy consumption. In the context of fixed and
              adaptive FIR digital filters and equalizers, the goal is to find datapaths
              which are best suited to transpose-form FIR filters, to use strength-reduced
              parallel structures to reduce the number of clock cycles and to perform
              scheduling by switching activity. In RLS adaptive filters for space-time
              adaptive processing and multi-user detection problems in wireless
              communications, a hierarchical scheduling approach is being explored. Here a
              globally parallel locally sequential partitioning approach is adopted where
              each partition is mapped to a distinct CORDIC datapath. Within each partition
              Givens' rotation operations are scheduled to reduce switching activity. In
              elliptic cryptosystem design, the goal is to reduce energy consumption by
              appropriate hardware-software codesign and parametric tradeoff analysis. 


