Title       : A Near-Field Scanning, Phase-Contrast Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9988761

Award Number: 9988761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hocken hocken@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Moyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrill W. Mayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a near-field scanning optical
              microscope (NSOM) which utilizes a unique phase-contrast mechanism. The
              standard NSOM, available commercially, has allowed the range of visible light
              microscopy to be extended into the nanometer range of spatial resolution
              normally reserved for electron microscopes.  However, unlike the electron
              microscope, an NSOM can image specimens in their natural environment (i.e.,
              liquids and ambient pressures) and can obtain scanning force surface profiles
              simultaneous with intensity images.  An NSOM takes advantage of the same
              contrast mechanisms available to conventional far-field methods (i.e.,
              fluorescence, transmission, polarization, spectroscopy, reflectivity, and
              phase).  The instrument proposed here would combine standard NSOM operation
              with pure phase imaging to provide a novel quantifiable NSOM phase-contrast
              measuring instrument useful for the metrology of a broad range of micro and
              meso scale devices.

Measurement of objects at a molecular or near molecular
              scale is becoming increasingly important in many disciplines.  These objects
              range from engineering surfaces, such as optical discs, magnetic disks,
              integrated circuits, and diamond turned optics to catalytic arrays of platinum,
              DNA molecules, cell biology, and nanoscale flaws in crystals.  Far-field phase
              microscopy is currently a workhorse method of analysis in all of these areas.
              Success of this project will extend phase microscopy into the nanometer region.
              Particular systems to be studied in this work include biological cells,
              photoresist masks, and optical fibers.  The semiconductor industry roadmap
              calls for 70-nm linewidths, which cannot be quantifiably measured with current
              optical methods.  In addition, with the rapid growth of the optical fiber
              industry, determination of index of refraction profiles of optical fibers with
              50-nm resolution will help manufacturers with fiber design and quality control
              processes.  Combined with the need for higher spatial resolution analytical
              tools, success of this particular project will be of value to many
              disciplines.

