Title       : Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9988536

Award Number: 9988536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma R. Dieter                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166451             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Askew taskew@hboi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Findley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 5416      SHIPBOARD SCIENTIFIC SUPP EQUI
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9988536  
Timothy Askew

This project will supply shipboard scientific
              support equipment to support National Science Foundation-funded projects using
              vessels operated by Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc. (HBOI) and
              supported by the University of Miami RSMAS Marine Technical Support Group under
              a Cooperative Marine Operations Program (CMOP).  Research vessels involved
              include the R/Vs Edwin Link, Seward Johnson, and Sea Diver which are operated
              by HBOI, and the R/V Walton Smith operated by RSMAS; all vessels are dedicated
              to use in support of ocean science research.  The Shipboard Scientific Support
              Equipment Program provides funds for ship equipment deemed essential to the
              proper and safe conduct of ocean science research. This Program provides
              support for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the
              deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational equipment such
              as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite receivers to pin point the location
              of research sites, communication equipment including radio transceivers and
              satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data communications and other
              equipment such as motorized workboats for transporting scientists to and from
              data retrieval sites.  The Project Director, Timothy Askew, is fully qualified
              to direct this project having had considerable experience in overseeing the
              acquisition and installation of shipboard equipment.  This project will allow
              the institution to acquire Counter-Balanced Trawl Block, Slip Rings, Markey CTD
              Winch, ARPA Radar, Rigid Hull Inflatable with Motor, Outboard Motors, and
              Glosten Stability Program.  
***

