Title       : Practical Techniques for the Measurement of Ultrashort Laser Pulses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9988706

Award Number: 9988706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Trebino   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



The measurement of ultrashort laser pulses remains an arduous task. 
              Theautocorrelator, the device of choice for decades, is complex, comprising
              many components.  The pulse must be split into two; the two pulses must then be
              spatially and temporally overlapped in a carefully
              aligned
second-harmonic-generation (SHG) crystal; and the pulse relative delay
              must be scanned while maintaining alignment.  Alignment involves four sensitive
              degrees of freedom and has great potential for error.  Worse, bandwidth
              considerations require a very thin SHG crystal, which severely limits device
              sensitivity.

Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating (FROG), which yields the full
              time-dependent pulse intensity and phase, requires adding a spectrometer to an
              autocorrelator apparatus, further complicating an already complicated
              apparatus.  And FROG is the simplest proven intensity-and-phase measurement
              device.  As a result, we have developed a remarkably
              simple,
full-intensity-and-phase pulse-measurement device that 1) uses no
              spectrometer, 2) uses no beam-splitter or delay line, 3) avoids the thin
              crystal and instead uses a more convenient, thick SHG crystal, 4) is
              considerably more sensitive, 5) involves no sensitive alignment parameters,
6)
              can measure a single pulse, and 7) comprises only a few simple optical
              components.  It yields traces identical to those of SHG FROG, and hence yields
              the full time-dependent pulse intensity and phase.  This device incorporates
              two key innovations: 1) a Fresnel biprism (a prism with a 170 apex angle),
              which replaces the beam splitter and delay line, and 2) a thick
nonlinear
              crystal, whose output light is angularly resolved, yielding spectral resolution
              (as well as improved sensitivity and the usual time-gating), and which replaces
              the thin crystal and spectrometer.





