Title       : Fundamental Development of Mathematical Techniques and Computational Metrology
               for Coordinate Metrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9988664

Award Number: 9988664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Kurfess tom.kurfess@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                        The goal of this research project is to advance mathematical and
              computational geometry tools to effectively and efficiently determine if the
              geometry of an artifact meets the target geometry that is specified. To achieve
              this task two primary objectives will be pursued. The first is the development
              of point-to-surface assignment based on a linearly faceted geometric model
              using a modified Voronoi diagram technique. A mathematical proof demonstrating
              that the faceted model in conjunction with the computational metrology
              techniques developed in this research will be developed to prove that the
              point-to-surface assignment is correct for the true (non-faceted) model. The
              second major objective is to derive the analytic partial derivatives for spline
              surfaces of any order. These partial derivatives will be tested against both
              numerical derivatives as well as currently used approximation techniques for
              both speed and accuracy. Finally, to demonstrate that the fundamental
              developments in mathematics and computational metrology are realistic and of
              use, they will be implemented and tested on a variety of industrial
              applications.

          If successful, the results of this research will
              provide faster and more accurate analyses of manufactured parts. The
              mathematics developed in this research to precisely align points to complex
              geometric surface models will permit improved analysis of parts such as complex
              injection molds and airfoil geometries. Furthermore, the techniques to be
              developed will also substantially reduce the computational time necessary to
              inspect complex geometries that have been made feasible via new manufacturing
              techniques, such as rapid prototyping. It is anticipated that the accuracy and
              speed results of this research will provide the enabling technology to directly
              and economically integrate optical and tactile scanning technology into
              production facilities such as automotive and aerospace facilities for use in
              real-time feedback for quality control.
