Title       : Further Studies in Complexity and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9988526

Award Number: 9988526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Saks saks@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PI:  Michael Saks
Proposal Number:  9988526
Institution:  Rutgers
              University

This project covers ongoing and new work in several diverse areas
              in the theory of computation:

(1) Time-space tradeoffs for branching
              programs,
(2) Exact algorithms for  NP-Hard problems,
(3) Private Information
              Retrieval, and 
(4) Online algorithms for distributed web servers,


Two
              basic resources in computation are computation time
and memory (space).  There
              are many computational problems known where there seems to be a  tradeoff
              between these resources: by increasingthe memory used one can significantly
              reduce the time needed.  However, we don't know whether these apparent
              tradeoffs are inherent properties of the  computational problems, or are just
              due to our lack of understanding. The first part of the project aims at
              analyzing the mathematical structure of some specific computational problems in
              order to establish that these tradeoffs are indeed inherent. There is a large
              class of problems, the so-called NP-complete problems, whose solution on large
              inputs seems to require a very large amount of time. One of the most basic of
              these is the satisfiability problem for boolean formulas, which asks whether
              for a given boolean formula it is possible to set its variables in such a way
              that the formula evaluates to 1. In the second part of this investigation, we
              seek to find the faster algorithms for this problem, and to investigate the
              limits to speed of the algorithms, as well as for related computational
              problems. The third part is based on a problem that arises in trying to
              maintain the privacy of users who request information from a large database. 
              In some such situations, the users do not want it known what information they
              are requesting. Various methods for maintaining user privacy have been
              proposed.  In some versions of this problem, maintaining privacy seems to
              require a large amount of communication between the user and the database.  In
              this investigation, we seek to determine whether such a large amount of
              communication is really necessary, and if so, whether small relaxations in the
              privacy requirements can significantly reduce the communication cost. In the
              fourth part, we look at the problem of a web server that is providing documents
              from a large library to users on the web.  The requests for documents arrive
              over time, and the server wants to satisfy the requests so that no requester
              ever waits too long.  Because a set of requests to the same page can be served
              faster than the same number of requests to different pages, it may be
              advantageous to delay some requests in order to group together requests of the
              same type. We seek to develop and analyze different algorithmic strategies for
              this problem.

