Title       : Diophantine Definability and Decidability Over the Algebraic Extensions of
               Global Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9988620

Award Number: 9988620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80781              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra Shlapentokh shlapentokha@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The investigator will study the issues of Diophantine definability
              and decidability over global fields and their algebraic extensions.  The long
              term goal of the project is to gain insight into  Diophantine (un)decidability
              of  Q and rings of algebraic integers of number fields.  The immediate goal is
              to study  Diophantine definability over some subrings of number fields and
              function fields.  In particular, if one thinks of the field as a ring where all
              the primes are allowed to occur in the "denominators" of the elements, then
              integers and rings of integral functions and numbers, where we understand the
              problem relatively well, can be considered as rings where no primes or only
              finitely many primes are allowed in the denominator.  Thus a natural
              intermediate step for the project is to understand what happens in the rings
              where infinitely many primes are allowed to appear in the denominator of the
              divisors of the elements.  These rings constitute the main focus of study by
              the Principal Investigator.  A related issue is the problem of defining of
              integrality at sets of primes using polynomial equations.  This problem has
              been solved for many fields for the case when the prime sets are finite. 
              However, even for the finite sets the question is open for the primes whose
              residue fields are algebraically closed.  The investigator also plans to study
              this problem with the goal of identifying situations where this kind of
              integrality is not definable in Diophantine terms.

In 1900, during an
              International Congress of  Mathematicians, a great German Mathematician David
              Hilbert presented a list of problems which had great influence on the
              development of Mathematics in the XX century and whose influnce is likely to
              extend to the XXI century.  The tenth problem on the list asked a question
              which, if rephrased in modern terms, can be stated as follows.  Is there a
              computer program which can determine whether an arbitrary polynomial equation
              in several variables has solutions in integers (whole numbers) ?  The answer
              turned out to be "no".  It took many years to obtain and it finally emerged in
              the late sixties in the work of Yurii Matyasevich building on results of Julia
              Robinson, Martin Davis and David Putnam.  There has been speculation that
              Hilbert did not expect this answer.  He hoped for an algorithm to "solve" all
              polynomial equations.  Such an algorithm would also solve all polynomial
              equations where the answers are allowed to be fractions.  The absence of the
              computer program for integer solutions left the question wide open for the case
              when we allow rational numbers (fractions) as solutions.  The answer to the
              question of what happens when we allow solutions to polynomial equations to be
              fractions is the long term goal of the project.  However, this problem
              currently seems too hard to approach directly.  As in many other situations in
              Mathematics, a gradual assault is probably necessary.  As a first step in our
              program we plan to move from integers to fractions in stages. If one thinks of
              rational numbers as a collection of numbers where any non-zero number is
              allowed in the denominator, and integers as a collection of numbers where no
              number is allowed in the denominator, one can visualize an intermediate step as
              a the study of collections of numbers where some but not all numbers are
              allowed in the denominator.  The investigator's immediate goal is to study such
              sets of numbers.  

Finally we should note that polynomial equations over
              rational numbers are present in virtually every part of Mathematics and its
              applications.  Thus understanding their logic properties is likely to shed
              light on many other problems.



