Title       : Effect of Hydrogen on the Elastic Modulus and Hardness of Gamma Titanium
               Aluminides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9988846

Award Number: 9988846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Sundaram psundaram@me.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick A. Just-Agosto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9988846	
Sundaram

In preliminary microindentation tests, gamma titanium
              aluminide (TiAl) samples charged with hydrogen for different times at room
              temperature exhibited lower values of elastic modulus and hardness compared to
              uncharged samples. On degassing the samples, the original values of hardness
              and elastic modulus were recovered. This preliminary result merits additional
              careful and detailed study of the effect of hydrogen on the elastic modulus and
              hardness of these materials. The research examines the effect of hydrogen on
              gamma TiAl by evaluating the elastic modulus and hardness. The alloy selected
              for the study is Ti-46.5Al-4(Cr,Nb,Ta,B) provided in sheet form in the fully
              lamellar condition. Hydrogen will be introduced into sheet samples by cathodic
              charging in an acid environment, both in the galvanostatic and the
              potentiostatic modes for a variety of charging conditions. X-ray diffraction
              will detect the formation of hydride on the surface of the samples under
              various charging conditions. The hydride formed will be characterized using
              transmission electron microscopy. A vibrational technique will determine the
              elastic modulus of both charged and uncharged specimens by measuring the
              transverse frequencies. Microhardness measurements will measure sample
              hardness. Standard room temperature tensile tests will be carried out to
              simultaneously evaluate their tensile properties. Selected hydrogen-charged
              samples will be degassed using a vacuum anneal at 1000o C. These degassed
              samples will then be subjected to the above tests. It is expected that the
              results from this investigation will lead to greater understanding of the role
              of hydrogen on the properties of gamma TiAl. 
%%%
Gamma titanium aluminides
              are an emerging class of materials with potential for use as advanced turbine
              engine materials in hypersonic airplanes. Consequently, the behavior of gamma
              TiAl in the presence of hydrogen is of great technological importance
              especially under stringent mechanical and thermal environments.
***

