Title       : Data Driven Communication and Synchronization in Non-Uniform Bandwidth Computing
               Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9988339

Award Number: 9988339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne E. Hambrusch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to develop efficient network- and application-aware
              data-driven communication and synchronization primitives for geographically
              distributed computing clusters connected over dynamically configured
              non-uniform bandwidth links.  Synchronization and communication primitives are
              the backbone of any non trivial parallel computation and performance in cluster
              systems crucially depends on the efficiency of such primitives.  The goal is to
              effectively incorporate diverse and dynamically varying network characteristics
              into the proposed solutions while taking advantage of the application
              characteristics.  The solutions will be based on methods that detect and limit
              avoidable congestion and hotspots.  The techniques employed will include
              collecting global information, sampling, and randomization.  Examples of
              synchronization primitives to be investigated include barrier, eureka, and
              termination synchronizations for different application-motivated models. 
              Data-driven communication primitives include data-dependent forms of
              many-to-many broadcast, multicast, and many-to-many transport operations.  The
              experimental aspects of the proposed research will be carried out on a
              collection of high performance computing clusters and platforms spread across
              Purdue University, University of Illinois at Chicago, and NSF/DOD sponsored HPC
              centers, interconnected via different bandwidth links in the Internet. 
              Data-intensive applications such as data mining/warehousing and multimedia will
              be used as a vehicle to study data-driven synchronization and communication
              issues.  The proposed work will facilitate the design of such parallel
              applications on cluster systems.
