Title       : Integration of Auditory & Chemical Processing into Compact, Distributed Sensing
               Nodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9988905

Award Number: 9988905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise Wilson wilson@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this research, we propose to combine complementary hear/smell functions where
              the hearing process is used to complement smell for minimizing false alarms and
              reinforcing suspected dangerous situations. Because of the unique nature of the
              "hear" and "smell" sensing nodes proposed here, the "hear" function also allows
              the hear/smell combination to operate under much lower overall power than a
              "smell" node can currently operate alone.  

If you think you see something,
              are you not reassured when you hear it as well? If you think you hear an
              explosion, are you not more anxious when you also smell smoke? If a dog smells
              a rabbit, does it not chase faster upon seeing it as well?

The answers to
              these questions are, of course, yes. Not necessarily because add information to
              the system, but because we complement one set of information with another set
              that confirms our conclusions and reinforces our reaction. The focus of this
              proposal on the integration of "smell" and "hear" functions using miniaturized,
              low-power, unattended sensing nodes is unique. The system architecture for the
              proposed work consists of two chips per sensing node, a wireless communication
              interface, and a remote base station. Please refer to Figure 1 in the main
              proposal text for a pictorial description of the proposed research. Each dual
              sensing node implements a com-bination of "hear" and "smell" functions. The
              interpretation of information gathered by these sensing nodes is done by a
              "base station" or remote computer. Real time processing of sensory information
              is enabled by compression of the large amount of incoming auditory and sensory
              data at the sensing node itself using analog VLSI based hard-ware processing
              architectures. Each sensing node consists of two custom integrated circuits
              (Chip 1, Chip 2), and an external miniaturized microphone. Chip 1 receives and
              processes an auditory signal from the microphone and also contains circuits to
              extract features from pre-processed chemical sensors transferred from Chip 2.
              Chip 2 con-tains an array of no less than eight chemical sensors based on
              polymer films deposited on ChemFET structures.  Chip 2 also contains processing
              circuits for controlling the heaters which reside local to the chemical sensors
              and processing circuits for reducing noise in each sensor signal. The auditory
              processing section of each sensing node is always powered on; by necessity, its
              design is ultra low power and compact. Only in the presence of relevant stimuli
              (as detected by the auditory processing) are the chemical sensors, chemical
              sensor processing circuits and link to the base station powered on. This
              selective operation not only extends battery life but also extends the
              life-time of the chemical sensors by limiting their exposure to gases that can
              irreversibly react with the sensor surface.  In this method of combination,
              "hear" and "smell" not only offer more valuable, robust, and coherent sensory
              information, they also enable lower power operation of the overall system.  

