Title       : Frameworks for Interactive Software Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9988531

Award Number: 9988531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Graham graham@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: CCR-9988531
Principal Investigator: Graham, Susan L. 
Institution:
              University of California, Berkeley


The Harmonia Framework for Interactive
              Software Development 

Both societal infrastructure and the economy depend on
              increasingly 
complex software systems.  To create and maintain high-quality
              
software, developers need software tools and services that enhance
 their
              productivity. The goal of this research is to devise the
 underlying
              technology that provides developers with integrated
 language-based
              interactive tools and services. The technology 
can be used to create
              multi-lingual and language-portable 
development environments or to create new
              tools for existing 
environments. The languages at issue are the myriad of
              
formally-specified system architecture, specification, design, 
programming,
              scripting and command languages used by the developer. 
Better language tools
              make it easier to develop and use new 
domain-specific languages, and to
              extend development environments 
to dialects of existing languages. This
              research will address 
several aspects of interactive language-based software
              development.  
The starting point is an existing language-based framework that
              
provides an annotated structural representation of programs, 
together with
              an embedded history of changes and support for 
incomplete or incorrect
              versions during the development process.  
This project will devise a method
              to improve the ease of formally 
specifying the semantics of languages, will
              create new analyses 
and transformation capabilities, and will create the
              means to 
integrate externally developed analyses and program manipulation
              
services into the framework. 

