Title       : Studies of Interstellar Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9988126

Award Number: 9988126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363741             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce T. Draine draine@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Bruce Draine of Princeton University will lead studies of a variety of
              processes in the interstellar medium.   He will investigate the size
              distribution of very small interstellar grains.  With the constraints provided
              by the observed wavelength-dependent interstellar extinction, Dr. Draine
              expects to obtain the best determination to date of the size distribution of
              interstellar grains.  New models of photo-dissociation regions will be
              developed, using improved estimates of photoelectric heating rates, and
              detailed modeling of radiative and collisional excitation/de-excitation of
              molecular hydrogen (H2).  He will extend previous studies on spherical grains
              to consider nonspherical grain shapes in order  to obtain realistic estimates
              for the net force on irregular interstellar grains.  He will study the
              observable consequences if a gamma ray burst (GRB) takes place in a dense
              molecular cloud, including the destruction of dust, thermal emission from hot
              dust, the appearance of absorption features due to vibrationally-excited H2,
              and ultraviolet fluorescent emission from H2. Studies will be conducted into
              the role of "thermal flipping" and "thermal trapping" in the physics of
              interstellar grain alignment.  Dr. Draine will attempt to improve the treatment
              of strongly-absorbing materials in the discrete dipole approximation (DDA).
              This would allow the DDA to be used to calculate the infrared absorption cross
              sections of irregular grains composed of materials like amorphous carbon. He
              also expects to continue to support and maintain the portable program DDSCAT,
              which is used by researchers in a number of disciplines to compute scattering
              and absorption by irregular targets.


