Title       : Basic Research in Antiferroelectric Perovskites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9988853

Award Number: 9988853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436926             (Estimated)
Investigator: I-Wei Chen iweichen@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9988853
Chen

The objective of this proposal is to investigate fundamental
              materials problems concerning antiferroelectric perovskites. Antiferroelectric
              perovskites are a small subclass of ferroic perovskites. Compared to
              prototypical ferroelectric perovskites, they have relatively limited
              applications to date and have been much less studied in the past. Nevertheless,
              theoretical considerations indicate that the antiferroelectric states are
              energetically similar to the ferroelectric states, and that in many
              large-response ferroelectrics there is a strong antiferroelectric/ferroelectric
              competition that is central to latter's outstanding properties. Moreover,
              several physical and chemical features common to nearly all of the
              antiferroelectric perovskites, e.g., a negative transformation volume and a
              very weak isotope effect, are anomalous and not found in any ferroelectric
              perovskites. This suggests that new basic research on antiferroelectric
              perovskites will have a fundamental impact on ferroelectrics that are used for
              important technological and biomedical applications. It also has the potential
              of discovering novel ferroelectrics and antiferroelectrics with attractive
              physical and chemical properties. In this research project, the PI will
              determine mechanical and electrical field effects on
              antiferroelectric-ferroelectric transitions, interrogate local atomic and
              electronic structures of antiferroelectric perovskites, and investigate
              antiferroelectric thin films and heterostructures. Using concepts in crystal
              chemistry and statistical physics, experiments will be designed to optimize
              antiferroelectric interactions and tune their competition with ferroelectric
              interactions. Synchrotron x-ray and other scattering and imaging techniques
              will be used to probe the cation couplings and electronic transitions that may
              give rise to the anomalous features observed in antiferroelectricity. This
              study will be further complemented by property characterization of bulk and
              thin film antiferroelectrics to understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of
              phase transitions, interface motion, interface-defect interactions, and
              antiferroelectric/ferroelectric competition at the smallest length scale.
              

Antiferroelectric perovskites are a type of perovskites that have had
              relatively limited applications to date and have been much less studied in the
              past.  Nevertheless, theoretical considerations indicate that these materials
              may have unique properties and thus basic research on them will have a
              fundamental impact on ferroelectrics that are used for important technological
              and biomedical applications. The project will train Ph.D. students as well as
              offering training to undergraduates and high school teachers. This effort will
              be integrated into the research project to attract traditional and
              non-traditional students and to provide them laboratory and research
              opportunities. 

