Title       : Efficient Algorithms for Molecular Sequences, Evolutionary Trees, and Physical
               Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9988353

Award Number: 9988353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tao Jiang jiang@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              "Efficient Algorithms for Molecular Sequences, Evolutionary
    Trees, and
              Physical Maps"

PI:  Tao Jiang
Proposal Number:  9988353
Institution: 
              University of California-Riverside



Project
              Summary
---------------

Biological, biomedical and pharmaceutical research
              is undergoing a major
revolution as new experimental approaches, such as
              high-throughput DNA
sequencing, are yielding unprecedented amounts of genetic
              data.
The exploration of this information is critically dependent upon the
              
development of advanced computational methods for data analysis.
From this
              dependency, a new interdisciplinary research field, 
{\em Computational
              Molecular Biology}, has emerged in recent years. This
project aims at
              investigating some fundamental algorithmic issues
in several key areas of
              computational molecular biology,
including multiple sequence alignment, the
              reconstruction of
evolutionary trees, physical mapping, and DNA
              sequencing.

Multiple sequence alignment is a standard model for comparing a
              set of
(biomolecular) sequences simultaneously. Software tools for computing
              multiple
sequence alignments are routinely used by biologists.
This project
              continues the study of a unique approach for multiple sequence alignment
that
              takes into account the evolutionary history of the input sequences.
The
              objectives include improved approximation methods to compute multiple
sequence
              alignment and evolutionary tree simultaneously. 

Efficient and accurate
              inference of evolutionary trees has long been a
challenging topic for both
              biologists and computer scientists. 
This project is especially focused on
              quartet-based evolutionary tree reconstruction
methods that attempt to extract
              topological information about quartets
(i.e. sets of four) of input species
              and then recombine these quartet topologies
into a full evolutionary tree.
              Efficient approximation algorithms will be 
devised that explicitly aim at
              minimizing the inconsistency between the output tree
and the estimated quartet
              topologies. 

The other objectives of the project include the study of
              efficient (approximation)
algorithms for some combinatorial problems that are
              motivated by physical mapping and
(shotgun) DNA sequencing, which are two
              fundamental steps in the Human Genome Project. 
Some specific topics to be
              studied include the complexity of fragment identification
in multiple complete
              digest mapping with bounded multiplicity and the approximation
of (vairants
              of) shortest superstrings.

Although this research is theoretical in nature,
              its results will 
likely have applications (or implications) in the
              development of software tools
for multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic
              inference, and restriction mapping.

