Title       : Product Design and Inventory Deployment for Improving Delivery Time Performance
               in the Steel Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9988721

Award Number: 9988721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diwakar Gupta guptad@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Saif Benjaafar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of mathematical models and
              numerical tools which can be used to determine the optimal design (dimensions,
              grade, and weight) of steel slabs, and optimal replenishment policies for slab
              inventories.  A two-step approach will be used.  In the first step, optimal
              design configurations will be determined using a combination of heuristics to
              generate both a good initial solution and refinements to the initial solution. 
              A stochastic integer programming formulation involving binary variables will be
              used to provide bounds on the performance of these heuristic solutions.  For a
              given number of slab designs, these methods will determine those configurations
              that maximize coverage, measured in terms of total finished tons that can be
              manufactured from the chosen configurations.  In the second step, a multi
              period stochastic linear program will be developed to determine replenishment
              batch sizes for each slab design configuration in order to minimize the sum of
              inventory holding and production inefficiency costs. 

If successful, the
              results of this research will provide a science-based solution to a chronic
              problem faced by integrated steel mills (ISMs).  By focusing on reducing the
              number of slab designs, ISMs can pursue specialty steel markets while
              simultaneously reducing their production process complexity and inventory
              costs. Solution techniques developed to solve the underlying stochastic
              optimization problems, will have wider applications to industries with similar
              process architecture, e.g., paper and pulp, and to other stochastic
              optimization problems involving a large number of scenarios. The latter occur
              in a host of applications ranging from energy models, capacity planning to
              financial asset management.   Models proposed for determining optimal
              replenishment policies, especially when coupled with the possibility of
              delaying product differentiation, will be useful for manufacturing firms trying
              to cope with increased product variety.


