Title       : Diffusion and Cross-Diffusion in Pattern Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a9988635

Award Number: 9988635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Ming Ni ni@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ni

Professor Ni plans to continue his research in
              understanding
mathematically the effects of various diffusion-related
              mechanisms.  
Using calculus of variations and perturbation techniques,
              Professor Ni and
his collaborators have established the spike-layer solutions
              for an
activator-inhibitor system in morphogenesis by exploiting the gap
              between
the diffusion rates of the activator and inhibitor.  Stability of
              such
solutions with single peak in one dimension is also proved.  However,
              to
undrestand the complete dynamics, multipeak solutions in multi-
              dimensions
and their stability properties are very important and not yet
              fully
understood. They are currently under investigation.  It should be
              noted
that the gap between the diffusion rates alone is not sufficient
              in
creating patterns, as is shown by the Lotka-Volterra
              competition-diffusion
system in the weak competition case.  Thus, from the
              point of view of
pattern formation, the notion of "cross-diffusion" was
              introduced in 1979
by theoretical biologists.  Cross-diffusion systems are
              both nonlinear and
strongly-coupled in the highest order terms, and are
              therefore
mathematically challenging.  Professor Ni and his collaborators
              proposes
to study the effect of cross-diffusion: First, to obtain necessary
              and
sufficient conditions for cross-diffusion rates to create patterns,
              and
then to investigate their qualitative behavior as well as their
              stability
properties.

      Professor Ni plans to continue his research in
              understanding, in a
mathematically rigorous manner, the phenomena and effects
              of various
diffusion-related mechanisms and hopefully thereby to have some
              impact in both
improving our ability in modeling more complicated or realistic
              situation in
applied sciences, as well as creating new and significant
              mathematics.  In
this project, from the point of view of pattern formation,
              Professor Ni
intends to investigate the various "concentration phenomena" in
              diffusion or
cross-diffusion systems.  These, in particular, include Turing
              patterns in
chemical reactions (e.g. the CIMA reaction), Gierer-Meinhardt's
              activator-
inhibitor systems (in modeling the regeneration phenomena of hydra)
              in
morphogenesis, and the Lotka-Volterra competitions with cross-diffusion
              (in
modeling segregation phenomena) in population dynamics.



