Title       : QUANTUM PANCAKES FOR QUANTUM ENTANGLEMENT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9988865

Award Number: 9988865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galina Khitrova galina@optics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia L. Ell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine P. Spiegelberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9988865
Khitrova

Quantum entanglement is essential for quantum repeaters
              needed for any of the proposals for quantum information processing to have a
              chance.  The goal of this project is to obtain a quantum pancake that is good
              enough to achieve quantum entanglement.  "Good" means one with a large dipole
              moment and radiatively dominated lifetime and decoherence time.  A large dipole
              moment allows one to optically control the pancake with the vacuum field or an
              applied optical pulse faster than nonradiative decoherence times.  Based on the
              growth of narrow-linewidth InGaAs/GaAs quantum wells and extraction of the
              radiative width and dipole moment, this proposal would take the next step: make
              a quantum pancake by laterally confining a 100- to 200-nm diameter portion of
              such a quantum well.  A good pancake could be used in a small 3D microcavity to
              achieve quantum entanglement between a transition of the pancake and the
              optical mode.

The approach will begin with a search for the best portions of
              a single quantum well with 0.8-micron spatial resolution using conventional
              optics or 0.25-micron resolution with a solid immersion lens.  Various
              techniques for lateral confinement will be considered, for example, stress from
              a layer of self-organized dots grown above the quantum well or interdiffusion
              by local heating using a tightly focused laser beam.  Candidate pancakes will
              be evaluated by a multitude of optical spectroscopic techniques.  Differential
              reflectivity or absorption will determine the integrated absorption and dipole
              moment.  MHz-resolution cw nonlinear spectroscopy and picosecond pump-probe
              measurements will be used to find out the effect of absorption of a single
              photon.  Finally, streak-camera detection of the forward or backward emission
              following picosecond resonant excitation will show to what extent the
              polarization decay is purely radiative.

