Title       : Photonic, Electronic, and Optoelectronic Materials for Molecular Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9988142

Award Number: 9988142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan S. Lindsey jlindsey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professors Jonathan Lindsey (North Carolina State University),
              David Bocian (University of California Riverside) and Dewey Holten (Washington
              University) is supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing Program in
              the Chemistry Division. Under the award, new oligomers will be synthesized from
              multimetallic porphyrins, phthalocyanines and perylene units. The oligomers
              will be linked by regioselective polymerization to form cyclic and nanotube
              macromolecular structures with an ultimate goal of fabricating all optical
              gates, electrically conducting molecular wires and coaxial cable assemblies
              from these structures.  The optical and electronic materials will be
              characterized by different photophysical methods.  Photoexcitation studies will
              be carried out to determine the rates and efficiencies of energy and charge
              distributions in these materials.

Photoactive and electroactive
              macromolecular structures, both circular and nanotubular, will be prepared
              under this research award.  The macrocyclic structures with controlled
              networks, orientation, size and shape will be prepared, and molecular wires and
              coaxial cables will be fabricated by functionalizing the tubular and cyclic
              structures.  These optical and electronic materials may have applications in
              small electronic devices such as logic gates and molecular computers.  In
              addition, the research program will provide a rich multidisciplinary education
              and training opportunity to students in material chemistry.





