Title       : Circuit Complexity: Grid Graphs, Planar Circuits, and Lower Bounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9988260

Award Number: 9988260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212790             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Barrington barrington@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Circuit Complexity: Grid Graphs, Planar Circuits, and Lower
              
Bounds

David Mix Barrington
Computer Science Department
University of
              Massachusetts

Project Description

Complexity theory is the mathematical
              study of the resources needed for computational problems.  In circuit
              complexity theory these resources are the size, depth, and other parameters of
              boolean circuit families that solve the problems.  The basic results are upper
              bounds (algorithms solving the problem while obeying certain resource
              constraints) and lower bounds (proofs that no such algorithm can do
              so).

This project takes a qualitative approach to circuit complexity.  The
              basic object is a complexity class, which is the set of problems that can be
              solved within certain resource constraints.  For most natural and robust
              choices of constraints, the resulting class has complete problems --- problems
              whose solution requires a fundamental algorithmic technique that suffices to
              solve all the problems in the class.  Upper and lower bounds for the complete
              problems then give us results about the classes. This project studies two
              specific computational problems: grid graph reachability and monotone planar
              circuit value. Given a graph embedded on a rectangular mesh, and two nodes, is
              there a path from one node to the other?  What is the value computed by a given
              circuit of AND and OR gates, where no wires cross, and a given input? In each
              case recent work of the PI and others have improved upper bounds for versions
              of the problem.  The goal here is to improve these algorithmic results and
              explore the various versions, relating them to each other and to standard
              problems.  

This exploration will be carried out in the context of prior
              work by the PI and others in qualitative complexity theory.  This work has
              identified a set of standard complexity classes that are robust across a
              variety of models, and developed a single framework characterizing these
              classes in term of the syntactic resources needed to express their problems in
              first-order logic.

In addition, further work will apply the logical
              framework to lower bound problems in low-level complexity.  The outstanding
              problem in this area, open for a decade, is to prove some natural problem to be
              outside of a circuit class such as $ACC^0$. Here two new approaches, developed
              in recent work of the PI and others, offer some hope: counting circuit classes
              and intermediate levels of uniformity.


