Title       : Subdivision-based Algorithms for Surface Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9988528

Award Number: 9988528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279592             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis Zorin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Subdivision was initially conceived as an extension of splines to control meshes
              of
arbitrary topology. Subdivision algorithms, while being more flexible and
              general,
retain a number of useful properties of splines. Most importantly,
              the surfaces generated
by these algorithms have a natural hierarchical
              structure and are computed
using simple local rules. This allows the design of
              efficient hierarchical, local, and
adaptive algorithms for rendering,
              manipulation, collision detection and intersection
of such surfaces.
              Subdivision surfaces are rapidly gaining wide acceptance in
the industry. In
              recent years, substantial progress has been made in understanding
the
              properties of the subdivision surfaces, especially smoothness properties.
              However,
subdivision still lacks the body of well understood and reliable
              algorithms
available for splines and a few practically important aspects of
              subdivision, such
as subdivision rules for boundaries and singular features,
              do not have a rigorous
theoretical foundation. Aside from smoothness, no other
              property of subdivision
surfaces has been studied in detail. At the same time,
              some fundamental limitations
of the commonly used stationary subdivision
              schemes became apparent. For example,
practical curvature-continuous
              subdivision surfaces necessarily have a "flat."
spot near extraordinary
              vertices, and the surfaces acquire ripples near vertices of
high valence. The
              proposed research has three main objectives:


Advance the theory of
              stationary subdivision to include all important practical
cases, and develop
              the theory necessary to understand fairness, mesh
quality, and approximation
              properties of subdivision.


Develop robust algorithms for common geometric
              operations such as com-putting
collisions and intersections of subdivision
              surfaces;


Explore nonstationary subdivision schemes which retain locality,
              and identify
ways to improve the quality of the resulting surfaces without
              sacrificing
the performance.

The three components are unified by a common
              goal: the development of a
surface representation supporting highly efficient,
              local, hierarchical and adaptive
algorithms for geometric modeling.
