Title       : Quantization, Quantum Groups, the Yang-Baxter Equation, Integrable Systems, and
               Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9988796

Award Number: 9988796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pavel I. Etingof etingof@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The present proposal is concerned with various aspects of the theory of quantum
              groups. The goals of the proposal could be briefly formulated as follows.
  1.
              To complete the theory of universal quantization of Lie bialgebras, begun in
              the PI's joint work with D.Kazhdan, and answer most of the remaining open
              questions of Drinfeld about quantization.  In particular, to investigate the
              dependence of the quantization of an associator, and to show that the universal
              quantization of Kac-Moody algebras coincides with their usual quantization.  To
              study quantization of Poisson homogeneous spaces.  To study quantization theory
              in positive characteristic.  To study quantization of solutions of the
              classical dynamical Yang-Baxter equations, and associated Poisson groupoids.
 
              2. To continue to develop the theory of dynamical quantum groups, originated by
              Felder in 1994.  In particular, to generalize the exchange construction
              (introduced in the PI's joint work with Varchenko) to the case of affine Lie
              algebras. To use this construction to establish the equivalence of suitable
              categories of representations for Yangians, quantum affine algebras, and
              elliptic algebras. To study the structure of dynamical quantum groups obtained
              by quantizing generalized Belavin-Drinfeld triples for simple Lie algebras.
 
              3. To continue to develop the theory of generalized Macdonald functions, begun
              in the PI's joint work with Varchenko, Kirillov, and Styrkas. In particular, to
              use representation theory to generalize the recent results of Felder and
              Varchenko on elliptic hypergeometric functions from sl(2) to any simple Lie
              algebra. To develop Macdonald's theory for affine root systems (of type A)
              using the representation theory of quantum affine algebras. To develop a theory
              of twisted trace functions for quantum groups, and deduce difference equations
              for them which involve R-matrices obtained by quantizing Belavin-Drinfeld
              triples.
  4. To work on the theory of finite dimensional Hopf algebras. To
              look for new examples of semisimple Hopf algebras. To study tensor products of
              representations of cotriangular Hopf algebras.
  5. To continue to study
              set-theoretical solutions of the quantum Yang-Baxter equation.

  The theory
              of quantum groups is a relatively new area of mathematics which arose in mid
              1980-s at the junction of the theory of groups and quantum theory.  The theory
              of groups, which was created in 19-th century, is a mathematical theory which
              is designed to describe precisely the phenomenon of symmetry, and which is
              fundamental in modern particle physics. Symmetry is a basic property of nature.
              It also played a crucial role in all technological achievements of mankind,
              starting from the invention of a wheel: the ability of a wheel to roll comes
              from its symmetry with respect to rotations.   Quantum theory was the most
              important achievement of theoretical physics of the 20-th century, which lies
              at the foundation of this century's technological revolution.  It is a physical
              theory which allows to describe the behavior of very small objects, like atoms
              and electrons.   In the late eighties, it was realized that in certain systems
              described by quantum theory, there is a new kind of symmetry which the theory
              of groups fails to describe.  This new, very peculiar kind of symmetry, is
              called quantum symmetry.  In order to describe this symmetry mathematically,
              mathematicians introduced new mathematical objects called quantum groups, which
              are generalizations of ordinary groups. The present proposal seeks to further
              develop this theory and to explore its interactions with other areas of
              mathematics and physics.
