Title       : Scheduling Proxy and Adaptive Algorithms for Irregular Applications on SMP
               Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9988266

Award Number: 9988266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chengzhong Xu czxu@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Clusters of symmetric multiprocessors (SMPs) are emerging as one of the most
              cost- effective ways for high performance computing. However, delivering their
              full potential heavily relies on efficient cluster-wide resource management
              systems. This project focuses on run-time scheduling techniques for irregular
              applications on SMP clusters. Since an SNIP cluster deploys a hierarchical
              organization, it is the depth of the memory hierarchy with its different access
              primitives and costs at each level that makes dynamic scheduling on the cluster
              challenge.

The first objective of this project is to develop scheduling
              proxy architecture to take advantage of the hierarchical organization of the
              clusters. The architecture designates one of the processors in each SMP, either
              statically or dynamically, for scheduling among the nodes. The scheduling proxy
              balances the workload in proportional to the nodal
capacities and enhances the
              communication locality. The scheduling proxy architecture facilitates the use
              of distributed scheduling algorithms between the nodes. The second objective of
              this project is to develop parametric algorithms, based on existing ones for
              massively parallel computers, to reflect the possible heterogeneity of the
              nodes and the communication links. Major undertaking is a rigid analysis of the
              adaptivity of the parametric algorithms. The scheduling proxy architecture and
              adaptive algorithms ease the burden of parallel programming and ensure the
              efficiency of cluster computing.

