Title       : Picosecond Electron Diffraction Study of Superheating of Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9988669

Award Number: 9988669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hani E. Elsayed-Ali helsayed@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion University
	      5115 Hampton Boulevard
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-3159

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The possibility and limits of superheating solids are studied. A superheated
              solid is one in which long-range order remains present at temperatures higher
              than the bulk melting point, Tm. Time-resolved transmission electron
              diffraction (TED), with up to 1 ps temporal resolution, will be used to probe
              the structure of laser-heated thin films. The laser provides an ultrafast
              heating pulse, while ultrafast electron diffraction probes the structural
              integrity of the crystal to detect any metastable superheated state. While
              supercooling of the molten state is a common phenomenon, observations of
              superheating of solids are rare. Surfaces and extended defects, such as grain
              boundaries, provide vast nucleation sites for disorder below Tm and, thus,
              inhibit superheating of solids. Some single-crystal surfaces, however, remain
              ordered up to Tm allowing a surface to be superheated. The present work focuses
              on transmission electron diffraction studies to probe up to several hundred A
              thin films, rather than the first few atomic layers probed in reflection
              high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) used in previous work. Time-resolved
              TED (1-ps or less) will be conducted on single-crystal and polycrystalline thin
              metal and semiconductor films and on microcrystallites bounded by close-packed
              surfaces. The structural integrity, atomic mean vibrational amplitude, and
              lattice spacing of thin films subjected to heating and melting with laser
              pulses of 80-fs and 100-ps pulse durations will be probed.. Graduate and
              undergraduate students will participate in this research.
%%% 
Melting is one
              of the most common phase transformation in nature. While our understanding of
              melting from a thermodynamic point of view is well established, microscopic
              understanding of this phase transformation is lacking. Supercooling of the
              molten state is a common phenomenon; however, observations of superheating of
              solids are rare. A supercooled liquid is one that remains in a liquid state for
              some time at temperature below the bulk melting point. A superheated solid is
              one in which the structural integrity remains present at temperatures higher
              than the bulk melting point. Melting is initiated at surfaces and defects and
              propagates into the bulk of the crystal. The main objective of this study is to
              investigate the possibility and limits of superheating solids, thus, providing
              an answer to the question of how far and for how long can a solid exists above
              its melting point. Because of the fast nature of melting, this study requires
              the use of a fast heating source and a probe capable of monitoring the atomic
              arrangement during melting. We use laser pulses of ultra-short duration, one
              trillionth of one second or less, as a fast heating source. Diffraction of a
              subsequent electron pulse in the material allows for monitoring the structure
              of the heated material. These high time resolution studies will be conducted on
              single-crystal and polycrystalline thin metal and semiconductor films and on
              microcrystallites. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
              research. They will receive training that prepares them for entry into the
              industrial, government, or academic job market during the coming decades of the
              century.
***


