Title       : Securing Scalable Distributed Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9988212

Award Number: 9988212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustaque Ahamad mustaq@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As computers become pervasive in the home and community, a variety of new
              applications will emerge which will allow widely distributed users to share and
              manipulate continuously evolving information.  The problem of providing secure
              access to such information in a timely fashion is highly challenging in wide
              area environments where the applications will be deployed.  The project will
              focus on an integrated approach that will explore the scalability and security
              of such demanding applications.  The provide interactive response time to
              request for shared information, a variety of consistency models and protocols
              will be developed, and they will specially address the timeliness needs of
              applications.  To secure the applications, a new context-aware security
              approach will be explored.  In this approach, access can be controlled not only
              based on the user that makes the request but also on the security relevant
              context of the request.  An access control model based on this approach as well
              as relevant security services will be developed.  A general service
              architecture that employs the scalability mechanisms and the associated
              services will be built in a distributed object based middleware system.  The
              effectiveness of these services will be evaluated using novel applications and
              workloads.
