Title       : Collaborative Research: Architecting Design Repositories - Product Modeling,
               Exchange and Reuse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9988817

Award Number: 9988817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Stone rstone@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to create, develop, and disseminate a
              design-repository framework that advances industry's and the design research
              community's ability to model, exchange, and reuse product design information. 
              In contrast to traditional design databases, design repositories serve not only
              as archives, but also serve as repositories of heterogeneous knowledge and data
              that support representation, capture, sharing, and reuse of corporate design
              knowledge.  To create the repository framework, basic research will be
              performed in the representation and modeling of design function, product
              architectures, and form through a fundamental and systematic study of 100-200
              current products.  The National Institute of Standards and Technology will
              disseminate the research results within a computational, application-neutral
              format.

If successful, the results of the research will contribute
              fundamental knowledge in the form of function and product-architecture
              representations to the design community.  Most importantly, the results will
              improve product design in industry in two ways: (1) by developing a basic
              technological infrastructure to support the creation and use of design
              repositories in industry, and (2) by providing industry with access to design
              information in order to demonstrate the value of these repositories before they
              have to invest significant effort in their development.  Thus, in addition to
              contributing basic research results in the area of design repositories, the
              research will produce sets of domain-specific prototype repositories that will
              be made available online via the world wide web.  The results also open the
              doors to using design-by-analogy, product architecting, and design-for-assembly
              and manufacturing techniques early in the design and development process.

