Title       : Dissertation Enhancement: Testing the Theory of Ecological Modernization:
               Implementation of the Kyoto Protocol for Global Climate Change as a Natural
               Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a9988521

Award Number: 9988521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17035              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Freudenburg freudenburg@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Freudenburg
9988521

This award supports a National Science Foundation
              Dissertation Enhancement award to Dr. William R. Freudenburg of University of
              Wisconsin-Madison.  Dr. Freudenburg's Ph.D. student, Ms. Dana Fisher, will
              conduct part of her Ph.D. research in Japan and the Netherlands.  Ms. Fisher
              will spend 2 months in Japan to work with Professor Tsuneyuki Maorta, Tokyo
              Institute of Technology, Graduate School of Decision Science and Technology. 
              She will also spend 3 months in the Netherlands to work with Dr. Arthur P. J.
              Moi, Wageningen University of the Netherlands, Department of Social Sciences,
              Environmental Sociology Group. The research project will test the theory of
              ecological modernization by specifically examining the differing responses of
              Japan, the U.S., and the Netherlands to the Kyoto Protocol from an ecological
              modernization perspective.

One of the key challenges facing the effort to
              deal with global environmental change is to understand different nation-states'
              responses to global environmental issues and proposed regulations.  This
              project proposes to link ecological modernization theory with models of the
              polity to give a more complete account of the factors affecting government
              regulation of environmental problems in different nations.  Both quantitative
              and qualitative research methods will be incorporated to test ecological
              modernization theory.  The quantitative portion of the research analyzes
              certain social, economic and environmental characteristics of all of the OECD
              nations, and systematically assesses claims about the relation between economic
              development and environmental quality.  The qualitative portion of the research
              looks at the main actors involved in the debates surrounding implementation of
              the Kyoto Protocol.  Interviews with a sample of important actors from the
              government, industry, media, science and the NGO sectors in these countries
              will be carried out.  This dissertation research will provide some interesting
              information about the political landscape for environmental regulation in these
              countries.
***






