Title       : Arithmetic of Automorphic Forms on Reductive Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9988043

Award Number: 9988043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haruzo Hida hida@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While the investigator was pursuing the goals described in the grant proposal to
              NSF made and funded three years ago, he has come up with a few workable ideas
              which may be useful in verifying certain number of fundamental conjectures on
              arithmetic of automorphic forms.  We now start an attack in order to make these
              partially valid speculations into a methodology based on a solid foundation. 
              Project A describe a way to establish theory of p-adic families of automorphic
              forms defined on Shimura varieties, particularly those carrying a canonical
              fiber system of abelian varieties.  After establishing such control theory of
              p-adic automorphic forms, construction of p-adic L-functions associated to each
              family of automorphic forms is the goal of Project B.  There should be some
              applications of such p-adic L-functions and p-adic families to Iwasawa
              theoretic understanding of CM fields, to verification of automorphic
              functoriality (like base-change; Project C) and to modularity problems of
              abelian varieties (Project D).  There is a possibility of extending such theory
              to algebraic groups not associated to Shimura varieties.  In Project E, the
              case of general linear groups is discussed.  If successful, many rationality
              results of automorphic L-functions are expected even in this non-holomorphic
              case.

Number theoretic questions, though formulated often in an elementary
              way, could be astonishingly difficult to solve.  The Fermat's last theorem
              (which was actually a conjecture made by Fermat in the seventeenth century) has
              been solved finally by Wiles in 1995, surviving for 350 years of serious
              attacks by the strongests of mathematicians.  In its solution, arithmetic study
              of modular forms and automorphic forms played essential roles in many ways. 
              The programs described here are intended to broaden the applicability of some
              of the tools used in this endeavor to more general setting, encompassing more
              geometric objects: those spaces classifying algebraic equations whose
              solution-set (so called "abelian varieties") having a canonical algebra (group)
              structure.  Each abelian variety is somehow (conjecturally) related to a very
              specific function satisfying many symmetries (so it is called an "automorphic
              form").  The solution of such classification problems (so-called "modularity
              problem") in the simplest case of dimension one is a key ingredient of the
              above mentioned proof of Wiles.  One of the goals described in this award is to
              generalize this "modularity" result to higher dimensional abelian varieties.

