Title       : Mettalic Behavior of Two-Dimensional Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9988283

Award Number: 9988283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey Kravchenko S.Kravchenko@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Metal-insulator (M-I)transitions in two-dimensional semiconductors will be
              investigated in this project.  This phenomenon was first observed several years
              ago in silicon-base two-dimensional electron systems and later reproduced in
              other two-dimensional systems.  The underlying physics of this phenomenon is
              not understood, in spite of several proposed models (new types of
              superconductivity, non-Fermi liquid state, formation of a Wigner glass) and a
              growing number of theoretical and experimental papers.  In the present project,
              the capacitance and chemical potential of two-dimensional systems will be
              measured along with their transport and magneto-transport properties at
              milliKelvin temperatures.  These measurements will provide information about
              density of states, compressibility, and possibly about magnetic properties of
              the unusual metallic state.  They will show how these properties change at the
              M-I transition and in an external magnetic field. The information obtained is
              expected to be crucial for the understanding of the nature of the M-I
              transition in two dimensions.  Graduate and undergraduate students will
              participate in this research and will thereby be trained in a complex and
              important area of forefront physics, become familiar with semiconductor device
              technology, and will be excellently prepared for future employment in industry,
              government or education. 
***  
This project comprises an advanced research
              program in the properties of semiconductor materials, in which the interactions
              between electrons dominate the physical properties and often lead to new,
              unexpected phenomena.  This research stands at the forefront of condensed
              matter physics and materials science.  The questions addressed in this research
              are of fundamental importance, and the answers are expected to contribute to
              the understanding of materials at the most basic level.   The project will
              provide an excellent introduction for graduate and undergraduate students in a
              cutting edge area of physics.   They will become familiar with semiconductor
              technology, relevant research methods, and will be prepared for future
              employment in industry, government or education. 
%%%

