Title       : Disorder, Localization, and Pinning in Two-dimensional Transport in Intense
               Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a9988638

Award Number: 9988638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Tsui tsui@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental condensed matter physics project that will investigate
              the roles of disorder and electron-electron interaction in the charge transport
              of two-dimensional electronic systems in dilute limit in the presence of an
              intense magnetic field. The project will proceed in three stages: the first
              entails dc transport and microwave absorption measurements; the second stage
              extends these measurements to lower temperatures, ca. 20 milliKelvin; and the
              third stage further extends the measurements to ultra-low temperatures in the
              microKelvin range. The experiments are designed to explore a new regime in
              two-dimension electron physics and to uncover phenomena underlying new quantum
              phases, and to investigate their phase transitions. The research provides
              exceptional educational opportunities for graduate students and post-docs who
              engage in cutting edge research which is of fundamental significance and which
              involves unique experimental facilities requiring ultra high magnetic fields
              and ultra-low temperatures. This training equips them for a range of careers,
              including academe and  industrial research. 
%%%
This research is directed at
              exploring the physics of two-dimensional electrons, that is a sheet of
              electrons confined to the interface between two different semiconductors, at
              the extreme conditions of low temperatures (in the milli-Kelvin range) and high
              magnetic fields (in the 2~ Tesla range) in the low electron density limit. In
              this limit, the physics of the electron system is governed by the interplay of
              the interaction of the two-dimensional electrons among themselves and the
              disorder caused by impurities and defects close to the semiconductor interface.
              While the former is intrinsic, the latter is extrinsic and has remained largely
              unknown and elusive to quantitative characterization. The proposed work is
              focused on the development of a two-dimensional electron system in which the
              relevant disorder is known and characterizable. It is also focused on dc
              transport and microwave absorption experiments in new physical regimes to
              uncover new phases of the two-dimensional electrons and to investigate their
              quantum phase transitions. The research provides exceptional educational
              opportunities for graduate students and post-docs who engage in cutting edge
              research which is of fundamental significance and which involves unique
              experimental facilities requiring ultra high magnetic fields and ultra-low
              temperatures. This training equips them for a range of careers, including
              academe and  industrial research. 




