Title       : Ultra-Wideband Wireless Communication from Emerging Multiple Access Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9988665

Award Number: 9988665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Nassar carln@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9988665
Nassar

This proposal outlines the requirements for developing an
              enabling technology referred to as Ultra Wideband Multicarrier Code Division
              Multiple Access (also known as UW-CDMA). UW-CDMA will emerge as the
              ultra-wideband wireless backbone for the mobile industry, enabling a
              substantial increase in bandwidth for low-cost hand-held communication
              devices.

The development of UW-CDMA will redefine the bandwidth paradigm by
              transforming wireless bandwidth from a scarce resource into an available
              commodity.  This transformation will occur when UW-CDMA provides communication
              channels through which wireless services are delivered. Service providers will
              employ UW-CDMA to deliver services based on market demands. Bandwidth will be
              traded as a commodity which can be purchased in advance, or at the time of
              demand. For example, a wireless service provider who wants to offer video
              conferencing services (1) purchases bandwidth at low cost from a UW-CDMA
              network, (2) develops the wireless video conferencing services he wants to
              offer customers, and (3) sells his service to his customers. This allows
              wireless-service providers to focus on the services provided to end users with
              a guaranteed bandwidth for delivering their service.

A UW-CDMA network
              provides a large number and variety of communication services because
              UW-CDMA:

1. offers ultra-wide bandwidth in a market traditionally limited to
              small, high-cost frequency bands; and
2. provides superior performance in the
              most challenging conditions,  including multipath fading.

UW-CDMA provides
              ultra-widebandwidth by using multiple frequency bands simultaneously. For
              example, UW-CDMA can occupy the three unlicensed frequency bands in the ranges
              of 902-928 MHz, 2400-2485 MHz, and 5725-5850 MHz, and not interfere with the
              licensed frequencies between these bands. UW-CDMA fills available gaps in the
              frequency spectrum to enable ultra-wideband services, and UW-CDMA can provide
              these services without requiring expensive, high-frequency microwave
              components.

UW-CDMA provides frequency diversity and improved signal quality
              by redundantly transmitting information signals on different carrier
              frequencies. However, this redundancy does not diminish the bandwidth
              efficiency. In fact, superior bandwidth efficiency is achieved because the
              carriers combine to produce signals that are orthogonal in the time domain. As
              a result, each user attains the performance of N-fold frequency-diversity gain,
              where N is very large.

Multiple users share the UW-CDMA wireless connection
              by use of a sophisticated version of multiple carrier-code division multiple
              access (MC-CDMA). In each frequency band in which a user transmits a signal, an
              applied phase is employed as part of a spreading code. The collection of all
              applied phases acts as the spreading code.  Complex phases are applied such
              that desired signals are received and combined to create the N-fold diversity
              gain, whereas undesired signals cancel.

This proposal outlines the
              development of UW-CDMA. Successful completion of this project will bring the
              dream of anytime, anywhere, anything wireless access one giant leap closer to
              reality.
***

