Title       : Parallel Algorithms and Software for Steepest Descent Fast Multipole Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9988347

Award Number: 9988347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Aluru aluru@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shanker Balasubramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel Algorithms and Software for Steepest Descent Fast Multipole
              Method

Srinivas Aluru & Shanker Balasubramaniam 
Iowa State

The goal of
              this project is to develop theoretically rigorous and practically efficient
              parallel algorithms for the steepest descent fast multipole method (SDFMM) and
              to build a parallel software library for the solution of a wide variety of
              complex problems related to electromagnetic scattering and radiation by
              quasi-planar surfaces. Several important applications that can be studied with
              the use of this software include soil and ocean modeling, remote sensing, long
              range communications, applications in radio astronomy, full-wave analysis of
              electrical circuits and the design and analysis of antennas, diffractive
              optical gratings, solar cells and quantum well infrared detectors. Classical
              iterative integral techniques for solving such applications require quadratic
              work per iteration. SDFMM drastically reduces this computational complexity, to
              linear time, in the case of uniform distributions, by exploiting the redundancy
              in the classical representation of fields and the geometric structure of
              quasi-planar surfaces. Efficient sequential and parallel algorithms will be
              developed for solving non-uniform problems and for solving problems involving
              multiple, mutually interacting quasi-planar regions. Particular emphasis will
              be placed on developing distribution-independent algorithms, i.e., provably
              efficient algorithms for which the run-time is independent of the distribution
              without making any assumptions on either the range of distributions or the
              limited precision of computer arithmetic. Research will also be carried out in
              developing numerical methods that have a demonstrable order of accuracy. The
              software library will be written using the Message Passing Interface (MPI).
              Validation of the software will be carried out via comparisons against
              experimental data as well as numerical results obtained from slower,
              established solvers. This is an interdisciplinary research project involving
              the knowledge of algorithm development, computational electromagnetics,
              numerical methods and parallel computing. The research will be carried out by a
              group of three PI's (two from Iowa State University and one from the University
              of Illinois, Urbana Champaign), representing a mix of expertise and research
              interests that is vital to the success of this project. All the PIs have access
              to high-performance parallel computers and clusters, required for the software
              development and experimental validation of its practical efficiency.
