Title       : Direct Brain-Computer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9988748

Award Number: 9988748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melody M. Moore melody@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Mynatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Previous work has hinted that human brain signals may be able to control a
              computer.  However, traditional mouse-oriented interaction techniques are
              tedious and error-prone for users controlling a computer with neural signals.  
              In order to increase the efficacy of direct brain-computer interfaces, new
              paradigms of human-computer interaction must be devised in order to facilitate
              faster and more accurate control with minimal effort on the part of the user,
              through use of auditory, visual, haptic feedback.   The PIs will explore
              hysteretic ("nudge and shove") user interfaces as a possible means to this end,
              combining the new techniques with ideas adapted from Georgia Tech's "Aware
              Home" research in an effort to find ways to improve the quality of life for
              locked-in patients by giving them the ability through their brain signals to
              control features of their personal environment such as lights, television,
              radio, and temperature.   The PIs plan to implant six new patients and to
              continue working with the two patients who are already implanted.    This
              project will lay the groundwork fir innovative methods for communication
              (including phonemes, codes, and iconic languages that could be mapped directly
              to neural signals), for  Internet access (including web browsing and electronic
              communication);    and eventually for effective ways of giving implant patients
              control of prosthetics which could restore movement to paralyzed limbs.
