Title       : Coalescence of Binary Black Holes: Computational Contributions to LIGO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9988581

Award Number: 9988581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74849              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory B. Cook cookgb@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      1834 Wake Forest Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27106    336/758-5000

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Gravitational wave forms from the final plunge and coalescence of black-hole and
              neutron-star binaries are primary targets for LIGO and other gravitational wave
              interferometers.  These wave forms can only be predicted by large-scale
              numerical computations.  If such simulated wave forms are to be made available
              to the LIGO community in a timely fashion, a significant effort to compute them
              must be continued now.  Such an effort is beyond the scope of a
              single-investigator project, and requires a collaboration among a dedicated
              team of researchers.  Important theoretical and algorithmic issues remain to be
              solved before successful simulations of compact binary mergers can be achieved.
              

A code for evolving Einstein's equations in three spatial dimensions and
              with no special symmetries assumed is needed to produce binary coalescence
              simulations.  This code must be stable and accurate.  Achieving stability will
              require theoretical advances in understanding how evolution schemes interact
              with boundary conditions when the spacetime is evolving dynamically.  It will
              require the development of coordinate gauge choices that ensure that the
              coordinates do not behave pathologically.  Evolving neutron stars require
              incorporating matter sources into the Einstein equation solver and developing
              stable and accurate methods for evolving the matter.  Dr. Cook will construct
              such a code to solve the problem of coalescing compact binaries, combining
              theory and computation in a symbiotic fashion to make the most rapid progress
              possible toward the goal of producing gravitational wave forms.
