Title       : CyPhy Process for Rapid Product Design and Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9988880

Award Number: 9988880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin L. Wood wood@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Bourell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Beaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this research project is to change, fundamentally, 
              industrial engineering design processes by providing a means to integrate,
              directly, virtual and physical prototypes.  Six supporting research objectives
              will be pursued to meet this goal.  The first is to benchmark industrial design
              processes to clarify critical managerial needs, and quantify their cycle time,
              cost, and product quality tradeoffs.  The next objective is to develop a new
              similarity method to enable reliable functional tests with rapid prototypes in
              broad product domains.  A third objective is to embed instrumentation (sensors
              and interconnects) within physical prototypes, and to estimate product behavior
              through physical measurements.  Based on these measurements, a theoretical
              framework and algortihms will be developed to compare and integrate virtual
              models with physical models, followed by the objective of validating the new
              process by designing, fabricating, and thermo-mechanically evaluating prototype
              products from industrial benchmarks.

If successful, the research will
              significantly reduce design cycle times.  As a consequence, more information
              will be available to the designer earlier in the design process, possibly
              increasing productivity and design robustness.  Particular benefits expected
              from the research include: a novel solid freeform fabrication process with
              embedded sensor technology; sensor models using polymer materials; control,
              signal processing, and similitude analysis techniques for integrating virtual
              and physical models.

