Title       : An Interdisciplinary Approach to Improved Material Properties of Layered
               Manufacturing Functional Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9988906

Award Number: 9988906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fritz B. Prinz fbp@cdr.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Barnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Physical prototyping has gained popularity with the help of a concept called
              "layered manufacturing" or"solid free form fabrication" (SFF). The main
              benefits from SFF are mostly derived from its ability to create physical models
              regardless of shape complexity.  However, the majority of SFF processes
              available to the community today, produce "touch and feel" parts rather than
              'functional' components that can be used for engineering applications. 
              Although many novel parts can be made from these processes, residual stresses
              and anisotropy of material properties limit the applicability of current
              practices. Residual stresses, a characteristic feature of components made in a
              layerwise fashion, can cause distortion, warping, and delamination.  In
              response to these problems researchers from Stanford and the University of
              California-Davis are jointly exploring methods to (1) reduce residual stress
              levels during layered deposition of metallic and non-metallic materials and to
              (2) produce parts with enhanced microstructures with high mechanical strength
              and good wear resistance by optimizing the deposition patterns and synthesizing
              new composite materials. 

The following results are anticipated from the
              present research:   The development of a deeper understanding of the
              relationship of compositional constituents and process variables upon material
              properties and material deposition characteristics.  The synthesis of material
              composites with low coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) matrix and enhanced
              material properties.   The development of material deposition strategies which
              minimize thermal gradients and optimize microstructural morphology.   The
              integration of modeling and processing efforts to improve part decomposition
              and layering strategies for optimal part design and fabrication.   


