Title       : Recognition Theorems of Group Theory with Applications to Modular Galois Theory
               and Desingularization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a9988166

Award Number: 9988166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shreeram Abhyankar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jung's method of complex desingularization does not adopt to nonzero
              characteristic because in the complex case the local fundamental group above a
              normal crossing of the branch locus is Abelian whereas in nonzero
              characteristic it need not even be solvable. This is shown by constructing an
              unsolvable surface covering of degree six in characteristic five. Taking a
              plane section of this unsolvable surface covering, leads to a conjecture about
              the structure of the algebraic fundamental group of an affine algebraic curve
              over an algebraically closed ground field of nonzero characteristic. This
              Affine Curve Conjecture was settled affirmatively by Harbater and Raynaud.
              Various Recognition Theorems of group theory, which played a crucial role in
              the initial explorations of this Conjecture, have lead to some progress in a
              refined version of this Conjecture over finite ground fields. These Recognition
              Theorems, have also lead to some progress in Conjectures about Local and Global
              algebraic fundamental groups above normal crossings of branch loci of higher
              dimensional algebraic varieties. Another fertile application area for the
              Recognition Theorems has been in the direction of Permutation Polynomials and
              Exceptional Polynomials. This area, together with Guralnick's very recent work
              on genus zero coverings, as well as the theory of Moore-Carlitz-Drinfeld
              Modules is a rich source for finding explicit equations with prescribed Galois
              groups. The proposer intends to continue his investigations into the
              application of the Recognition into these areas of Galois theory.

    This
              research is in the combination of the fields of algebraic geometry and group
              theory. Although they are amongst the oldest parts of modern mathematics, both
              these fields have had a revolutionary flowering in the past fifty years. In its
              origin, algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the plane
              by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Likewise, group theory had its
              origin in the study of symmetries. Nowadays, both these fields make use of
              methods not only from algebra, but also from analysis and topology, and
              conversely they are finding applications in those fields as well as in physics,
              theoretical computer science and robotics. Moreover, interplay between
              algebraic geometry and group theory continues to enrich both these
              disciplines.


