Title       : Undergraduate Research Program in Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a9988059

Award Number: 9988059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris L. Craney chmclc@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark O. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              




ABSTRACT       Craney         Proposal # DBI - 9988059


This
              proposal from Occidental's Biochemistry Program will provide a summer research
              experience for eight undergraduates per year for three years, half of whom will
              be recruited from community colleges.  Many of the community colleges that will
              be contacted have very large minority student populations, and a special thrust
              of this proposal is to encourage and enable these minority students to
              participate in the program and thus enhance their opportunity to pursue a
              degree in biochemistry.  Occidental College's previous thirteen-year experience
              with community college students working in a summer research program in
              chemistry suggests these students generally have little or no opportunity to
              experience the excitement of scientific research at their local
              institution.
Occidental College has long held a position of leadership in
              undergraduate research.  The Biochemistry Program is jointly administered by
              faculty from both the Biology and Chemistry Departmepts.  These departments are
              highly ranked in a number of undergraduate research categories and this
              strength will contribute to the proposed project.  The experience gained in the
              previous thirteen-year undergraduate research program involving community
              college students in the Chemistry Department was recognized by one of the ten
              nationwide Merck Science Innovation Awards (1989), an NSF Special Creativity
              Award (1994), contributed to a NSF-AIRE award (1998) and a HHMI award (1996). 
              The well-documented success of the program at Occidental strongly suggests this
              proposal will have a significant impact on the student participants. 
              Furthermore, as demonstrated in the past, support from the REU program has been
              crucial in gaining additional support for the community college program from
              private sources.
Students will work on the following on-going projects: (1)
              Kinetic Studies of Human Erythrocyte Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Dimers
              (G6PD); (2) Molecular genetics of predation by the bacterial predator,
              Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus; (3) Biophysical Studies on Phospholipid Membranes;
              (4) Regulation of Immunoglobulin VDJ Rearrangement by a Mouse/Human Chimeric
              Heavy Chain; (5) Study on PQQ-dependent soluble glucose dehydrogenase (sGDH);
              and (6) Molecular Evolution of Ryanodine Receptor (RyR) Calcium Channels.


