Title       : Research on Plasma Light Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9988282

Award Number: 9988282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Lawler jelawler@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Curry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9988282
Lawler

Continued research on discharge plasmas for use as light
              sources is proposed. This research is in close collaboration with industry.
              
The first Task is to continue experimental and theoretical investigations of
              barium (Ba) glow discharge plasmas for use as light sources. Barium has crucial
              advantages as a radiating atom in a glow discharge with an inert gas buffer.
              Barium has the required vapor pressure of 1 to 20 mTorr at achievable
              temperatures, it has a low excited configuration with a resonance level at an
              energy less than half of the ionization potential, and it has its dominant
              resonance line at the peak of the efficacy curve. The primary disadvantage of
              barium vapor in a lighting application is that barium is quite reactive. These
              studies of Ba discharges could lead to an entirely new lighting technology
              analogous to the low pressure sodium (Na) technology introduced in the 1960's.
              Low pressure Na lamps currently achieve the highest luminous efficacy of any
              commercially available lighting product, but unfortunately these lamps produce
              nearly monochromatic light. The proposed Ba lamp technology should yield a
              higher efficacy in applications not requiring good color. The proposed Ba lamp
              technology should also produce a high efficacy with reasonable color. The
              theoretical investigation of Ba discharges is in close collaboration with Dr.
              Graeme Lister, Head of Theory and Modeling at OSRAM-SYLVANIA INC. The
              experimental studies are entirely at the University of Wisconsin and are
              entirely supported by NSF.

The second Task is to continue development of
              kinetic theory models of glow discharges.  Advances in computer performance
              have enabled us to run Monte Carlo plasma simulations to generate
              Self-Consistent space charge potentials. These simulations avoid all of the
              fluid approximations in commonly used glow discharge models. These
              Self-Consistent Monte Carlo simulations also avoid any internal boundary
              conditions at the plasma-sheath transition. The simulation results are useful
              now for comparison to other, more efficient fluid and kinetic theory models.
              Continued development of the Self-Consistent Monte Carlo method including the
              introduction of multi-step ionization and gas heating, and more direct
              comparison to experimental results will be emphasized.


***

