Title       : Scanning Probe Microscopy for Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9988640

Award Number: 9988640
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Hansma prasant@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on finding the fundamental limits on the performance of
              Atomic Force Microscopes (AFMs), and then building AFMs that come closer to
              those fundamental limits. Development of AFMs for small cantilevers that can be
              used by scientists and engineers across many disciplines is a primary goal of
              this research.  Small cantilevers have higher resonant frequencies at a given
              spring constant, thus the thermal noise is spread out over a larger frequency
              range giving less noise per unit bandwidth. Since small cantilevers have lower
              viscous drag in solution less dissipation and smaller fluctuations are
              observed. This allows faster and gentler imaging of soft materials, such as
              biological samples.  A strong motivation in this research and development is
              the long-term goal of making AFMs that can be useful on a wide range of
              materials, such as enzymes and other proteins for biomaterials processing.
              Therefore, small cantilevers and small cantilever AFMs could be an important
              part of the future of scanning probe microscopy, which will be of fundamental
              and practical interest to materials research. Graduate students involved in the
              project receive training in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting
              edge technology. This training will prepare them for a range of careers in
              academe, industry or government.
%%%
This research focuses on finding the
              fundamental limits on the performance of Atomic Force Microscopes (AFMs), and
              then building AFMs that come closer to those fundamental limits.  Based on
              previous research, we know that small cantilevers will be essential for this
              goal.  Thus, we will build AFMs for small cantilevers with goals not only of
              coming closer to the fundamental limits, but also of making generally useful
              microscopes for a wide range of applications in materials research and beyond. 
              On application that seems especially promising is single molecule mechanics of
              enzymes that nature uses for materials synthesis.  By analyzing single molecule
              mechanics of enzymes and other proteins, scientists and engineers will be able
              to develop materials that are environmentally friendly, easy to manufacture
              (e.g. under ambient conditions), and cost effective. Such materials would span
              medical and textile industries.  Graduate students involved in the project
              receive training in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting edge
              technology. This training will prepare them for a range of careers in colleges,
              industry or government.



