Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in the Biological Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9988047

Award Number: 9988047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances M. Hanzawa fhanzawa@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel N. Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT        Frances Hanzawa       DBI # 9988047



The Biology
              Department at Pomona College is committed to teaching students by engaging them
              in active research.  This commitment is reflected in the fact that each faculty
              members maintains a research program that invites and encourages student
              participation.  The current REU program has greatly enhanced student-faculty
              interactions in the research community.  The proposed program includes both
              part-time positions during the academic year and full-time summer positions in
              order to meet the needs of a variety of students.  The program is particularly
              oriented towards recruiting and retaining women and students from minorities
              traditionally underrepresented in science.  The program also strives to provide
              research experience to those who might not have such opportunities at their
              home institutions.  In the current program, it has been found that the
              increasing success in reaching these goals is due primarily to relationships
              established with a local community college that educates many students from
              underrepresented minority groups.  The impact of the program on the career
              trajectories of these students is exceptional--nearly all are now pursuing
              further education and research positions in the sciences.  The program will be
              strengthen our by establishing a relationship with a second local community
              college.  Funding provided by NSF will be partially matched by Pomona College 
              to accommodate 20 part-time academic year and 8 full-time summer positions
              annually.  Each student in the program will collaborate with a faculty advisor
              on a project in one of a variety of fields including genetics, molecular
              biology, developmental biology, population biology, ecology, animal behavior,
              endocrinology, neurobiology and physiology.  Students will participate in
              regular meetings within their research group as well as a number of activities
              that will both enrich the research community and involve others who are not yet
              involved in research.  These activities will include a series of informal
              research lunches, student-hosted lab open houses, and a formal poster
              presentation.



