Title       : FRG: Structure and Dynamics of Reversible Model Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9988451

Award Number: 9988451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy C. Berry gcberry@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Armitage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Focused-Research Group award combining synthetic, characterization,
              and rheological strength to the study of polymer gels.  Specifically, static
              and dynamic light scattering and rheological measurements will be carried out
              on two model reversible gels to elucidate the realtion of macroscopic behavior
              to the underlying thermondynamics and molecular dynamics.  One of the gels will
              comprise a water soluble telechelic polymer and a small molecule crosslinker
              with groups conjugate to the endsgroups of the polymer.  These telechelic
              polymer endgroups will reversibly associate with the crosslink loci, the
              distributions of molecular weight of the telechelic polymer, and the
              functionality of the crosslinker.  These will be varied to explore their
              effects on the structure and dynamics of the model gel.  The other system will
              comprise an ABC triblock copolymer, with mutually incompatible A,B and C block
              where B, but not A and C may be swollen in water.  At high temperatures the A
              and C blocks will be fluid, permitting the material to be formed, but at low
              temperatures it is anticipated that A and C will be glassy micelles, with C
              excluded from A micelles and vice versa.  The nonergodic character of the gels
              will be of particular interest, and the variation of this with processing
              conditions will be characterized by light scattering measurements.  Then
              viscoelastic properties of the gels will be determined and considered in terms
              of the structure and dynamics determined by light scattering and the known
              chemical characteristics imposed by the gel synthesis. 
Gels are an important
              category of "soft matter" and this multi- and inter-disciplinary approach
              should provide significant educational benefits to the students involved in
              addition to advancing our understanding.
 
