Title       : Research to Produce Pressures of 450 GPa or Higher on Hydrogen and to Produce
               Metallic Hydrogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a9988764

Award Number: 9988764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. Ruoff ruoff@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns attempts to statically compress hydrogen to pressures of
              450 GPa or higher. Hydrogen has multifaceted behavior, exhibiting covalent
              bonding in the molecule, behaving as a positive ion combined with H2O (HCl in
              water), as a negative ion (in large part) in crystals of the alkali hydrides,
              and having secondary hydrogen bonds with electronegative elements already
              bonded to other molecules. Quantum mechanical calculations performed by Wigner
              and Huntington in 1935  showed that still another possibilty exists, namely
              that at very high pressures hydrogen could be metallic. A more recent
              prediction suggests that metallic hydrogen could be a high temperature
              superconductor. This goal of this project is to realize the metallic state of
              hydrogen by static compression. The realization of this goal will solve one of
              the outstanding problems of condensed matter physics. It will open up new areas
              of investigation of the properties of materials under extreme conditions of
              pressure and will assist in the understanding of the cores of the giant planets
              which are believed to be composed of metallic hydrogen.
%%%
Since the early
              1900s hydrogen has been the key element for the understanding of the structure
              of matter. Hydrogen has multifaceted behavior. It exhibits covalent bonding to
              form a molecule, it behaves as a positive ion combined with water, it exists in
              large part as a negative ion in crystals of the alkali hydrides, etc.. Quantum
              mechanical calculations performed in 1935 showed that still another possibility
              exists, namely that at very high pressures hydrogen could be metallic, while a
              more recent prediction suggests that metallic hydrogen could even be a high
              temperature superconductor. It is the goal of this research to generate
              sufficiently high static pressures to bring about an experimentally verifiable
              state of metallic hydrogen. The pressures necessary to accomplish this have
              never been achieved in the laboratory but are believed to exist in the cores of
              the giant planets. The realization of this goal will open up new areas of
              investigation of the properties of materials under extreme conditions of
              pressure, and will provide data needed for the understanding of the properties
              of the cores of the giant planets.
***

