Title       : Spectral Line Radiation from the Molecular Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9988104

Award Number: 9988104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257507             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Watson w-watson@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. William Watson of the University of Illinois will calculate the creation and
              transport of spectral line radiation in the molecular gas in astronomical
              environments-mainly in the gas of star forming regions and in the gas of
              accretion disks. Specific goals of this research include the following: (1)
              delineating the spatial and spectral variations of the polarization
              characteristics of
radiation at radio and millimeter wavelengths from
              potential star-forming molecular clouds due to turbulent magnetic fields; (2)
              examining the dynamical changes in the images and spectra of masers in a
              Keplerian disk to assess possible systematic uncertainties in the maser
              distance to NGC4258, and hence in the recalibration of the extragalactic
              distance scale based on Cepheids; and (3) relating the polarization
              characteristics of observed maser radiation to the magnetic fields in a clumpy,
              Keplerian disk to better understand the structure of accretion
              disks.

Delineating the consequences of turbulent magnetic fields for the
              radiation from
molecular clouds will provide a basis for observational efforts
              to identify an irregular component of the magnetic field that is presumed to be
              present and provide a pressure that supports molecular clouds. A unifying theme
              in Dr. Watson's research is the transport of radiation in an irregular medium.
              The calculations are especially needed because of the lack of a definitive
              theory for magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence in the relevant environments.
              The calculations will provide a framework for extracting key parameters that
              are used to describe theories for turbulence. Because of the highly refined
              data that are available and the broad importance of the issues, masing in the
              circumnuclear disk of the galaxy NGC4258 serves as a focus for the research on
              astrophysical masers. It will provide a basis for research on the transport of
              maser radiation in other types of astrophysical disks and on related aspects of
              the theory of astrophysical masers.

