Title       : REU Site Grant in the Field of Biostatistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a9988006

Award Number: 9988006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Lemeshow lemeshow.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Haikady N. Nagaraja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The fact that there is a shortage of professionals trained in the use of modern
              statistical methods is clear from the large number of outstanding employment
              opportunities available today in academia, government and industry.
              Universities are constantly searching for bright, highly motivated students to
              study statistics but, at most universities, this education takes place at the
              graduate level.   Turning students on to the challenges and rewards of
              statistics while they are undergraduates has great appeal as we plan for the
              inevitable increase in demand we are likely to see for these skills in the
              future. Support is requested for an REU site grant in the field of
              biostatistics. Following a nationwide search, six undergraduate trainees will
              be selected. Each trainee will spend 8 weeks at The Ohio State University where
              they will be assigned to a project requiring the application of statistical
              methods to a real problem. During the first five weeks of the program all
              students will take an intensive 5-credit course in applied statistics. In this
              course they will learn to reason statistically, to use statistical software, to
              manage data and to perform standard statistical analyses. Throughout the eight
              weeks trainees will meet with faculty mentors concerning the subject matter
              issues of their specific projects, will meet with statistical faculty, staff,
              and graduate research assistants to discuss alternative ways of analyzing their
              data, will present their problems and alternative solutions to the other
              trainees, and will attend seminars demonstrating the wide variety of
              applications of statistics in science. All trainees will prepare, during the
              eight-week period, a written report documenting the scientific questions and
              the associated solutions. A poster session will be held where results from this
              summer experience can be 
shared with the scientific community at The Ohio
              State University.
