Title       : Niche Finding - A New Task of Knowledge Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9988084

Award Number: 9988084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul Valdes-Perez valdes@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The starting point for many tasks of data-driven knowledge discovery is a data
              matrix whose rows are individuals, columns are numeric and/or symbolic
              features, and entries are feature values.  The usual goals of discovery or data
              analysis include finding classifiers, clusters, association rules, and Bayesian
              networks.  The new question posed by the PI in this work about a data matrix
              is:   Given one individual (or row) that is of special interest, what is unique
              about that individual?  That is, concisely articulate that individual's niche
              within the overall context.  One challenge the PI intends to address here is to
              better understand what statements of individual uniqueness people tend to find
              understandable and interesting.  Preliminary results indicate that the criteria
              for these two properties are mostly general, and only partly domain-dependent. 
               A prototype implementation of niche finding, using a set covering approach,
              has been applied to a newly assembled dataset on 236 major U.S. universities
              described by 123 features.  The PI will extend the methods by adding new
              feature types, scaling up to larger datasets, comparing against alternative
              approaches and different approximation algorithms, and by applying niche
              finding to significant problems in science and other professional fields.  The
              overall goal is to make niche finding as usual a discovery task as the others
              cited.   The PI expects to show that there is a new, simple, and interesting
              question to ask about datasets that has broad applicability in science and
              other professional fields.  He also intends to enhance public appreciation for
              knowledge discovery and information processing by developing special versions
              for baseball, with plans for use on public media and as a museum exhibit

