Title       : RUI: Nature of Spacetimes with Mild Singularities or Cauchy Horizons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a9988607

Award Number: 9988607
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42486              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Konkowski dak@nadn.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Naval Academy
	      
	      Annapolis, MD  21402    301/267-6100

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A theoretical study will be undertaken of gravitational models
              called
spacetimes which contain two kinds of boundaries: mild
              singularities,
defined by particle paths which end abruptly,  and Cauchy
              horizons,
defined as the stopping point for the equations which describe
              the
model. The research will have three thrusts. The first will be to
study
              the behavior of quantum particles in the vicinity of the
spacetime
              singularities. The second will be to extend a
previously-developed conjecture
              into the stability of singularities and
Cauchy horizons. The last will be to
              study the mathematical
structure of spacetimes with certain unusual
              singularities.

The mathematical models used are based on Einstein's theory
              which describes
gravitation, one of the four basic forces of nature.  It is
              therefore
important to understand both the mathematical structure and
              predictions
of this theory.  Since basic theorems predict the existence
              of
singularities in Einstein's theory, it is important to study the
nature of
              these singularities.  Therefore, Prof Konkowski has chosen
to study spacetime
              solutions to Einstein's equations which possess the
most pathological types of
              singularities. In particular, spacetimes are
studied with mild singularities
              and Cauchy horizons.  This study should
lead to a more thorough understanding
              of general relativity and its
models of the gravitational effects of physical
              objects.

