Title       : Thermally Stable Organic and Inorganic Alkalides and Electrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a9988881

Award Number: 9988881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $528000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Dye dye@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to synthesize and characterize crystalline salts that contain
              alkali cations complexed by organic cage complexants and either alkali metal
              anions (alkalides) or trapped electrons (electrides) as the counter-ions.  In
              order to enhance thermal stability, the emphasis will be on the synthesis and
              use of tertiary amine aza-type complexants, which are more resistant to
              reduction than the currently used cyclic and bicyclic polyethers. 
              Cryptand-like or adamanzane-like molecules with cavities appropriate for
              selected alkali cations will be synthesized.  When the rate of encapsulation of
              the cation is fast enough, the free complexant will be used with the alkali
              metal in a solvent such as methylamine or dimethyl ether to produce the
              alkalide or electride in solution.  Addition of a less polar co-solvent such as
              trimethylamine or diethyl ether will permit crystallization to be initiated. 
              Slow cooling of the saturated solution or slow removal of the more polar (and
              more volatile) co-solvent will be used to grow crystals suitable for structure
              determination by X-ray diffraction.  Characterization methods and physical
              property studies will include chemical anaylsis, optical absorbance and
              reflectance, magnetic susceptibility, pulsed EPR and ENDOR and nuclear magnetic
              resonance differential scanning calorimetry and conductivity.  Such
              measurements will be much easier than are now possible with alkalides and
              electrides if, as we anticipate, the compounds are thermally stable to at least
              room temperature.  In an effort to synthesize a new class of inorganic
              electrides, alkali metal adducts to all-silica zeolites will also be prepared
              and characterized.  

These new classes of alkalides and electride compounds
              are of great inferent in the materials sciences community.  The importance of
              novel conducting materials to advancing areas of solid state materials
              sciences, such as molecular electronics, is receiving considerable emphasis in
              various industries.

