Title       : Assessing the Impact of Systemic Initiative Programs: Modeling Best Practices of
               Data Collection, Analysis, and Dissemination of Results from Educational
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9988050

Award Number: 9988050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean W. Mulvenon seanm@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronna C. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this study is to complete an empirical assessment of the specific
              effect of Statewide, Urban, and Rural Systemic Initiative Programs on improving
              the pedagogical practices and student achievement in science and mathematics 
              Using the six reform drivers as a guide, a study has been designed to assess
              the types of data produced and reported by SI programs, methodological
              procedures to assess the procedural (process drivers) and empirical (outcome
              drivers) effects of these programs, to identify innovative techniques and
              approaches to enhance the analysis of SI data, and improve methods for
              dissemination and use of results on the impact of SI programs.

Four
              objectives have been identified to ensure the purpose of the proposed study are
              met. The first
objective of this study will be to investigate and collect all
              available data on SI programs.  The second objective is to standardize a
              mechanism for interpreting data reported from the SI programs.  The third
              objective is to model additional strategies for conducting educational research
              on SI programs using data from Arkansas and three school districts within
              Arkansas. The final objective is to develop a practitioner's guide on
              measurement and statistics and will be designed to enhance the dissemination of
              results from SI programs and educational research. 

The identified outcomes
              from this study include: (a) A NSF SI database that could be used by
              other
researchers interested in investigating the impact of SI programs, (b)
              An empirical assessment of specific effects from past and current SI programs,
              focusing on all six reform drivers to identify the most successful elements of
              each program, (c) A comprehensive review of current practices toward analyzing
              data and demonstrations of procedures that may enhance the interpretation of
              results and can be easily employed, and (d) A model that may be employed to
              enhance the quality of data developed or collected, the analyses that can be
              completed in future assessments to identify specific program or classroom
              effects using this data, and a practitioner's guide on measurement and
              statistics to improve dissemination of results obtained from SI or educational
              programs.
