Title       : The Solution Physics of F-Actin and Filamentous Bacteriophages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9988389

Award Number: 9988389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay X. Tang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young professor at Indiana University
              for research that focuses on the intermolecular interactions of filamentous
              biopolymers, their assembly into distinct physical states, and transitions
              between the states. The major part of the program will use the protein filament
              F-actin, which is abundant in both muscle and non-muscle cells and is essential
              for cell motility and locomotion. A fraction of experiments will also be
              performed using filamentous viruses fd, Ml3 and pfl, as alternative biopolymers
              to compare with the physical properties of F-actin. The overall goal is to
              define experimentally a number of self-organized states and phase transitions
              in solutions of these biopolymers. The knowledge obtained in this proposal is
              directly relevant to biological phenomena such as the network and bundle
              formation of F-actin in many cell types. Elucidating the molecular interactions
              that govern the formation of various physical states will provide a means to
              predict and manipulate transitions among them, and therefore have potential
              applications for materials science and biomedical engineering. Participating
              graduate students will receive valuable training in applying physics concepts
              to complex biomaterials, and consequently acquire practical skills necessary to
              potentially succeed in a growing job market involving bioengineering and
              medically oriented research in both academic institutions and the biotechnology
              industry. 
%%%
This individual investigator award is to a young professor at
              Indiana University for a project that aims to study physical properties of
              protein filaments and filamentous viruses, which are common and relatively
              simple biological entities. The major part of the study focuses on an abundant
              cellular protein actin that can be readily purified from muscle tissues, but it
              is also a crucial component in non-muscle cells. In fact, the dynamic
              self-assembly of actin into filamentous and crosslinked forms is the most
              important factor for cellular shape change and migration. Our goal is to
              experimentally define the physical interactions that cause variable and
              reversible assembly of this essential cellular protein. Some of the polymeric
              properties of actin filaments will also be compared with filamentous
              bacteriophages, which are the most primitive self-replicating viruses. Both
              types of biopolymers have certain physical properties in common, and a better
              understanding of these simple systems shall help us to predict and manipulate
              their behavior, first in test tubes and then potentially in cellular and
              physiological conditions. Participating students will receive valuable training
              in applying physics concepts to biomaterials, and consequently acquire
              practical skills necessary to potentially succeed in a growing job market
              involving bioengineering and medical research in both academic institutions and
              the biotechnology industry. 
***

