Title       : Approximation Methods for Inference, Learning and Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9988642

Award Number: 9988642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Jordan jordan@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Graphical models have become a unifying focus for interdisciplinary research in
              the areas of probabilistic inference, learning and decision-making.  Referred
              to in various settings as Bayesian networks,  Markov random fields, influence
              diagrams, decision networks, or structured stochastic systems, the graphical
              model formalism is general enough to encompass a wide variety of classical
              probabilistic systems in AI and engineering, while providing a firm
              mathematical foundation on which to design new systems.   This research will
              focus on approximation algorithms for large-scale problems to provide a
              significantly deeper empirical and theoretical understanding of graphical
              models.  The approach will be based on probability propagation, variational and
              Monte Carlo methods for inference, learning and decision-making, the aim being
              to understand the kinds of graphical models for which these methods are
              appropriate.  The PI will extend the scope of approximation methodology to
              include hybrid graphical models and decision networks, and to provide
              theoretical convergence analyses and error analyses for them.  He will also
              test out the new methods empirically on standard benchmarks and in a variety of
              application areas.  The ultimate goal of the research is to establish
              probabilistic graphical models as a full-fledged engineering discipline capable
              of providing robust, systematic solutions to large-scale problems in inference,
              learning and decision-making.    A successful approximation methodology for
              graphical models would allow an engineer to design a graphical solution to meet
              performance specifications for a given problem, where these specifications are
              given in terms of time / accuracy tradeoffs and estimation / approximation
              tradeoffs.   Even partial progress towards these goals will have wide impact in
              fields where large-scale probabilistic systems are used, including information
              retrieval, medical diagnosis, biological sequence analysis, source and
              error-control coding, speech recognition, and machine vision

