Title       : Projection Methods for Balanced Model Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9988393

Award Number: 9988393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny C. Sorensen sorensen@caam.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Athanasios C. Antoulas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This project proposes the development of reduced models for
              large-scale
linear time invariant (LTI) systems of the form
 
   dx/dt = Ax
              + Bu, y = Cx

through low rank approximation of certain system Grammians.
              Complex systems 
of this form arise in circuit simulation; they also arise
              through spatial 
discretization of certain time dependent PDE control
              systems.

A new approach to model reduction will be studied, that will
              address some 
fundamental difficulties with existing dimension reduction
              techniques. 
These issues are central to the potential development of robust
              and widely 
applicable software. We intend to develop a computational
              methodology that 
will:

(1) Provide rigorous bounds on the response error
              of the reduced system; 
(2) Naturally preserve fundamental system properties
              such as stability;
(3) Be fully automatic once a desired error tolerance is
              specified. 

We propose to investigate subspace projection methods of Krylov
              and 
non-Krylov type.  Our primary goal will be to develop implicit
              restarting
methods that will iteratively produce low rank approximations to
              
controllability-, observability-, and cross-Grammians which are near best
              
approximations of reduced rank to the full Grammians.

The methods proposed
              will provide balanced partial realizations of large 
state space systems. Our
              computational experience with model problems 
indicates that the Hankel
              singular values of many systems decay extremely 
rapidly. Hence very low rank
              approximations to the system Grammians are  
possible and accurate low order
              reduced models will result. 

We expect to find important applications in
              circuit simulation and in 
the control of systems governed by partial
              differential equations,
particularly parabolic equations subject to boundary
              control. There is 
great potential in such problems for extensive dimension
              reduction. This 
will enable the design of real-time controllers for complex
              systems.

