Title       : REU Site: Cellular, Molecular and Genetic Approaches to Biological Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9988022

Award Number: 9988022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178044             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. David DavidJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Blockus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract - John David - Proposal #    DBI - 9988022



Our NSF-REU Site
              Program will provide summer research opportunities for undergraduates from
              three primarily undergraduate regional colleges and five Historically Black
              Colleges and Universities.  We will work in collaboration with this select
              group of schools to provide their students the kind of research experience only
              available at a major comprehensive research university.  This NSF-REU program
              will complement undergraduate internship programs for University of Missouri
              (MU) students funded by the University.
The research programs of the MU
              faculty mentors will center on the theme "Cellular, Molecular, and Genetic
              Approaches to Biological Problems." These programs use methodology ranging from
              recombinant DNA technology to molecular cytology to sophisticated population
              genetics.  All NSF-REU faculty mentors will be personally involved in their
              research projects and have a history of highly successful partnerships with
              undergraduate intems.
Faculty liaisons at our eight partner schools (Florida
              A&M University, Grinnell College, Jackson State University, Prairie View A&M
              University, Southwest Missouri State University, Truman State University,
              University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, and Xavier University-Louisiana) will be
              responsible for the selection of the intems.  They will assist in the
              preparation of the intems before the summer research experience at MU and the
              continuation of the training of the intems when they return to their home
              campus.
The research experience is the heart of our summer program.  We will
              also help intems develop critical communications skills through brown-bag
              lunches, lab group meetings, and an end-ofprogram Summer Undergraduate Research
              Science Symposium.  We will provide financial support for intems to also
              present their research at regional and national meetings in their discipline. 
              Finally, we have developed a number of enrichment activities including panel
              discussions on preparation for graduate school and career options and a science
              ethics workshop.


