Title       : Research on Applied Probability Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9988749

Award Number: 9988749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel F. Neuts marcel@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research project is for the development of integrated methodology consisting
              of mathematical analysis, algorithms, and computer experimentation for systems
              involving probabilistic behavior.  The long-term goal is to quantify properties
              of embedded point processes.  In this project a variety of important queuing
              problems will be studied from this perspective with the intent of developing a
              physical understanding of these systems.  This research will be performed in
              collaboration with a group of distinguished international colleagues to
              investigate questions such as the following:  (1) What is the behavior of the
              system between significant runs of increments or decrements? (2) During
              transient phases,  is the output stream more or less regular than the input
              stream?  (3) Does the input-output stream have fundamentally different
              behavioral characteristics at different levels of traffic intensity?  and (4)
              How does the distribution of time until a new maximum queue length evolve with
              the system state and time?   Research results on the use of matrix-geometric
              methods to obtain the moments of these systems will be extended and utilized in
              this project.

The proposed methodology has widespread applicability,
              particularly to telecommunication, biological, and manufacturing systems.  The
              results of this research can lead to improved methods for designing stochastic
              systems.  The intuition developed from the problems studied can lead to
              guidelines for system design that replace wasteful trial and error and costly
              simulation.  The mathematical methods developed may allow accurate performance
              prediction of proposed system designs and can enable analysts to produce
              probabilistic estimates for the occurrence of various combined events.  System
              managers may  be able to more effectively allocate resources to operate these
              systems and to avoid congestion and losses.  The results can lead to
              intelligent decisions for expanding system capacity and for early detection of
              changes in system performance ensuring satisfactory customer service without
              excessive investment.

