Title       : Collaborative Research: Compiler-Supported Simulation of Scalable Applications
               for Wide-Area Distributed Computing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9988471

Award Number: 9988471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajive Bagrodia rajive@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wide-area distributed computing systems represent the future of scientific and
              commercial computing.
Such systems will enable a wide range of futuristic
              applications with the potential for enormous economic
and social impact
              applications such as distributed multimedia services, Web-based
              collaboration,
distributed supercomputing, and teleimmersion. Before this
              vision can be realized, however, extensive
research will be required in
              virtually all aspects of software system design, implementation, and
              evaluation.
Discrete-event simulation has been an essential tool for the
              design and analysis of traditional computational
systems and applications.
              Realistic simulation of applications executing on wide-area distributed
              systems,
however, is a challenging task because of the scale of the software,
              hardware and network subsystems that
must be simulated. Nevertheless, the
              intricacy of these components and their complex, closed-loop
interactions
              require the components and their interactions to be modeled in sufficient
              detail to appropriately
predict their impact on overall system
              performance.
In recent work, the PIs have collaboratively obtained some
              exciting but preliminary results showing that
specific compiler information
              can greatly enhance the efficiency and scalability of simulation of
              message-passing programs. For instance, it was shown that simulation of a
              scalable ASCI kernel benchmark
application called SWEEP3D executing on up to
              128 processors could be simulated faster than real-time by
using parallel
              simulations together with the type of compiler optimizations that are the
              subject of this
proposal. Also, the compiler-optimized simulation can evaluate
              very large data sets on thousands of
processors: it was possible to simulate
              the performance of a 40 million-problem size Sweep3D for up to
10,000
              processors. There are potentially a number of other strategies to dramatically
              improve simulation
scalability and performance by using compiler information,
              none of which have been studied so far. A
comprehensive program of research is
              required to develop their potential and evaluate their impact on
simulation of
              real world applications.
The focus of the current proposal is to develop
              compiler-based techniques for improving the efficiency of
parallel discrete
              event simulation, and to use these techniques to evaluate application and
              system software
performance for wide-area distributed systems. There are three
              key components to this proposal:
1. To explore a range of compiler-supported
              strategies for highly efficient simulation of dynamic, large-scale systems and
              applications.
2. To use these strategies in developing a practical performance
              tool for wide-area distributed systems, by
extending our existing compiler and
              simulation infrastructure. This requires addressing additional
challenges
              raised by the dynamic nature of these systems and the lack of well-defined
              metrics to
measure effective application level performance in such
              environments.
3. To evaluate the effectiveness of these strategies for real
              world distributed applications such as SF-Express, a large-scale distributed
              interactive simulation (DIS) environment, and a distributed video-on-demand
              server (a distributed multimedia application).
The proposed research program
              builds on a collaboration of several years between the PIs' research
              groups,
and brings together key strengths in parallel simulation of
              large-scale parallel programs, parallel simulation of wide-area networks, and
              in parallelizing compilers and their use for supporting performance
              evaluation.
This program of research also complements the ongoing software
              efforts for wide-area systems that are
aimed at developing operating system
              services (e.g., Globus, Legion, and WebOS) and programming
environments (e.g.,
              Legion, Globe, and GrADS). As such, the proposed research program represents
              an
essential third leg of software support for the development and deployment
              of successful wide-area
distributed systems.
