Title       : Invariant Theory of Finite Groups and Finite-Dimensional Hopf Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9988756

Award Number: 9988756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin W. Lorenz lorenz@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the research of Professor Martin Lorenz in the area of
              algebra with particular emphasis on the structure of rings of invariants
              arising from actions of finite groups and finite dimensional Hopf algebras. 
              The main objectives are the description of the Grothendieck groups of these
              rings, the Cohen-Macaulay property of invariant rings under finite group
              actions, rationality questions for certain fields of invariants, and the
              continued development of the representation theory of finite dimensional Hopf
              algebras.  The subject and the methods employed are mainly algebraic
              (commutative and noncommutative), but there are strong connections with
              algebraic K-theory and algebraic geometry.  This project aims at deepening our
              present knowledge of the invariant rings of specific, especially relevant types
              of finite group actions while also extending the boundaries of both invariant
              and representation theory of finite groups by approaching these fields,
              whenever appropriate, from the more general perspective of Hopf
              algebras.

Invariant theory and representation theory of groups are classical
              algebraic themes that are ubiquitous in pure mathematics and are indispensable
              in parts of applied mathematics, notably coding theory, and in theoretical
              physics as well.  Both theories are formally subsumed in the theory of Hopf
              algebras, more recent algebraic structures with a wide range of applications. 
              In recognition of their relevance in physics, certain types of Hopf algebras
              are referred to as quantum groups.  Hopf algebras further naturally arise in
              knot theory, an area of particular interest to molecular chemists as well as
              physicists.

