Title       : Gelfand Pairs and Automorphic L-functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9988611

Award Number: 9988611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herve Jacquet hj@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposal is to study certain integrals of automorphic
forms on
              a reductive group G.  The integrals are over a subgroup H of G
which is large
              in G, in the sense that over the algebraic closure of the
ground-field, the
              group H has an open orbit in the flag variety of G.  
The integrals may be
              thought of being periods attached to automorphic
forms and turn out to be, in
              all cases, interesting numbers. In
particular, in many cases, the square of
              the periods are conjectured to be
the central values of automorphic
              L-functions. Examples of such a
phenomenon are results of Waldspurger and
              others and conjectures of
Gross-Prasad. In other cases, the forms for which
              the integrals are
non-zero are interesting in their own right. The
              investigator studies
theses periods and their properties by using a variant of
              the trace
formula, called the relative trace formula.

The proposal focuses
              on one aspect of the so called Langlands program. The
goal of the program is
              to study the automorphic objects (called
automorphic representations); they
              can be described in terms of the
spectrum of certain operators (generalized
              Fourier analysis). The data
attached to those objects is encoded in a family
              of functions of one
complex variable, the automorphic L-functions. The
              conjectured properties
of these functions contain all possible information on
              the automorphic
representations.  Moreover, other L-functions coming from
              geometry or
Diophantine problems should be automorphic L-functions. The value
              of the
automorphic L-functions at a particular point (central value) is
              a
especially interesting number which is difficult to compute. In many
cases,
              it is conjectured that this number is non-negative and yet this is
cannot be
              established directly.  The investigator is using a new method
(the relative
              trace formula) to obtain information about some of these
numbers by
              representing them as square of integrals. This a novel way to
connect the
              automorphic L-functions and the automorphic representations.
