Title       : Enhancing Sensitivity of Vibration-based Damage Metrics using Feedback Control:
               Towards Dual Use Smart Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a9988414

Award Number: 9988414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura E. Ray laura.e.ray@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Laura R. Ray
9988414
Enhancing Sensitivity of Vibration-Based Damage Metrics
              using Feedback Control: Towards Dual Use Smart Structures  


	This project
              explores methods of enhancing sensitivity of modal properties to local damage
              in order to detect damage noninvasively and autonomously in smart structures.
              Smart structures contain embedded or surface mounted sensors and actuators that
              are normally used for vibration or acoustic control.   Developing and
              demonstrating methods by which these components can also be used to diagnose
              and localize structural degradation due to damage is the primary objective of
              the project.  A second objective is to integrate damage detection and active
              vibration control in order to develop multifunctional smart structures. Choice
              of the control system, which encompasses determining an appropriate control
              model of the structure, quantifying nominal uncertainty, selecting number of
              and placement of actuators and sensors, and choosing a compensator, is
              investigated in the context of each objective.  

Vibration-based damage
              detection is complicated by the small sensitivity of modal metrics to local
              damage.  The hypothesis of the project is that careful selection of control
              laws for actuating the structure can enhance observability of local parameter
              variations induced by damage. An analytic framework for designing sensitivity
              enhancing control laws and for integrating such systems with vibration damping
              objectives is developed using optimization. Proposed metrics targeted for
              sensitivity enhancement include modal frequencies, mode shapes, and
              electromechanical impedance.  Experimental efforts focus on demonstrating
              sensitivity enhancing control for plate structures constructed from homogeneous
              materials. 

		The methods under development have application to autonomous
              damage detection and control of flexible structures or substructures.  Examples
              include aerodynamic surfaces, aircraft fuselage, building and bridge
              substructures  (e.g., plates, beams, shells), rotating machinery, and
              thin-walled pipes.  Through assured damage detection methods and
              multifunctional smart components, the research promotes economical use and
              development of smart structures in a variety of applications.



