Title       : Computer Graphics Techniques for Modeling and Rendering Weathered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9988535

Award Number: 9988535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Dorsey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Image synthesis is an important problem for such diverse fields as architecture,
              lighting and industrial design, scientific visualization, simulation systems,
              entertainment, and advertising. An important, largely unexplored area of
              computer image generation is the simulation of weathering and its effects on
              appearance. Weathering results from the interaction of the environment with the
              materials in the world. 

Current computer graphics models of materials are
              based on the physics of idealized surfaces that exhibit ideal diffuse, glossy,
              or specular reflection. However, such idealized materials rarely exist and are
              hard to produce. In order to make such idealized materials look realistic,
              animators and modelers often apply many textures. Unfortunately, this use of
              texture maps is very ad hoc and labor intensive, and it is in conflict with the
              use of idealized models. What is needed are physically-based models of real
              materials that incorporate their possible life histories, and hence, possible
              appearances. 

The goal of this project is to devise new computer models of
              materials that can sustain a range of appearances over time. Through an
              NSF-CAREER award, we have made significant headway on this problem and built
              critical infrastructure for future work. In this Accomplishment-Based Renewal
              (ABR) proposal, we provide a brief summary of several new directions that build
              on our initial work, including the study and modeling of several additional
              materials, simulations of environmental factors that affect appearance, surface
              representations and modes of interaction, a measurement device, and techniques
              for rendering light transport in materials with complex internal structures.
              

This work has the potential to greatly expand the visual realism of
              synthetic images and reduce the reliance on tedious ad hoc techniques by
              providing fundamental, sophisticated models for materials and the processes
              that affect their time-varying appearance. In addition to the work's importance
              in computer graphics, this research should benefit such applications as
              scientific visualization, architecture and preservation, advertising,
              entertainment, art restoration, automotive design, geology, civil engineering,
              and environmental sciences. 

Because the project draws on material from
              several other disciplines such as applied math, geology, materials science,
              optics, and physics, it promises to add new dimensions to the field of computer
              graphics.
