Title       : Metals and Hydrogen Bonding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9988184

Award Number: 9988184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon K. Anderson ganderson@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Brammer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research by Lee Brammer, Chemistry Department, University of
              Missouri-St. Louis, on hydrogen bonds that involve metals. Three aspects will
              be addressed. The first is the direct involvement of metal ions in hydrogen
              bonding. Here, early transition metals will be studied as H-bond acceptors. The
              second area concerns the indirect influence of metals via electronic
              interaction with ligands capable of hydrogen bonding. Research will focus on
              understanding aggregation by hydrogen bonding in supramolecular structures. 
              Finally, the spatial influence of metal coordination geometry in directing the
              mutual approach of metal complexes that are then linked via ligand-ligand
              hydrogen bonds will be studied.  In this domain, the role of hydrogen bonding
              in solid state and crystal engineering will be investigated using new compounds
              composed of coordination and organometallic compounds. The ultimate objectives
              are the rational design of solid state materials and understanding host-guest
              chemistry of "metal-walled" receptors and channels. The compounds synthesized
              will be characterized by solution and solid state spectroscopy, single crystal
              and powder diffraction studies, calorimetry, gravimetric analysis, and
              computational modeling.

Hydrogen bonding is important in chemistry and
              biology, but its role in organometallic chemistry, materials, and bioinorganic
              chemistry is not well understood, particularly as it affects new areas such as
              supramolecular chemistry, self-assembly, and crystal engineering.  Research
              will be focused on hydrogen bonds that involve metals.  Traditional studies
              have considered non-metal elements.  The research is expected to lead to a
              better understanding of proton transfer reactions involving metals, new
              hydrogen-bonded hybrid organic-inorganic materials, and a new class of host or
              channel structures involving organometallic compounds.  Students will gain
              experience in a variety of experimental techniques that will be invaluable as
              they seek careers in emerging areas of chemistry.

