Title       : Adaptive Systems-on-a-Chip for Low-Power Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9988238

Award Number: 9988238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne P. Burleson burleson@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell Tessier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Future signal processing systems will use a heterogeneous System-on-a-Chip
              architecture for performance, flexibility, cost and power efficiency. 
              Components will include programmable DSP and RISC cores, memories, dedicated
              hardware blocks and embedded field programmable logic cores for flexible and
              late-bound functionality.  Adaptation of the system will be required to track
              time-varying aspects of the environment.  Dynamic reconfigurability can be used
              to adapt algorithms and architectures to time-varying computations in signal
              processing applications, thus dramatically reducing average power consumption. 
              The objective of this project is to develop theory, methodology, tools, and
              demonstration of several adaptive signal processing systems using parameterized
              macros which can be dynamically configured to adapt to the computation and save
              power.  Improvements to embedded field programmable architectures and circuits
              will be developed to make them better suited for low-power signal processing
              applications.  This includes hardware and software mechanisms at the chip and
              system level to support the dynamic reconfiguration of parameterized macros to
              save power.  CAD techniques will leverage recent work in incremental
              place-and-route, macro-based floorplanning, and statically scheduled
              communication.  New design methods and tools will be evaluated in four
              realistic and complex DSP systems which all have time-varying computations and
              tight power budgets: 1) an MPEG2 encoder, 2) an FFT-based wireless receiver, 3)
              a radar for unmanned aircraft, and 4) a wireless LAN prototype.  Collaboration
              with ENST/Paris is anticipated.


