Title       : Radon-like Transforms: Possible Applications to Partial Differential Equations
               and Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9988798

Award Number: 9988798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58703              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Jerison jerison@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Greenblatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

In my thesis and in extensions I have made over the past year and a
              half, I 
have studied variants of Radon transforms known as singular
              Radon
transforms, generalizing earlier work of Christ, Nagel, Stein and
              Wainger. 
In my proposed research, I intend to extend my methods to include a
              broader
class of operators, which would include fractional and more
              traditional smooth 
Radon transforms, proving boundedness properties on
              Sobolev and L^p
spaces. I also intend to research possible applications to
              partial differential
equations; there is a similarity between concepts that I
              use and results of
Fefferman and Phong in subelliptic PDE theory that might
              lead to interesting
results in that direction. Further, I would like to
              generalize my work in more
applied directions. For example, tomography, an
              important tool in medical 
imaging and related areas, requires the inversion
              of Radon transforms. Due to 
the close relation between PDE's and inverse
              problems, I hope to be able to 
apply my methods to help solve inverse
              problems such as those in tomography.


In recent work, I have studied
              mathematical objects known as singular Radon
transforms. They are variants of
              standard Radon transforms, which have
important applications in both
              mathematics as well as the sciences. For
example, in medical imaging one
              frequently uses X-ray tomography to generate
an image of an internal organ
              that one can not easily analyze through other
imaging techniques. X-ray
              tomography involves inverting a Radon transform
operator, in other words, the
              determination of an image from the Radon
transform of this image. In my
              proposed research, in addition to extending my
earlier results to strictly
              mathematical questions, I hope to be able to 
extend my research to help
              tackle more applied problems such as these. Ideas 
from disparate areas of
              mathematics and science might be needed.


