Title       : Implementation Proposal-MIE Program Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a9988401

Award Number: 9988401
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Arratia um_jarratia@suagm0.suagm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam Falero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Universidad Metropolitana
	      PO Box 21150
	      San Juan, PR  009281150    787/751-5235

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Sistema Universitario Ana G. Mendez (SUAGM) is comprised of
              three
institutions: Universidad Metropolitana (UMET); Universidad del Turabo
              (UT);
and the Colegio Universitario del Este (CUE). SUAGM presently enrolls
              19,600
students and is the second largest private university on the Island.
              SUAGM
serves principally economically and educationally disadvantaged
              students.
In October 1995, UMET competed and won an NSF Model Institutions
              for
Excellence (MIE) Program Award.  To date UMET has used the MIE program
              to
dramatically improve its educational infrastructure in science
              and
mathematics (S&M) and to increase the quantity and quality of
              minority
students who earn SEM baccalaureate degrees. This proposal sets forth
              a plan
for Phase II that will improve upon Phase I accomplishments, raise UMET
              to
the next level of capability, and begin the process of disseminating
              its
model to other institutions including UT and CUE.

The four
              "cornerstones" of the Phase I MIE are: (1) curriculum, instruction
and
              assessment; (2) faculty development; (3) student recruitment, retention,
and
              graduation; and (4) physical and administrative infrastructure. Phase II
will
              further improve each "cornerstone" of the MIE framework established
during
              1995-1999 and build  synergy across the "cornerstones" to ensure an
integrated
              and systemic improvement effort. During Phase II, UMET will
concentrate to a
              greater degree on bringing its increased SEM student body
through graduation
              and onto graduate school.
 
To improve curriculum, instruction, and
              assessment, UMET will increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of its 10 SEM
              academic programs and disseminate
the MIE curriculum development process to UT
              and CUE science departments and
other UMET departments, using institutional
              resources.

UMET will develop faculty by hiring additional faculty with
              advanced degrees
in selected areas; enhancing existing faculty<B9>s content
              knowledge in SEM
areas; delivering improved student centered instructional
              programs;
stimulating faculty research capability and involvement of students
              in
research; developing an improved infrastructure for proposal
              development,
improving its ability to assess faculty performance; and
              providing financial
support to faculty completing doctoral degrees.

To
              improve student  recruitment, retention, and graduation, UMET will
develop a
              highly effective program for accelerating student learning,
critical thinking
              skills, and content knowledge; provide pre-college
students with a greater
              appreciation of the benefits of careers in S&M and
the skills needed to pursue
              S&M studies; and conduct a coordinated set of
activities to attract better
              prepared students and provide sufficient
academic support services to retain
              them through graduation.  These
objectives will be achieved through a
              comprehensive  Science  Support Center
(SSC).

UMET will improve its
              physical infrastructure by better equipping the UMET
Science building;
              building a new science laboratory building  with
institutional funds; and
              enhancing the computer networking capability of all
SEM faculty in SUAGM. To
              further improve the administrative infrastructure,
UMET will build on the
              policy changes that were developed during the initial
MIE period, continue the
              development of UMET and initiate a transformation
at both the UT and CUE
              campuses by extending the UMET MIE administrative
policy changes across the
              System.

The project is managed under the direction of Dr. Juan F. Arratia
              who
reports to the Chancellor of UMET.
support to faculty completing doctoral
              degrees.

To improve student  recruitment, retention, and graduation, UMET
              will
develop a highly effective program for accelerating student
              learning,
critical thinking skills, and content knowledge; provide
              pre-college
students with a greater appreciation of the benefits of careers in
              S&M and
the skills needed to pursue S&M studies; and conduct a coordinated set
              of
activities to attract better prepared students and provide
              sufficient
academic support services to retain them through graduation. 
              These
objectives will be achieved through a comprehensive  Science  Support
              Center
(SSC).

UMET will improve its physical infrastructure by better
              equipping the UMET
Science building; building a new science laboratory
              building  with
institutional funds; and enhancing the computer networking
              capability of all
SEM faculty in SUAGM. To further improve the administrative
              infrastructure,
UMET will build on the policy changes that were developed
              during the initial
MIE period, continue the development of UMET and initiate a
              transformation
at both the UT and CUE campuses by extending the UMET MIE
              administrative
policy changes across the System.

The project is managed
              under the direction of Dr. Juan F. Arratia who
reports to the Chancellor of
              UMET.
