Title       : Data Warehouse Maintenance over Dynamic Distributed Information Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9988776

Award Number: 9988776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elke A. Rundensteiner rundenst@cs.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As digital repositories of information are springing up everywhere and
              interconnectivity between computers around the world is being established, the
              construction and maintenance of data warehouses (views) over such distributed
              data sources has been recognized to be of great importance for modern
              applications. However, data sources continuously evolve by modifying not only
              their content but also their query capabilities and schema and by joining or
              leaving the environment. This research addresses this critical and timely
              problem of how to rewrite view definitions synchronously with the schema
              changes of data sources, coined the "view synchronization" problem. The
              Evolvable View Environment (EVE) solution is based on a preference model for
              view evolution and a meta model for capturing data source interrelationships.
              Algorithms that exploit different types of metadata and view evolution
              preferences to synchronize views are designed. Measures for ranking alternative
              view rewritings based on their quality are established. To assure survivability
              in any dynamic environment, a strategy for coordinating view synchronization
              under schema changes and the more traditional view maintenance under data
              changes is incorporated. Implementation of the EVE software system serves as a
              proof of concept and as an experimental test bed. Experimental evaluations are
              conducted to assess performance, applicability, and quality of the rewritings.
              A case study on applying the technology to Web and E-commerce applications
              helps to determine the applicability as well as the limitation of the
              technology. In summary, this project will advance not only the state-of-the-art
              in data warehousing, a core area of database technology, but the benefits are
              potentially far-reaching by providing techniques and software tools for
              simplifying access to large sets of dynamic distributed data
              sources.
http://davis.wpi.edu/dsrg/EVE


