Title       : Monomialization, Ramification and Regularity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9988533

Award Number: 9988533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Cutkosky cutkoskys@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The  investigator will continue his work on monomializing algebraic mappings. 
              The investigator has previously shown that generically finite mappings of
              smooth varieties can be made to be locally monomial mappings of smooth
              varieties by performing sequences of mappings which are locally blowups of
              smooth subvarieties of the domain and image.  These mappings may however fail
              to be separated.  The investigator has  more recently proven that mappings from
              a 3 fold to a surface can be made locally monomial by performing sequences of
              blowups of  smooth subvarieties of the domain and target.  The resulting
              varieties are separated and proper. In this project the investigator seeks to
              extend this result to general algebraic mappings between smooth varieties, and
              to extend the previous results, which are valid in characteristic zero, to
              positive characteristic.

The purpose of the investigator's project is to
              find computible methods of solving systems of  polynomial or analytic
              equations.  Many important problems in pure and applied mathematics  are of
              this form.  If the system can be reduced to a system of monomial equations,
              explicit solutions can be given very easily.  The investigator has found a 
              method of reducing any nondegenerate  system  to a monomial system locally, by
              performing very simple and computible operations, from which a complete
              solution to the system can easily be read off.  The investigator has extended
              this method to give a computable and global solution in the case of  2
              equations in 3 unknowns.  The investigator seeks to extend this method to work
              for systems of general size. 


