Title       : Optimization Techniques in Response Surface Methodology for Quality Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9988563

Award Number: 9988563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique Del Castillo exd13@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9988563
Del Castillo

The objective of this research is to develop new and
              efficient optimization techniques for use in Response Surface Methodology
              (RSM). RSM is a set of Statistical and optimization techniques aimed at
              improving the quality characteristics of a manufacturing process via the
              sequential application of designed experiments and model building techniques.
              Specific goals of this research include 1) the development of new statistical
              search methods under the presence of large sampling variability; 2) development
              of new algorithms for the global optimization of the type of quadratic
              programming problems frequently arising in RSM studies, including the case of
              multiple secondary responses. Methods will be studied for finding a confidence
              region for the best operational settings of a manufacturing process that is
              modeled using polynomial regression techniques. Finally, 3) a Rapid Response
              Surface Methodology will be developed that will allow for fast optimization of
              multiple response processes. 

The outcome of this research will be a new set
              of optimization techniques for industrial experimentation that will be
              well-received by Process and Quality Engineers who currently use existing RSM
              optimization techniques. This will be accomplished by taking into consideration
              the particular characteristics of experimental optimization in industrial
              practice, namely, its sequential nature, the existence of high sampling
              variability, the presence of multiple responses, and the need for rapid
              optimization in expensive processes. This latter will be of interest to
              capital-intensive manufacturers where the number of experiments required to
              qualify or optimize a process should be kept to a minimum. Collaboration with
              industrial researchers (Lucent Technologies and SmithKline Beecham) and with
              Penn State's Nanofabrication facility will provide a testbed for the techniques
              developed in this project. The manufacturing laboratories at the Leonhard
              building, the new home of the IE department at Penn State, will allow testing
              in more traditional manufacturing processes. Easy to use software will be
              developed that will facilitate technology transfer.


