Title       : Large o-minimal structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9988453

Award Number: 9988453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick U. Speissegger speisseg@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main focus of the proposed research is on finding as yet unknown  examples
              of o-minimal structures.  Essentially two types of such structures are known at
              present: one is obtained by adding functions belonging to certain quasianalytic
              classes to the field of real numbers, and the other by adding Pfaffian
              functions to any given o-minimal structure (e.g., the field of real  numbers,
              or an o-minimal structure of the previous type).  The investigator and his
              colleagues intend to extend currently known methods for proving the
              o-minimality of such structures to other classes of functions, such as
              Denjoy-Carleman classes or certain solutions of differential equations (other
              than Pfaffian functions).

The "tameness" properties of sets definable in
              o-minimal structures have consequences that can be of interest to many areas of
              mathematics.  For instance, the structures above are inspired by the various
              current attempts to understand the mathematics of Hilbert's 16th problem, one
              of the famous list of problems in mathematics proposed by German mathematician
              David Hilbert at the turn of the last century.  The problem remains unsolved to
              this date, and while its solution may not have immediate applications to areas
              of science other than mathematics, the mathematical methods developed thus far
              in the attempt to understand the problem have already proved useful in the
              study of dynamical systems (which in turn is a major tool used in physics and
              engineering).  The investigator and his colleagues think that their proposed
              reasearch will eventually lead to new insights and methods in this very active
              area of mathematics.

