Title       : Determination of Thin Film Interfacial Properties by Laser Generated Stress
               Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9988127

Award Number: 9988127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy R. Sottos n-sottos@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An SGER award supports development and feasibility testing of a new technique to
              investigate interfacial failures in thin films.  The technique is based on
              using a laser pulse- induced shear wave.  Laser pulse absorption will generate
              high amplitude, short duration stress wave pulses that will be deflected to
              load the interface between film and substrate in shear.  Failure of the film is
              related to the known dynamic stress state which allows the strength of the
              interface to be inferred.  This adaptation of established methods of high
              amplitude dynamic tensile loading of interfaces to the case of pure shear
              loading will later be extended to the mixed mode case, because thin film
              interfaces fail under mixed mode conditions in most commercial applications. 
              

A short term, exploratory investigation will establish the feasibility of
              the technique and answer several key questions regarding the design of this
              novel test method.  A careful series of experiments combined with rigorous
              theoretical analysis will be carried out for Al films on a Si substrate.  This
              material system is chosen for ease of fabrication and low cost.  A shear wave
              will be generated with amplitude large enough to fail the film interface.  The
              resulting shear stress at or just prior to film failure will be calculated from
              high speed interferometric displacement measurements using elastic wave
              propagation theory.  Samples will be carefully examined using an optical
              microscope and SEM to assess the nature and extent of interfacial failure.  The
              interfacial strength and failure mode determined for the Al film loaded by a
              shear wave will be compared with that obtained for the same film loaded by a
              tensile wave.  Initial set-up of the method is complex, but once established,
              this novel technique is expected to have direct impact on mechanical testing
              and consequent design of thin films and interfaces, with significance for a
              wide variety of applications in multi-layered electronic and optical
              structures. 

