Title       : A Semantically-Based Methodology for Proving Safety, Liveness, and Security
               Properties of Parallel Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9988551

Award Number: 9988551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Brookes brookes+@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Current research to establish behavioral properties of concurrent systems uses
              several different paradigmatic semantics, each with its own domain of
              applicability.  This project develops a unifying denotational semantic
              
framework for reasoning about safety and liveness properties of concurrent
              programs in a broad variety of paradigms, including shared-variable
              parallelism, asynchronous communicating processes, dataflow networks, and
              Java-style concurrent objects.  A single, simple, mathematical model based on
              "transition traces" is applied to interpret these paradigms, permitting
              analysis and comparison of programs and specifications across paradigms. This
              denotational approach additionally supports syntax-directed, or compositional,
              reasoning. By combining concurrency with procedures and local variable
              declarations, the framework developed will support Java-style concurrent
              object-oriented programming and assist in developing a formal basis for the
              design of correct and secure Java programs. Principles of reasoning that apply
              to multiple paradigms, as well as laws of equivalence specific to a particular
              paradigm, are identified.  To demonstrate the utility and advantages of the
              transition-trace approach, semantically-based techniques are applied to
              security protocols.  The project also explores the applicability of
              semantically-based reasoning in improving the efficiency of automated model
              checking. 

