Title       : Analysis Tools and Control Algorithms for Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a9988813

Award Number: 9988813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Teel teel@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9988813
Teel

While the field of control design for linear, time-invariant,
              finite dimensional systems is very mature, there is still a lot remaining to be
              discovered about control of nonlinear, time-varying, (even finite dimensional)
              systems. Since nonlinearities are ubiquitous in engineering systems, it is not
              uncommon to see the lack of knowledge about this topic slowing down
              technological advances. It is noteworthy that, for example, modern
              
anti-windup control synthesis developed in the last three years was recently
              needed to solve an industrial, high-performance vibrational attenuation control
              problem  where actuator saturation was non-negligible.

The objective of this
              research is to contribute additional stability analysis tools and control
              algorithms for nonlinear continuous-time dynamical systems. These tools and
              algorithms will be keyed to problems of engineering significance. For the sake
              of generality, systems that are modeled as differential and forward-shift
              inclusions will be stressed. This class of models is able to address systems
              that rely on discontinuous controls and those that implement control algorithms
              with discrete or hybrid dynamics.

In this work Lyapunov-type
              characterizations of set asymptotic stability will be emphasized. Some of the
              specific goals of the project are to 1) provide important extensions to the
              most recent converse Lyapunov theorems on strong asymptotic stability of sets;
              2) modify these converse Lyapunov function constructions so that they apply to
              weak asymptotic stability of sets and generate locally Lipschitz weak Lyapunov
              functions; 3) show how these locally Lipschitz weak Lyapunov functions produce
              locally Lipschitz control Lyapunov functions for asymptotically controllable
              nonlinear systems; 4) show how the optimization problem associated with the
              converse Lyapunov function construction yields a meaningful receding horizon
              control strategy; 5) analyze the efficacy of these receding horizon control
              strategies when using discrete-time model approximations; 6) provide new,
              integral characterizations of uniform global asymptotic stability; 7) use these
              new characterizations to generate new nonlinear control algorithms.

These
              objectives complement other work of the principal investigator that is aimed at
              transitioning recently developed nonlinear control theories to industry.
              Moreover, the objectives are consistent with the broader goal of making the
              tools of nonlinear analysis and control design more powerful, more concise,
              better understood and more widely applicable to today's control engineering
              problems.   
***   

