Title       : Carolina Symposium on Neutrino Physics: Its Impact on Particle Physics,
               Astrophysics and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2000        
File        : a9988661

Award Number: 9988661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : March 15,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kuniharu Kubodera kubodera@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9988661
Kubodera
	Interconnection between microscopic physics and
              astrophysical phenomena is one of the most fascinating aspects of nature.  In
              particular, we now know that neutrinos play a key role in many areas of
              particle physics, nuclear physics and astrophysics.  The recent discovery of
              neutrino oscillation gives the first exciting hint of new physics beyond the
              standard model.  It is clearly extremely important to further study the
              oscillation and other fundamental properties of neutrinos.  It is also
              important to improve our knowledge of neutrinos-nucleus reactions, which are
              crucial for understanding stellar collapse and the origin of chemical elements.
               These and many other interesting questions can be investigated at stopped pion
              neutrino facilities like the planned spallation neutron source (SNS) at the Oak
              Ridge National Laboratory.  The SNS offers a unique opportunity to build a
              large neutrino detectors that are ideally suited for neutrino oscillation
              measurements and studying neutrino-nucleus reactions.  It is clearly desirable
              to place this project in the broad context of the current status of neutrino
              physics in general and its relation to astrophysics and cosmology.  We
              therefore wish to organize a three-day symposium entitled Carolina Symposium on
              Neutrino Physics (CSNP), with two main goals:  (1) To explore and exchange
              ideas on the latest developments in general frontiers of neutrino physics, both
              experimental and theoretical;  (2) To address specific issues pertaining to the
              above-mentioned stopped-pion neutrino facility.  We request the NSF to
              partially support CSNP with a grant belonging to the category:  ``Conferences,
              Symposia and Workshops".  The CSNP will also include an educational session in
              which the main themes of the symposium will be presented as a universal view
              for the general public.

