Title       : Learning from Multiple-Instance and Unlabeled Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9988314

Award Number: 9988314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217175             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Goldman sg@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Learning from Multiple-Instance and Unlabeled Data

Sally A.
              Goldman
Department of Computer Science
Washington University
St. Louis, MO
              63130 


PROJECT SUMMARY
In standard supervised learning each example is
              given a label with the correct (or possibly noisy) classification.  In
              unsupervised learning, all the individual examples are unlabeled with just a
              single overall label.  This project is studying two learning models that fall
              between these two extremes.  In the multiple-instance model the learner only
              receives labeled collections (or bags) of examples.  A bag is classified as
              positive if and only if at least one of the examples in the bag is classified
              as positive by the target concept.  Supervised and unsupervised learning can be
              thought of as two special cases of this model.  In supervised learning, each
              example is in its own bag, and in unsupervised learning, all examples are
              together in one bag.  The multiple-instance model was motivated by the drug
              activity prediction problem where each example is a possible shape for a
              molecule of interest and each bag contains all likely shapes for the molecule. 
              By accurately predicting which molecules will bind to an unknown protein, one
              can accelerate the discovery process for new drugs, hence reducing cost. 
              Existing multiple-instance learning algorithms use boolean labels for the bags.
               However, in the drug activity prediction problem, the true label is a
              real-valued affinity value measurement which gives the strength of the binding.
               This project is performing an in-depth study of learning in the
              multiple-instance model with real-valued labels including empirical studies
              using real drug binding data.  Other applications areas will also be
              explored.
This project is also studying learning when much of the available
              data is unlabeled.  In many application areas (e.g. the classification of web
              pages as appropriate or inappropriate for minors, or medical applications)
              there is a small amount of labeled data along with a large pool of unlabeled
              data.  This project is studying techniques to use the unlabeled data to improve
              the performance of standard supervised learning algorithms.  In particular, a
              method of co-training is being studied in which there are two independent
              learning algorithms which are originally trained on the labeled data.  Then
              using statistical techniques, each learner will repeatedly select some of the
              unlabeled data to labeled for the other learner.  This project will perform
              empirical studies and also theoretical studies to understand the limitations of
              various approaches to develop better learning algorithms.
