Title       : A QoS-based Approach to Clustering and Interclustering with a Unified
               Methodology for Scalability, Security, Performance, Fault-handling and
               Co-scheduling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9988524

Award Number: 9988524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Skjellum tony@hpcl.cs.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rayford B. Vaughn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2876,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Because improved parallel computing requires introduction of quality of service
              and security into cluster computing environments, the following study and
              research is incorporated in this effort:  QoS for intracluster scheduling is
              studies and prototyped; Intrusion Detection Integration with a single cluster
              environment is studied and prototyped.  Furthermore, since ubiquitous
              middleware offers a powerful paradigm for integrating resources in common
              operating environments, Proposers study CORBA interoperation with QoS and
              parallel computing.

Several specific themes facilitate new science in this
              work.  Background study on existing QoS-oriented research for LANs and clusters
              are brought to bear on the current work, including previous work of Proposers
              involving RSVP and cluster admission controls.  Furthermore, lower middleware
              for delivering admission-based messaging for clusters is prototyped on a
              Myrinet SAN (single cluster configuration).  A high-quality implementation of
              the MPI/RT standard messaging middleware is integrated with QoS-based
              middleware.  CORBA is studied as a possible parallel processing notation and
              environment, including potential for peer-to-peer constructs such as in MPI. 
              Intrusion detection methodologies are converted for use in SAN-based settings,
              such as Myrinet.  Finally, CORBA uses in hard realtime settings are considered.
               New middleware prototyped in this effort are promulgated through the worldwide
              web.



