Title       : Residual Automorphic Representations and Automorphic L-functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9988672

Award Number: 9988672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65225              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Earnest aearnest@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry H. Kim  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI studies two problems which come from the study of residual automorphic
              representations: First, poles of completed automorphic L-functions. Second,
              parametrization of the local components of residual automorphic
              representations. It is a part of Arthur's conjecture on parametrizing the
              discrete spectrum in terms of representations of a certain profinite arithmetic
              group. The first problem is to establish the holomorphy of all completed
              automorphic L-functions attached to generic cuspidal representations which
              appear in the constant terms of Eisenstein series. The PI uses
              Langlands-Shahidi method and the observation that the local components of
              residual automorphic representations are unitary representations. This is
              possible because one has the holomorphy and non-vanishing of normalized local
              intertwining operators due to recent progress on local results, such as
              standard module conjecture and Shahidi's conjecture on the holomorphy of local
              L-functions. For example, the PI established, as a joint work with Shahidi, the
              holomorphy of the third symmetric power L-functions attached to non-monomial
              cuspidal representations of GL_2, which had been unsolved last 20 years. The PI
              continues to work on the existence of the symmetric cube lift of cuspidal
              representations of GL_2, using the converse theorem. The second problem is to
              parametrize the local components of residual automorphic representations. This
              amounts to parametrizing the image of normalized local intertwining operators.
              The PI wants to show that the local components of the residual automorphic
              representations coming from the trivial character of the torus, are
              parametrized by the distinguished unipotent orbits of the dual group and
              Springer correspondence.

This research area is in a part of number theory
              generally known as the Langlands program. Number theory is the study of the
              properties of whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the
              beginning, 
problems in number theory have served as a driving force in
              creating new mathematics in other diverse parts of the discipline. The
              Langlands program is a general philosophy that connects number theory with
              calculus; it embodies the modern approach to the study of whole numbers. Modern
              number theory is very technical and deep, but it has had astonishing
              applications in areas like theoretical computer science and coding theory. 
