Title       : Transparent Middleware Support for Shared State on Heterogeneous Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9988361

Award Number: 9988361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandhya Dwarkadas sandhya@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The explosive growth of both large and small scale distributed systems is
              leading to a host of new applications, most of which employ some notion of
              distributed shared state: information required
at more than one location. 
              Building on the experience of the PIs, this research will develop convenient,
              efficient middleware for applications running on heterogeneous platforms.  The
              goal is to dramatically reduce the programmer effort required to develop
              distributed applications, and in particular to make it as easy to run
              applications on a local-area cluster as it is to to run them on
a
              shared-memory multiprocessor.  The proposed research will therefore employ a
              shared-memory programming model.  The PIs will extend their previous work in
              software distributed shared memory (S-DSM) to accommodate heterogeneous
              languages and machine types,
and to transparently provide shared state for
              independently-deployed processes. They will introduce application-specific
              notions of when a cached copy of data is ``recent enough'' to use, thereby
              facilitating optimized communication in more globally distributed
              environments.

The applications driving the research include both scientific
              simulations and codes developed by local colleagues in the areas of datamining
              and intelligent multi-sense environments.
The research will facilitate the
              effective distribution of these applications across the resources they
              require.


