Title       : Collaborative Research: ASES: An Approximate Search Engine for Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9988636

Award Number: 9988636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Tsong-Li Wang jason@cis.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to make it possible to process approximate
              queries on combinatorial structures such as trees and graphs in a fast (i.e.,
              sublinear with respect to the number of objects being searched) and efficient
              manner. The ultimate goal is to be as fast as approximate keyword search in
              text documents. The approach consists of: (1) discovering the best heuristics
              for answering these NP-complete problems in polynomial time with high quality,
              and (2) discovering data structures to make queries on thousands or millions of
              such objects fast. The results of this project will provide techniques and
              software to search for patterns among graph and tree structured data. Possible
              applications of such a search engine include searches among proteins, chemical
              compounds, neuroanatomical structures, Web/text filters and XML documents. The
              techniques developed in this research are in particular suitable for
              bioinformatics and biocomputing applications. Professors Shasha and Wang plan
              to collaborate with five additional researchers in these areas: Jack Collins,
              National Cancer Institute working in small molecule-protein docking for drug
              design; Michael Donohue, Professor of Biology and Director of the Harvard
              University Herbaria planning to apply this research to phylogenic trees; Bruce
              Shapiro, National Cancer Institute developing algorithms and computational
              systems for determining structure/function of nucleic acids; Cathy Wu, National
              Biomedical Research Foundation doing research in analysis and classification of
              protein sequences; and Daniel Zaharevitz, National Cancer Institute whose goal
              is to make biological and structural data more available to the research
              community via better search capabilities. These collaborators help to motivate
              and validate the tree and graph matching tools and algorithms development for
              biological applications.
http://www.cis.njit.edu/~jason/sigmod.html



