Title       : Large-Scale Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9988205

Award Number: 9988205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466255             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Murray walter@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Saunders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Optimization problems arise in all areas of science, engineering, and industry. 
              They
involve choosing variables to satisfy certain constraints while
              minimizing an objective
function such as cost or weight.  Large problems may
              have many thousands of variables
and constraints, but they are usually sparse
              in some way.  For example, each constraint
may involve only a few of the
              variables.

This proposal describes a 3-year program of research to develop
              new computational 
methods for solving large real-world optimization problems.
               The design of algorithms
to exploit sparsity is the main focus of our
              research.

Our large-scale solver SNPOT already represents a major advance.  
              Its Sequential
Quadratic Programmin (SQP) algorithm is efficient on large
              problems if the number
of degrees of freedom is moderate (i.e., the number of
              binding constraints is nearly
as large as the number of variables).  Many
              important applications are of this
kind - for example trajectory optimization
              for spacecraft and aircraft.  However,
succes on such problems inevitably
              generates the demand to solve larger problems.

We must develop a new sparse
              QP solver (the heart of an SQP algorithm).  Other
advances are proposed to
              improve SNOPT's performance on problems whose nonlinear
functions are cheap to
              evaluate.  This includes a vast array of applications generated
by the
              algebraic modeling systems GAMS and AMPL.

A key aim of this project is
              tranferring results to the scientific and industrial
community by developing
              mathematical software.
