Title       : Research in Birational Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9988874

Award Number: 9988874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117624             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean M. Keel keel@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is in algebraic geometry, covering basic questions in
              birational geometry related to the areas of Mori theory, moduli of curves,
              geometric invariant theory, and toric geometry.  The first main question is the
              classical problem of whether or not the moduli space of curves is uniruled. 
              This is a very natural question for Mori theory, which was indeed invented to
              study uniruledness questions, but somewhat surprisingly no serious attempt from
              this direction has yet been made --perhaps because the main work in the area
              was done before the invention of Mori theory.  The applicant believes Mori
              theory gives important new insights, and supports this with many concrete
              examples.  The second proposed direction is on foundational work in birational
              geometry. The applicant, together with Yi Hu, has observed a foundational
              connection between Mori theory and geometric invariant theory.  They define
              Mori Dream Spaces abstractly as spaces with the best possible Mori theoretic
              properties.  There turn out to be many examples. They associate to any variety
              a natural ring, which they call the Cox ring, and show that Mori dream spaces
              are characterized by the finite generation of this ring, and moreover, are in a
              natural way a quotient of the associated affine variety in a way generalizing
              Cox's construction of toric varietie`s as quotients of affine space. There are
              two main proposed directions for further research.  One is to study the
              expected interplay between commutative algebraic properties of the Cox ring and
              the geometry of the variety.  The other is a foundational factorization problem
              for birational maps between smooth toric varieties, which would significantly
              strengthen Morelli's factorization theorem.  The final proposed direction is on
              Mori theory in positive characteristic.  The vast majority of work in Mori
              theory is based on vanishing theorems which restrict it to characteristic zero.
               The theory would have myriad arithmetic applications (e.g. the construction of
              higher dimensional Neron models) if it could be extended to positive
              characteristic.  The applicant has a significant result in this direction (by
              methods entirely different from preceding work).  There is a natural way in
              which this result might vastly generalize, and the applicant has a partial
              result in this direction.

The main questions the investigator considers are
              among the oldest problems in algebraic geometry, each actively studied at least
              since the twenties.  As the investigator indicates, new ideas from Mori theory
              (named after its Field's medal winning inventor) suggest new and promising
              approaches to these problems.  This is particularly true of several
              foundational questions about the moduli space of curves, one of the most
              studied objects in mathematics and, more recently, theoretical physics. 


