Title       : An Observational Study of Magnetic Fields in the Galaxy and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9988341

Award Number: 9988341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Troland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal objective of Dr. Troland's  research is to measure magnetic field
              strengths in many interstellar environments and to use this information to
              better understand the role of magnetic fields in our Galaxy and in others. It
              has long been known that interstellar material is permeated by weak magnetic
              fields. It is also known that these fields can play an important role in the
              dynamics and evolution of interstellar material, including the process of star
              formation. What is not well known is the strength of the field in a wide
              variety of interstellar environments. A detailed knowledge of field strengths
              is important. The effects of these fields on interstellar clouds depend
              crucially upon the ratio of magnetic energies to other relevant energies in the
              clouds. The relationship between increasing field strength and increasing gas
              density can reveal much about the details of the contraction process. On the
              galactic scale, magnetic field strengths may be closely related to the overall
              rate at which new stars form in a galaxy.

Dr. Troland seeks to expand upon
              previous observations of the radio frequency
Zeeman effect, the only known
              technique for measuring magnetic field strengths in
localized regions of
              interstellar material. The recent upgrade of the Arecibo 300 meter radio
              telescope and the impending completion of the 100m Green Bank Telescope
              offer
many new opportunities to study interstellar magnetic field strengths.
              In this project, the
Zeeman effect will be studied in spectral lines of a
              variety of interstellar species including
HI, OH (ground and excited states),
              CCS, C4H, CH and H2O. This project should
provide a significant increase in
              our knowledge of magnetic fields in a wide variety of
galactic interstellar
              environments. This project may also provide the first direct
measurements of
              magnetic fields in galaxies beyond our own. 


