Title       : Centroidal Voronoi Tessellations: Algorithms, Applications, and Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9988303

Award Number: 9988303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max D. Gunzburger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Qiang Du  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A centroidal Voronoi tessellation (CVT) is a Voronoi tessellation of a
given
              set such that the associated generating points are centers of 
mass of the
              corresponding Voronoi regions. Applications of CVT's 
range from problems in
              image compression, vector quantization, 
quadrature rules, grid generation and
              optimization, finite difference 
schemes, distribution of resources, cellular
              biology, cluster analysis, 
and the territorial behavior of animals. The goals
              are to develop highly
efficient parallel algorithms for the computation of
              CVT's, to gain 
further understanding of interesting features related to the
              these 
tessellations, to implement and test these algorithms, and to produce
              
a useful software suite that can serve as a design tool for many
problems in
              applications.

Among the theoretical questions to be studied are the
              complexity of 
algorithms for the construction of CVT's, the effects of
              nonuniform 
densities, CVT's in general metrics, constrained CVT's, and
              generalized
CVT's based on lines, curves and surfaces.

Parallel
              deterministic and probabilistic algorithms will be developed 
and tested. In
              the former case, different averaging and communication
strategies will be
              examined; for the latter,domain decomposition 
ideas will be exploited. This
              effort can lead to parallel grid generation
 algorithms and other software
              useful in applications such as
clustering analysis.

Applications of CVT's
              will also be studied, with particular emphasis 
on grid generation and
              optimization. The questions addressed in this
connection include the role of
              the density functions used to generate 
the CVT's on the optimal placement of
              grid points, the construction of 
grids with special properties and the the
              use of various generalized 
CVT's. Another application that will be examined
              are the use of CVT's 
in the clustering analysis of large data sets.

