Title       : Thermal, Magnetic, and Mechanical Modulations of Ultrasonic Diffuse Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9988645

Award Number: 9988645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Weaver r-weaver@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Richard L. Weaver
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Proposal #
              9988645
Thermal, Magnetic, and Mechanical Modulations of Ultrasonic Diffuse
              Fields

Abstract:
This project explores novel modalities for ultrasonic
              NonDestructive Evaluation and Materials Characterization by investigating the
              dependence of diffuse ultrasonic signals on parametric variations of
              temperature, magnetic field, and stress.  Conventional (non-diffuse) ultrasound
              is sensitive to a variety of material properties of engineering significance. 
              It is also sensitive to externally applied parameters.  Notable amongst these
              are temperature, and (in steels) magnetic field.  The coefficients of thermal
              and magnetic variation depend on stress.  This implies that ultrasonic
              measurements of temperature and magnetic field variations should allow
              inference of stress.
Recent demonstrations that ultrasonic diffuse fields are
              more sensitive (because travel times are much longer than those of conventional
              ultrasonic fields) and more robust (because demands on apparatus are less)
              indicators of wave speed change suggest that these variations can be measured
              with great precision.   Diffuse fields are used in this project to measure
              ultrasonic wave speed as it depends on temperature and magnetic field.  The
              variations are measured with specimens under a variety of static loads, and the
              correlation (coefficient-of-variation versus stress) assessed.  Ultrasound is
              also affected by low-frequency vibrations and the associated opening and
              closing of microcracks.  In this project the variations of diffuse fields as a
              specimen is subjected to low-frequency quasi-static strains (e.g. vibrations)
              are also measured, and correlated with the presence of opening and closing
              fatigue cracks.
The research will lead to new methods for field detection of
              distributed damage, of individual fatigue cracks, and of residual and applied
              stress.  The corresponding improvements in nondestructive evaluation will
              tighten assessments of remaining structural life, critical for aging air fleets
              and civil infrastructure.

