Title       : Theory of Dense Hydrogen and Correlated Quantum and Classical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9988576

Award Number: 9988576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil W. Ashcroft nwa@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9988576
Ashcroft
The grant supports theoretical studies of dense hydrogen
              (extended to certain light elements), and of correlated quantum and classical
              systems with novel states of order.  In one sense hydrogen, the most abundant
              of elements (and rife in its combination with others) can be regarded at high
              compression as the simplest realistic and quantifiable departure from the
              ubiquitous jellium.  It is a fundamental system and, given the simplicity of
              its basic Hamiltonian, its properties in the condensed phase are intriguingly
              complex.  Hydrogen has recently come under very sustained experimental attack
              both dynamically and statically.  Laser shock experiments now take hydrogen
              into a regime of around ten-fold compression (over the one atmosphere solid)
              and temperatures as high as 20,000K.  Yet there seems to be little in the way
              of theoretical consensus on accounting even for something so basic as the
              equation of state under these conditions.

The first of three major research
              themes, on dense hydrogen, is prompted by the fact that both at high
              temperatures and at low there is a remarkable persistence of proton-pairing:
              for near the ground state conditions this has been shown to be accompanied by
              unusual states of electronic order, the extent and range of which invite
              further investigation.  At very high temperatures it is reasonably expected
              that the pairing will give way to a dense monatomic and metallic state, but en
              route we are presented with intermediate conditions (partially degenerate
              electrons, and especially strong pairing correlations in the protons) that give
              rise to a problem of considerable complexity.  There will be a range of
              transitions on the way to the upper reaches of the phase diagram, and whether
              some of these are continuous or not is already a matter of debate.  It is known
              experimentally that the low temperature/high density phase diagram of hydrogen
              (and deuterium) is rich, and yet it has received only partial explanation in
              terms of the ordering of quadrupoles.  One interesting challenge is to
              incorporate the new physics associated with the experimental observation of
              electronic broken symmetry leading to self-consistent fields of a largely
              dipolar character to which the quadrupolar problem can now couple.

A second
              major effort is to be centered on many-body theory, following on the heels of a
              prediction that at high densities the light s-p metals may have electronic
              structures unusually different from their one atmosphere counterparts.  This
              arises from a generalized view of pairing in Coulomb systems (but extended to
              the case of pseudopotentials) and leads to the possibility of new ordered
              states in systems hitherto regarded as relatively simple.  The generalized
              pairing view itself can also now be extended to anisotropic systems, those of
              most immediate interest being layered.  The nature of effective interactions in
              such systems, particularly if the one-electron structure admits of a
              particle-hole character, is of considerable interest.  For then the
              interactions can depart significantly from the corresponding results in three
              dimensions.  In the quasi-two-dimensional electron gas the issue is also of
              some interest with respect to the possibility of intrinsic superconductivity
              (i.e. that the true ground state of quasi-two-dimensional electron-hole
              ensembles might exhibit off-diagonal long range order).  When such systems are
              taken to quite low densities, symmetry breaking to a crystalline state is
              anticipated, though as in three-dimensions it appears now that the standard
              constraint (to simple Bravais lattices) does not necessarily lead to states of
              lowest energy.  

The third theme deals with density functional theory which
              has also had wide applications in a classical context, and in particular has
              had a major impact on the theory of classical inhomogeneous systems.  Classical
              systems are often more highly correlated than their quantum analogs, and for
              this reason the class of approximations developed here (coarse graining and
              weighted density methods, for example) might well find application now in
              electronic systems.  The new studies may therefore be viewed as an exploration
              of a possible alternative to gradient correction approaches to the ubiquitous
              local density or local spin density approximation.
%%%  
This grant supports
              theoretical research on condensed matter systems.  There are three broad
              themes: the study of the simplest element, hydrogen, and its behavior at high
              pressures and temperature; the study of interacting charged quantum particles;
              and, the study of classical interacting systems.  The research ranges from very
              basic investigations of the foundations of the physics of interacting systems
              to realistic calculations of novel new phases of hydrogen.
***


