Title       : Numerical Simulation of Delayed Fracture by Surface Reaction in Material
               Structures of Small Feature Sizes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9988788

Award Number: 9988788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Herve Prevost prevost@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9988788
Prevost
	Many advanced devices, such as microprocessors and
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems (MEMS), are material structures of small
              feature sizes.  Because these devices are part of all major engineering
              systems, an ability to predict their lifetime is of great importance to both
              the defense and the commercial industry.  The smallness of the features poses a
              broad challenge to scientific computation.  One pervasive problem is cracking
              in the small dimension, driven by the combined action of residual stresses and
              environmental molecules.  Such cracking often occurs long after the devices
              have been made.  No method has been developed to predict the delayed cracking
              in such devices.  The main difficulties are readily understood in the context
              of the lifetime prediction method established for large engineering components.
               For a large component such as a ceramic tile on a reentry space vehicle, the
              lifetime prediction relies on the crack growth model.  It assumes that cracks
              pre-exist in the ceramic tile, and grow under the combined action of stresses
              and environmental molecules.  To predict the lifetime requires two experimental
              data: the initial crack size, and the crack growth law (i.e., the crack
              velocity as a function of the stress intensity factor).  However, both are
              difficult to obtain for micro devices.  Fabrication processes are controlled
              down to the feature sizes, so that the meaning of an initial crack is
              ambiguous, and in any case its size will never be measured experimentally on a
              routine basis.  Moreover, the allowable crack velocity is so small (say 0.1
              micron per year) that no experimental method exists to obtain the crack growth
              law. This proposal proposes to address these problems via numerical
              simulations.
	This program will develop a lifetime prediction method for micro
              devices.  The method relies on a crack nucleation model.  A device initially
              has no sharp cracks, although stress concentration sites, such as corners, are
              pervasive.  A solid constituent, such as silicon dioxide, loses mass to its
              environment by chemical reaction on the surface.  The rate of the reaction
              depends on the local stress.  Because the stress field is nonuniform, the
              reaction proceeds faster at a corner root than elsewhere, gradually changing
              the root into a sharp crack.  This model was envisioned in the 1960s, and has
              regenerated interest in recent years.  A main difficulty in using the model has
              been computational.  Existing work has been restricted to idealized geometries
              and materials.  The proposed work will develop a finite element method to
              simulate the crack nucleation process in complex structures incorporating
              interface models formulated by Prof. Z. Suo. The work will focus on situations
              where a device spends its lifetime mainly on crack nucleation rather than
              subsequent crack growth. Preliminary work using 2D models shows considerable
              promise, and this work will be further extended and address the very difficult
              3D problems. An interdisciplinary research team is assembled, integrating
              expertise in multiphysical processes, multiprocessor finite element
              implementation, and mesh adaptation for large shape change and intensifying
              stress field.  The numerical effort will be coupled with ongoing experimental
              works by Professor A.G. Evans and a complementary NSF-funded experimental
              research effort by Professor W. Soboyejo both at Princeton University. These
              will provide test cases that will be used to validate our computational models.
              
***

