Title       : Research Internships in the Neural and Behavioral Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9988009

Award Number: 9988009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Shuster stephen.shuster@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              




ABSTRACT        Stephen Schuster       Proposal #  DBI -
              9988009



Research Internships in Neural and Behavioral Sciences

This
              proposal describes an interdisciplinary REU program, Research Internships in
              Neural and Behavioral Sciences, for IO Native American, Hispanic, African
              American or Asian/ Pacific Islander students, including female students and
              White students who are the first in their family to attend a college or
              university.  Students will conduct research in neural and behavioral sciences
              under the guidance of scientists from the Department of Biological Sciences and
              the Department of Psychology.
This 10-week summer research internship
              integrates five major components: (1) Faculty mentors will provide hands-on
              research experience to students in faculty laboratories, fostering the
              excitement of scientific discovery and allowing students to learn science by
              doing science. (2) Research faculty will present seminars in which they
              demonstrate research techniques and present their research results. (3)
              Professional development seminars will provide instruction on how to apply to
              graduate school and present scientific results at professional meetings.  At
              seminars, students will discuss ethical concerns in research, and will hear
              presentations about the Institutional Review Board and the Institutional Animal
              Care and Use Conunittee.  Cultural issues will also be addressed, including
              Native American attitudes toward the use of plants and animals in research. (4)
              Students will participate in weekly noon meetings where students can socialize
              and discuss the progress of their work. (5) At the end of the summer, students
              will present the results of their projects in a joint poster session ensuring
              that each student produces a tangible, research product at the end of IO weeks,
              that can be refined for presentation at a scientific meeting or submitted for
              publication.
This program will continue to refined based on evaluation
              results, the input of faculty mentors and current and former students, and the
              findings of social and educational research..  The goal since 1992 has been to
              prepare minority and first generation university students for graduate
              education in the Neural and Behavioral Sciences.  The program's contributions
              to date are significant.






