Title       : Self-Sealing Nanostructured Ceramic Coatings for Corrosion Protection of
               Orthopedic Implants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a9988892

Award Number: 9988892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn R. Aita aita@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9988892
Aita
An SGER award will demonstrate feasibility of a novel approach to
              corrosion protection of metallic implants.  A "smart" ceramic coating that
              adjusts to the human physiological environment will be developed to protect an
              underlying metal implant against corrosion.  The coating structure is based on
              the repetition of three types of modules.  Module I consists of nanocrystalline
              AlN or ZrN and provides corrosion protection via a self-sealing mechanism.  A
              self-limiting hydrated/hydroxide layer forms at the surface of the
              nanocrystallites upon exposure to blood thereby protecting the underlying
              implant metal.  Module II consists of a zirconia-alumina nanolaminate and
              provides mechanical toughness via a phase transformation mechanism.  Module III
              consists of a zirconia-titania nanolaminate and provides hardness.  Modules II
              and III together are expected to accommodate both external stress occurring
              upon implant use and internal stress that may accompany the chemical changes of
              the self-sealing process.

The proof-of-concept question is whether the
              coating offers better corrosion protection than bare metal used for the same
              purpose.  The experimental strategy is to grow coatings of various
              nanoarchitectures on room temperature 316L stainless steel substrates by
              sequential reactive sputter deposition from multiple targets.  Electrochemical
              testing will be carried out in physiological saline solution electrolytes at
              37o C (body temperature) and at three levels of pH, 6.5, 7.4, 8.0, representing
              hypo-, iso-, and hypertonic conditions to normal blood.  Direct and alternating
              current (electrochemical impedance spectroscopy) polarization methods will be
              used to determine corrosion parameters known to affect successful implantation,
              including open circuit potential, reciprocal polarization resistance, breakdown
              potential, and protection potential. Pin and disk accelerated wear tests will
              be conducted to identify synergistic corrosion-wear effects.  Physical and
              chemical changes in the coating at various stages of electrochemical and
              mechanical abuse will be studied using electron microscopy, electron
              spectroscopy including depth resolution, and diffraction techniques.  If
              successful, the result will be a coating for metal or polymer implant that
              offers superior protection upon initial introduction into the body and retains
              its integrity over long-term use.  This coating should find use in medical
              applications beyond the orthopedic field.  In addition, the experimental data
              obtained in this study will form a base for understanding corrosion and
              corrosion-wear synergy in multicomponent layered nanostructured
              ceramics.
***




