Title       : In-situ, Remote Query Chemical Sensors Based On Magnetoelastic Thick Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9988598

Award Number: 9988598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Grimes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc A. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks support for the development and application of a new remote
              query sensor technology based on changes in the resonant frequency of
              free-standing magnetoelastic thick films.  The work builds upon, complements,
              and helps extend the chemical sensor oriented research the co-PI's are actively
              involved with.

Magnetoelastic sensors are comprised of ribbon-shaped
              thick-films of magnetostrictive, magnetoelastic amorphous metallic glass [1]. 
              In response to an ac magnetic field the sensors efficiently translate magnetic
              energy into elastic energy which, in turn, acts to mechanically deform the
              sensor.  This mechanical deformation demonstrates a mechanical resonance the
              frequency of which is inversely proportional to the length of the sensor.  It
              has recently been demonstrated [2] that the resonant frequency of a
              magnetoelastic sensor shifts in response to several different environmental
              parameters including pressure, temperature, viscosity, inter-facial molecular
              bond and, very importantly, when used in combination with a mass changing,
              chemically responsive layer [3] chemical analyte concentrations.   Applications
              of magnetoelastic sensors to remote query chemical sensing has been
              demonstrated using a glucose responding polymer [4].  Changes in the resonant
              frequency of a magnetoelastic sensor have been measured in response to
              differential surface mass loadings below 0.9 ng/mm2.  Three types of
              microporous thin-films were chosen for this study, providing a broad range of
              surface chemistries for controlling the adsorption and/or absorption of gas
              into the micropores.  By controlling the pore size as well as the surface
              chemistry, we can tune the selectivity of the magnetoelastic sensor to a given
              compound in a mixture that may contain numerous different solute and solvent
              molecules. 

