Title       : Role of Strain Localization and Dilatancy on Deformation and Stability of Soil
               Slopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9988557

Award Number: 9988557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Majid T. Manzari manzari@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              In addition to traditional limit equilibrium methods, the upper bound and lower
              bound theorems of plasticity are the main tools in evaluation of stability and
              collapse load of geo-structural systems.  A recent study by the PI shows that
              an analysis that is based on such theorems may significantly over-estimate the
              collapse load and the factor of safety of slopes and soil embankments.  The
              main cause of such over-estimation is the assumption of normality and the
              inherent assumption of high dilation angle (equal to friction angle) in the
              upper bound and lower bound theorems, which implies an unrealistically large
              dilatational volume change.  In order to overcome this deficiency, a proper
              constitutive model that can accurately model the volume change of the soil
              should be used. Moreover, since the shear strength of the soil is directly
              affected by its volume change, an accurate soil model will automatically
              simulate the softening of dense granular soils. This post-peak behavior of the
              soil will also affect the stability of a geotechnical system. In the context of
              numerical simulations, both non-normality and softening cause significant
              difficulties that are directly related to initiation of localized shear
              deformations.  Here it is proposed to investigate the effects of strain
              localization and soil volume change on the collapse of soil embankments. The
              dilatational soil response will be modeled within the framework of critical
              state soil mechanics. A selection of plasticity models ranging from
              non-associative Mohr-Coulomb model to a critical state two surface plasticity
              model will be employed to examine the effect of soil volume change and induced
              strain softening on the stability of soil slopes. Considering the fact that
              strain softening will cause significant localization of deformations in certain
              parts of the systems that are on the verge of instability, enhanced finite
              element techniques and constitutive models will be developed to handle the
              post-bifurcation behavior of the systems. The results of the investigation will
              be presented in form of appropriate charts that may be used as guideline for
              incorporating the effect of soil dilatancy on slope stability.
