Title       : Low-Power System-on-a-Chip Design for Minimum Transient Energy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9988239

Award Number: 9988239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Bushnell bushnell@caip.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vishwani D. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this project, the original theory for hazard elimination in combinational
              circuits is being expanded to also accelerate circuit speed while reducing
              power consumption.  This method relies on transistor timing adjustments to
              eliminate hazards, and also on transistor resizing to speed up multiple circuit
              paths.  One method being investigated is to enumerate path delays in the
              circuit, and use them as non-linear programming constraints.  This will be
              feasible if the circuit is partitioned.  Another method being investigated is a
              different formulation that does not require path enumeration.  Experiments on
              both formulations are being conducted using linear and non-linear programming
              solvers.  Since it is not clear which method is superior, both will be tried
              using AMPL, which is a widely used mathematical programming package.
	Hazards
              account for 60% of the power used in certain arithmetic circuits.  Hazards are
              eliminated with either the balanced path delay method or by an original method
              of increasing logic gate inertial delays so that gates do not respond to
              hazard-creating input conditions.  Agrawal and Bushnell have proven the minimum
              transient energy conditions necessary for a circuit to use minimal energy, and
              developed the first optimal linear programming method for transistor resizing
              to minimize transient energy. They use a simultaneous application of both the
              balanced path delay method, and the method of increasing logic gate inertial
              delays to make logic gates filter out hazards.  The balanced path delay method
              frequently requires the insertion of buffers to balance path delays, or
              decreased transistor sizes on fast paths to achieve the same effect.  Hazard
              filtering, instead, merely requires that logic gates be slowed down so that
              they cannot react to hazard-producing conditions at their inputs.  The project
              is developing a non-linear programming method to adjust path delays by
              transistor resizing to simultaneously lower power and speed up the circuit,
              while limiting the increase in chip area.  This beneficial method substantially
              reduces power while speeding up the circuit, which lowers chip packaging,
              cooling, and silicon costs.

