Title       : Quantum Information Processing Using Nanocrystal-Microsphere Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9988542

Award Number: 9988542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hailin Wang hailin@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Lonergan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A composite quantum-dot (QD) microcavity consisting of semiconductor
              nanocrystals coupling
to a high-Q whispering gallery mode (WGM) of a fused
              silica microsphere is proposed. This novel
microcavity combines unique
              properties of a fused silica microsphere with 3D electronic confinement
              in
high quality QDs and features a Q-factor exceeding 108, four orders of
              magnitude greater than that of
other existing semiconductor microcavities. The
              proposed system allows fabrication, selection, and
assembling of individual
              electronic and photonic components.

The nanocrystal-microsphere system can
              be used to implement quantum logic gates of Cirac-Zoller
type. The ground
              state and a metastable excited state of the nanocrystal are used as a qubit.
              An
auxiliary dipole transition is used for two-qubit operations. Coherent
              interactions between qubits are
mediated by a photon in a high-Q WGM and
              through coherent photon exchange between two
nanocrystals. Quantum confined
              Stark effects are used to tune a given nanocrystal on- and off-resonance
with
              the WGM and to control the coherent photon exchange process.

Research
              efforts in this program are aimed at developing experimental approaches to
              covalently
attach an array of nanocrystals to the equator of a fused silica
              microsphere and at achieving coherent
photon exchange between a nanocrystal
              and a resonant WGM, two most important steps toward
implementing the proposed
              quantum logic gate. New experimental techniques will also be developed
              to
investigate decoherence processes in single nanocrystals.

To attach an
              array of nanocrystals to the equator of a fused silica microsphere, the
              nanocrystals
will be covalently linked (chemisorbed) to the sphere surface by
              exploiting the well-developed surface
chemistry of silica and precedented
              ligand exchange chemistry. The two primary means to be used for
chemisorption
              will be peptide bond formation and ligand exchange with surface bound thiols.
              For a more
precise control of nanocrystal positions, microcontact printing
              will be used to achieve localized surface
derivatization. As an alternative,
              micro-manipulation of nanocrystals by using an atomic force
microscope will
              also be pursued.

To achieve strong dipole coupling and the resulting
              coherent photon exchange between a
nanocrystal and a resonant WGM, a
              nanocrystal-microsphere system where a high-Q WGM couples
resonantly to a
              single nanocrystal will be used. Experimental studies will be carried out by
              using optical
transitions with the smallest g and the largest ratio of grad /
              g where g and grad are the total decoherence
rate and the radiative
              decoherence rate of nanocrystals, respectively.

A new spectroscopic
              technique that takes advantage of the extreme sensitivity of a high-Q WGM
to
              absorption or emission from a single nanocrystal will be developed to measure
              absorption and
excitation spectra of a single nanocrystal. Stimulated photon
              echoes will also be used to obtain
information on both decoherence and
              population relaxation of nanocrystals and especially on pure-dephasing
              associated with acoustic phonon side bands. Combining results obtained from the
              single
nanocrystal and the ensemble-average photon echo investigations will
              enable us to identify optical
transitions with the smallest g and the largest
              ratio of grad / g . These studies should also lead to much-needed understanding
              of decoherence processes in nanocrystals.

In addition to accomplishing two
              most important steps toward realizing quantum logic gates in a
QD system, the
              proposed research should lead to identification of important issues, both
              technological
and fundamental, in quantum information devices using a QD
              system. The achievement of the strong
coupling regime for a single QD will
              open up a new frontier of semiconductor quantum optics and will
make possible
              devices such as optical switching at the level of a single photon and
              microlasers at the level
of a single QD. The understanding of decoherence
              processes in nanocrystals should also be important to
any quantum computing
              scheme that uses semiconductor nanocrystals or more generally QDs.

