Title       : Computing with Shapes: Reconstruction and Decimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a9988216

Award Number: 9988216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamal K. Dey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computing with Shapes: Reconstruction and Decimation
Tamal Dey
Ohio
              State


Computations with shapes are prevalent in a number of application
              areas ranging over CAD/CAM, medical imaging, physical simulations and so on. We
              propose studying two of these computations, namely,  reconstruction and
              decimation. The choice of these two operations is prompted by their imminent
              relevance in applications, our ongoing research on them, and their rich
              theoretical challenges. We focus mainly on low dimensional shapes such as
              curves and surfaces in two and three dimensions. These shapes are ubiquitous in
              applications and  their understanding is essential to move forward to higher
              dimensional shapes.

By reconstruction we mean computing a piecewise linear
              approximation of a shape from a set of sample points. Modern technology with
              laser scanners has made it easy to obtain a dense set of sample points from the
              boundary of an object. A piecewise linear approximation from these sample
              points help to model the object for prototyping, visual inspection, and further
              reengineering. The problem has been studied by graphics community who used
              numerical approaches to the problem. Computational geometers attacked the
              problem with ideas from discrete and differential geometry. Although a
              considerable success has been made by these approaches, there are growing
              demand from the industry to handle shapes with boundary, sharp features, noise
              which cannot be tackled robustly with the current methods. 

Decimation of a
              shape is the process of reducing the size of the data structure representing
              the shape. The model reconstructed from a sample may have a large number of
              elements such as triangles since the input sample set is typically large. Such
              a model with large number of elements becomes unwieldy for further processing
              such as graphic rendering or physical simulations. A standard strategy is to
              reduce the number of triangles by edge contractions. In this method selected
              edges are contracted to a new vertex. All incident simplices are contracted
              accordingly. Different kinds of demands on the geometry and topology of the
              shapes during decimation are put forward by multitude of applications. While
              some of the applications need to preserve the topology, the others want to
              change it in a controlled manner. The investigator with other researchers in
              the community studied the problem of preserving topology during edge
              contractions. The question of allowing topology change in a controlled manner
              is still largely unsolved. 

The geometry of the shape depends on the
              location of the new vertex replacing the contracted edge. An effective
              numerical tool used for this purpose is the quadric error measure that tries to
              optimize the the sum of distances of the new vertex from the planes of the
              neighboring triangles. This strategy tends to produce an anisotropic mesh whose
              triangles are elongated according to the curvature of the shape. Although
              anisotropic meshes are preferred in some applications, there are others who
              favor isotropic meshes that have triangles with bounded aspect ratio. Can we
              produce an isotropic mesh after reconstruction and decimation? Instead of
              decimating the model after reconstruction, is it possible to decimate the
              sample itself? In a recent work, the investigator tries to address this issue.
              This work is far from complete and we propose to continue it for new
              results.

Theoretical studies proposed for this project would require
              combining ideas from topology and geometry, a central issue in the emergent
              field of Computational Topology. New algorithms will be developed as a result
              of our theoretical study, but their ultimate proof of performance will be
              tested through implementation which is also part of our agenda. 

