Title       : CNPq: IMiMD-Indexing and Data Mining in Multimedia Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9988876

Award Number: 9988876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christos Faloutsos christos@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1085,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a joint effort with Prof. Caetano Traina from the University of Sao
              Paulo, Brazil. It strengthens the existing collaboration between Prof. Christos
              Faloutsos at CMU and Prof. Traina and his group, which has already contributed
              fast indexing methods for metric and video datasets. CMU brings expertise in
              video indexing (the Informedia DL-II project), in power laws, and in data
              mining. The benefit of the collaboration will be faster methods for indexing
              multimedia and metric datasets, and for finding patterns in such collections.
              This project focuses on indexing multimedia data and on developing new tools to
              find patterns and correlations in such data. Multimedia objects can often be
              mapped to n-dimensional points through feature extraction. If not, then they
              can be treated as metric data, when we are provided a pair-wise distance
              function. The methods will be applicable to multimedia, metric and spatial data
              alike. Typical questions include: "find video clips similar to a given video
              clip"; "how strong is the correlation (or anti-correlation) between the
              locations of schools and the locations of libraries?"; "how many schools are
              within 5 miles from libraries?". For indexing, the goals are (a) to provide
              formulas to estimate the selectivities for similarity queries and (b) to build
              faster searching structures. Preliminary joint work showed that the
              distribution of distances in spatial and metric datasets often follows a
              "power-law", which are useful to design better search strategies. For data
              mining, the goals are to provide tools for detection of spatial correlations
              and to develop fast visualization algorithms for spatial and multimedia
              datasets. The developed tools will be able to show whether there are clusters
              in a dataset, how many they are, and whether two groups of points (e.g.
              "schools" and "libraries") are "attracting" or "repelling" each other. 


