Title       : A Bench-top Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer for Biologically Significant
               Compounds and Enzyme Functional Assay Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a9988599

Award Number: 9988599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51583              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell L. Roelofs wlr1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Knipple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Villani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9988599
Wendell Roelofs
A bench-top GC/MS for Biologically Significant
              Compounds and Enzyme Functional Assay Analyses

A benchtop capillary gas
              chromatograph/mass spectrometer system equipped with an
autoinjector will be
              purchased to replace an outdated GC/MS currently used in the Entomology
              Department. The instrument will generate classical mass spectra, be highly
              sensitive for the analysis of trace biologically active components from complex
              mixtures, be highly reliable for daily routine analyses, and would be designed
              for easy operation and maintenance. The instrument will be used on a daily
              basis for research programs of the 4 Co-PIs. The PI will supervise instrument
              usage and two chemist postdocs will provide daily operations and
              maintenance.

Research projects that will use the GC/MS include the
              following: characterization of unique desaturase genes from insect pheromone
              glands; isolation and identification of a naturally occurring fungicide in
              blueberry; the identification of key volatile compounds from host plants of
              various species of Rhagoletis flies, which have been the center of a
              controversial discussion on sympatric speciation; the generation a yeast
              expression system for commercial production of unsaturated acids;
              identification of root volatiles important in host finding by soil arthropods; 
              and for characterization of sex pheromone components in several coleopterous
              soil feeding pests. These projects will involve close coordination of
              behavioral studies and GC/MS analysis of minute quantities of biologically
              active materials in airborne-collected samples. The GC/MS will be an invaluable
              resource in the Department of Entomology for the above projects and will
              provide training and research opportunities for postdocs and graduate
              students.

