Title       : Ectropic Design: Intelligent Collaboration Spaces for Open-Source Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a9988235

Award Number: 9988235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Guzdial guzdial@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Spencer Rugaber  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Open-Source software has proven to be an exciting and productive
alternative to
              traditional, process-driven software development. But
Open Source has an
              inherent limitation--it has been most successful in
those situations where a
              strong individual has served as a unifying
force.  Ectropic software design is
              proposed as a way of sustaining
conceptual integrity in the absence of such a
              unifying force;
ectrospaces are proposed as a collaboration technology to
              support
ectropic design.  The term ectropic is intended to describe
              software
systems that maintain or increase their structuredness, as opposed
              to
the more typical, entropic, case in which the structure and
              conceptual
integrity of a system degrade as it evolves.  Besides
              precisely
defining the ectropic design process and building a
              prototype
ectrospace, this project studies the power and practicality
              of
ectropic software.  It also investigates it in the setting of
              a
sophomore-level, object-oriented development class. The class
              will
undertake an Open-Source development effort using ectropic design
              and
supported by an ectrospace.  The resulting software and
              documentation
will be distributed in Open Source form to the Internet
              community.

