Title       : K-theories, Cycle Theories, and Cohomology Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a9988130

Award Number: 9988130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Friedlander eric@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart B. Priddy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              					Friedlander-Abstract  

The relationship between algebraic K-theory and
              algebraic cycles is of fundamental importance.  Friedlander proposes to
              consider his investigations of this relationship by continuing to contemplate
              the spectral sequence developed in collaboration with Suslin and by studying
              Chern classes to various cohomology theories.  Much of Friedlander's effort
              will be directed to semi-topological K-theory (being developed in collaboration
              with Mark Walker) and its relationship with morphic cohomology (developed in
              collaboration with Blaine Lawson).  Friedlander also proposes to further
              investigate the representation theory of algebras related to algebraic groups,
              in part through the thesis work of several Ph.D. students.

Throughout the
              twentieth century, algebraic topology (mathematics of "bending and twisting")
              and algebraic geometry (mathematics of "surfaces" coming from graphing
              polynomial equations) enjoyed a very positive interactive relationship.  The
              types of geometric objects ("surfaces") studied by topologists can be more
              general than geometric "surfaces" called algebraic varieties, but many of the
              most basic and interesting topological "surfaces" are algebraic varieties. 
              Constructions and techniques arising naturally in either geometry or topology
              continue to be successfully imported to the other area, often with surprising
              computational or conceptual results.  Much of the proposed work is to use
              techniques and to pose questions that are topological in character to gain a
              better understanding of some central aspects of algebraic geometry.


