Title       : Towards an Understanding of Deregulated Electricity Markets through Time Series
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9988626

Award Number: 9988626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Tomsovic tomsovic@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zoran Obradovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this study is to gain understanding of the interactions between
              the behavior of electricity markets under new management regulations and the
              engineering aspects of large-scale electric power systems.  

There are
              numerous practical difficulties in allowing financial mechanisms the freedom to
              directing day-today operations of the power system.  The electric commodity
              must be generated, distributed and consumed in real-time under strict physical
              laws and extremely high reliability requirements.  This process is far more
              exacting and complex then the distribution of traditional commodities, such as,
              oil or agricultural products.  Further, the importance of the electric power
              system to all areas of economic activity suggests caution for any changes that
              may radically alter system operation.  Certainly, assessing the effectiveness
              of the deregulated markets is of great importance for maintaining reliable
              power system performance.  

Neither traditional engineering nor the
              economics viewpoint can alone provide complete explanations for behavior in
              trades and other financial instruments.  Of direct relevance to the proposed
              work is the existence of predictable patterns of price movements that may
              indicate either market or power system problems.  These problems include price
              volatility, poor system reliability, excessive market power leading to high
              prices, and market inefficiencies.  This study will develop techniques to
              analyze the deregulated electricity market in order to determine if there
              exists market behavior that represents conditions of concern for proper
              operation of the power system. 

In particular, the first task of the
              proposed study consists of studying relevant power system data applying domain
              specific knowledge and qualitative data analysis in order to identify
              interesting phenomena in the time series that represents electricity and
              ancillary service prices.  As a second task, the selected time series will be
              carefully pre-processed, and subject to an in-depth analysis using methodology
              developed in our preliminary studies.  We will focus on relating identified
              pricing regimes to power system operating conditions.  Subsequently, the third
              task consists of an in-depth performance analysis for electricity markets
              corresponding to the time series studied in the second task.  The objective of
              this fanal task is to address the fundamental question in this research: does
              predictable pricing behavior exist in the electricity markets that indicate
              market problems and which might distort economic and reliable operation of the
              power system.  The long-term objective is not to seek higher returns but to
              develop more efficient and effective market regulations.

This proposed
              project is a cross-disciplinary effort that combines our prior research efforts
              in the development of: (a) effective planning and operation tools that apply
              the latest computational methods to power system engineering problems; and (b)
              accurate knowledge discovery systems through data analysis, prior knowledge,
              and learning from examples in practical complex domains.

