Title       : How Good Can Parallel Algorithms Really Be?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9988256

Award Number: 9988256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uzi Vishkin vishkin@umiacs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manoj Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Institution:  U of MD College Park
Proposal Number:  CCR-9988256


How Good
              Can Parallel Algorithms Really Be?
Uzi Vishkin, PI and Manoj Franklin,
              co-PI
Abstract

Experimental study of parallel algorithms and applications
              is proposed. The investigators plan to conduct this study with respect to the
              Explicit Multi-Threaded (XMT) platform for instruction-level parallelism (ILP).
              A general goal of this work is to promote \thinking and programming in
              parallel". For this the investigators will try to better understand the
              performance potential of a platform such as XMT relative to existing parallel
              and serial platforms/models. Work which the investigators have already done
              provides interesting preliminary examples for mixing experimental research and
              theoretical analysis.  This preliminary work appears to update previous
              knowledge by suggesting that: (i) Good speedups for much smaller inputs are
              possible. (ii) Incorporating analytic (non-asymptotic) performance evaluation
              into experimental performance analysis is possible; this includes applicability
              to relatively small inputs.  Explicit Multi-Threading (XMT) is a fine-grained
              computation framework introduced in a SPAA'98 paper by Vicki et al. XMT aims at
              faster single-task completion time by way of ILP. Building on some key ideas of
              parallel computing, XMT covers the spectrum from algorithms through
              architecture to implementation; the main implementation related innovation in
              XMT is through the incorporation of low-overhead hardware and software
              mechanisms (for more effective fine-grained parallelism).

