Title       : Representation Theory & Computational Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2000     
File        : a9988229

Award Number: 9988229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 1,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Benson djb@byrd.math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.

There will be a conference at the University of Georgia in May
              2000, on the subject of Representation Theory and Computational Algebra.  This
              is intended to mean the representation theory of finite groups and related
              finite dimensional algebras, cohomology of finite groups, and computer
              calculations in these areas.  Over the last few years, the representation
              theory and cohomology of finite groups has seen some spectacular advances in a
              number of different directions.  On the computational side, the development of
              the computer algebra package MAGMA by John Cannon and his associates in
              Australia has enabled explicit calculations of projective resolutions and
              cohomology of groups on an impressive scale.  These computations have, in their
              turn, fed back into the design and development of the MAGMA package. 
              Theoretical input for these calculations comes from group actions on finite
              simplicial complexes and associated topological constructions at the level of
              the classifying space.  Methods originating in work of Peter Webb have been
              implemented by a number of people, including Adem, Carlson, Maginnis, Milgram
              and Smith.  These calculations seem to be intimately related to the homotopy
              decompositions of classifying spaces appearing in recent work of Dwyer,
              Jackowski, McClure, Oliver, etc.  A good example of the interaction between
              these techniques is given by the recent calculation of the cohomology of the
              Higman-Sims sporadic simple group by Adem, Carlson, Karagueuzian and Milgram. 
              One of the strongest reasons for studying the cohomology of finite groups is
              its connections with representation theory.  Recent developments in this
              direction have focused on structure of module categories, especially the
              associated stable categories and derived categories. Work of Benson, Carlson
              and Rickard on the stable category, and of Broue, Rickard, Rouquier and others
              on the derived category have been central to this development.  Computations
              with specific groups have been at the core of these developments, and many of
              the theorems and conjectures in the subject have arisen this
              way.

Representation theory, in the context of this conference, means the
              representations of abstract groups as groups of matrices.  Calculations in this
              area have implications in algebra, topology, geometry and number theory. Recent
              advances in high performance computing, combined with equally great theoretical
              advances over the last few years, have led to the development of powerful new
              techniques for calculating with representations and cohomology of groups, and
              this then feeds back into the theoretical development.  A symbiotic
              relationship exists between the researchers carrying out these calculations and
              the developers of software such as the MAGMA package for algebra and number
              theory.  The purpose of this conference is to bring together the people working
              in the theoretical and computational aspects of this and closely related
              subjects at this time of rapid development, in order to promote interaction and
              collaboration.  The three main speakers will give series of expository talks on
              computational algebra, cohomology of groups and representation theory, while
              other participants will give more technical talks.

