Title       : Collaborative Research: An experimental study of broadcasting protocols for
               video-on-demand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9988390

Award Number: 9988390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jehan-Francois Paris paris@cs.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the most promising approaches to making video-on-demand services more
              competitive is to continuously broadcast the most frequently requested videos. 
              This research addresses three important limitations that are common to most
              existing broadcasting protocols for video-on-demand.

A first research
              direction is the development of broadcasting protocols that can handle
              compressed videos having variable bandwidth requirements.  The performance on
              these new protocols will be evaluated using a representative set of videos in
              the MPEG-2 format used by DVD.

A second research direction is the efficient
              implementation of interactive functions analogous to those existing on a VCR. 
              These functions will allow customers to pause, move backward, and move forward
              as if they were watching a videocassette.

A third research direction is the
              design of broadcasting protocols that can adjust their broadcasting schedules
              to all observed changes in the request arrival rate.  As a result, these
              dynamic broadcasting protocols will perform equally well at peak hours and at
              hours of lower demand.

All of these broadcasting protocols will be
              demonstrated on a very simple testbed consisting of a single workstation
              broadcasting a few specific videos.

This is a collaborative research project
              between the University of California, Santa Cruz and the University of
              Houston.

