Title       : Dynamics and Control of Non-Laminated Actuators for Magnetic Levitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a9988877

Award Number: 9988877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Knospe crk4y@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. Maslen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for an investigation of high performance magnetic
              levitation for manufacturing.  The growth of manufacturing processes that
              require extreme cleanliness, very high precision positioning or non-contact
              part handling suggests an increasing role for magnetic levitation in production
              environments.  As a technology, magnetic levitation is developing rapidly,
              spurred by dramatic advances in power electronics, precision position sensing,
              high speed digital signal processing, and control theory.  Magnetic levitation
              has found application in many processes including metal conveyance, metal
              coating, silicon wafer transport, film stretching, and photolithography. 
              Almost all work in high performance magnetic levitation assumes that the
              actuator can be constructed from laminations so as to minimize the production
              of eddy currents in the face of the rapidly varying magnetic fields caused by
              active control.  However, in many current or anticipated applications,
              laminated construction conflicts with the basic process or would be highly
              costly.  Without laminations, a rapid change in current applied to the
              electromagnet's coil results in a much slower change in the applied force due
              to the eddy currents induced within the actuator by the changing field.  These
              currents interact with the produced field and greatly complicate the actuator's
              dynamics.  If known, the actuator dynamics can be partially compensated by a
              well-designed control algorithm so as to achieve improved stiffness and servo
              bandwidth.  However, they also impose fundamental limits upon levitation
              performance. Thus, the ability to predict, identify, and model non-laminated
              actuator dynamics is critical to attaining high stiffness/ bandwidth levitation
              and to understanding what can not be achieved.  The objectives of the
              theoretical and experimental tasks of this research effort are to (1) determine
              the fundamental limits that eddy current effects impose upon the performance of
              active magnetic suspensions, and (2) develop robust control strategies that
              provide very high levels of performance with non-laminated actuators.

If
              successful, this research effort will enable non-laminated magnetic suspensions
              that provide highly accurate positioning in spite of disturbance forces and
              reposition the levitated object quickly.  The effort will also provide a
              fundamental knowledge base that will connect an actuator's dynamic properties
              to its size, geometry, and composition.  This knowledge will allow the
              prediction of magnetic suspension performance limits as well as the
              optimization of the stator design to maximize stiffness and servo bandwidth. 
              Finally, it is anticipated that this research will help define new
              opportunities in manufacturing for high performance magnetic suspension.

