Title       : System Support for Distributed Information Change Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9988452

Award Number: 9988452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ling Liu lingliu@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calton Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project investigates the design and implementation issues in the mointoring
              of information changes in large distributed networks such as the Internet and
              World Wide Web.  One of the objectives is to develop efficient and scalable
              strategies, techniques, and systems support for distributed control of large
              numbers of information change monitoring requests.  Research questions to be
              addressed include the following.  What software techniques and tools are able
              to extract, integrate, and query streams of data over semi-structured or
              unstructured data?  Which distributed trigger and data processing techniques
              are most scalable and yet efficient in the presence of millions of information
              change monitoring requests?  How do change monitors adapt to wide system
              parameter variations in runtime environments such as the Internet?  How do they
              scale up as the number of information sources reach millions?  Critical system
              components include change detection algorithms (e.g., tree comparison for web
              pages), trigger and query grouping, indexing, and caching, as well as parallel
              processing.  Appropriate components will be implemented and evaluated through
              simulation and measurements on the Internet.  These experiments will emphasize
              the efficiency and scalability of Internet-scale information change monitoring
              systems.  The research results will aid in the engineering, implementation and
              evaluation of systems and middleware software support for scalable and
              efficient processing of distributed triggers and queries, as well as effective
              detection and notification of information changes.
