Title       : Lie Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9988643

Award Number: 9988643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Wolf jawolf@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF Proposal  DMS 99 88643
		"Lie Groups" Joseph A. Wolf, U. C.
              Berkeley 

The investigator proposes six intertwined research projects, all
              on the 
interface between group theory and geometry.  For the most part these
              
proposals are geometrically motivated approaches to specific problems in
              
modern harmonic analysis connected to the representation theory of
              
semisimple Lie groups.  The first is an approach to construction and
              
analysis of singular unitary representations of real reductive Lie
              groups,
in two steps: (i) geometric construction of those representations, as
              Frechet 
space representations on cohomology of homogeneous vector bundles
              over 
flag domains, and (ii) transforming the representation space to a space
              of
functions on a Stein manifold defined by a system of differential
              equations,
by means of a double fibration transform (the complex Penrose
              
transform is a particular case) from the flag domain to its linear cycle
              
space.  The second project is an approach to construction and analysis of
              
unitary and other representations for a class of infinite dimensional Lie
              
groups, the direct limits of finite dimensional Lie groups, especially
              strict
direct limits of finite dimensional real and complex reductive Lie
              groups,
both in the analytic category and in the algebraic category.  The
              third
project is to complete the investigator's work on the Harish-Chandra
              
Schwartz space of a general semisimple Lie group, by synthesizing structural
              
analyses of the relative Schwartz spaces.  The investigator's fourth project
              
is to complete his development of a direct reading of the character and
              
growth properties (asymptotics) of admissible representations of finite
              
dimensional real reductive Lie groups from the basic data that specify their
              
construction on cohomology spaces of homogeneous vector bundles
over flag
              domains.  One goal here is to do this in such a way that is
directly
              applicable to the first and second projects.  The fifth project
is to continue
              some earlier work on control theory and numerical analysis, 
especially
              observation point placement problems and numerical quadrature 
schemes, based
              on structural results and a priori estimates that come out of
the
              representation theory of real reductive Lie groups.  The sixth 
project, not
              directly analytic in nature, is to follow up on the investigator's
recent
              discovery of a strange relation between isoclinic spheres in
Grassmann
              manifolds, composition of quadratic forms, normal forms for 
spaces of
              antisymmetric bilinear forms, and the construction of flat
homogeneous
              pseudo-riemannian manifolds.

These six research projects all depend on the
              use of symmetry to clarify
analytic (and in one case geometric) problems. 
              Traditionally symmetry
considerations are used to simplify matters by
              decreasing the number of
variables, but here they are used to enable the use
              of insight, tools and
results from geometry and analysis.  The symmetries are
              embodied in group 
theory, which in fact is the algebraic abstraction of the
              notion
of symmetry.  But modern Lie group theory incorporates classical
              analysis
(calculus, differential equations...) and is closely tied to the
              geometry
(riemannian, symplectic, kaehler, ...)  of the spaces on which the
              groups
act as symmetries.  An important aspect of this synthesis of 
geometry
              and analysis is a geometric form of quantization that is 
particularly well
              suited to the sorts of finite dimensional groups 
considered in several of the
              projects.  This geometric quantization, 
originally inspired by physics and
              developed in some detail by mathematicians, 
has in turn been very useful in a
              variety of settings in mathematics and 
physics.  This is very much the case
              in five of the six projects, where the 
geometric quantization is combined
              with modern differential geometry to
understand various analytic problems. 
              This is especially evident in the first 
project, whose objective can be
              viewed as a sort of dequantization.


