Title       : Quantization and Nonlinear Dynamics of Discrete Superconducting Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9988832

Award Number: 9988832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry P. Orlando orlando@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This renewal award to a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
              will fund studies of the physics of vortex motion and novel nonlinear dynamical
              states in the classical and quantum regimes using discrete arrays of
              superconducting Josephson junctions. The study of classical nonlinear modes
              such as discrete
breathers and ratchets will lead to a better understanding of
              both vortex motion in superconductors as well as novel types of nonlinear
              states in condensed matter systems which are defined on a lattice.  As the
              junctions in the array are made smaller, the superconducting circuit becomes
              quantum mechanical and will be studied as new types of electronic applications
              (such as single electronics) and for circuits to perform quantum computation.
              The students will be able to combine a range of educational experiences
              covering experimental physics, nonlinear dynamics, and quantum coherence.  They
              will also gain experience in interdisciplinary training and international
              collaborations.
%%%
As the superconducting devices are miniaturized at the
              limits of today's technology, the circuit becomes quantum mechanical. This
              renewal award to a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will
              fund studies of these devices for new types of electronic applications and for
              use in circuits to perform a novel type of computation, known as quantum
              computation.  This project will also study how the current and voltage can be
              organized into spatial and temporal patterns known as dynamical states, and how
              these dynamical states are effected by the quantum nature of the circuit.  The
              students will gain experience in interdisciplinary training and international
              collaborations, which will prepare them well for today's increasingly global
              and interdisciplinary approach to research and development in science and
              engineering.
***

