Title       : Optimization, Randomization, and Generalization in Symbolic Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9988177

Award Number: 9988177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich L. Kaltofen kaltofen@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Erich Kaltofen proposes to study mathematical optimization techniques on
              problem formulations that are  imprecise due to numerical data; randomization
              techniques that are the power tools in the design of fast algorithms with exact
              arithmetic on black box matrices; and generalization of the computer programs
              that implement these algorithms to multiple domains with methodologies such as
              generic, reusable programming and interface protocols.

  A difficulty in the
              symbolic/numeric area is that inputs with imprecise coefficients as a result of
              a physical measurement or a numerical computation can lack a known property
              that is of interest. For example, instead of a double real root, a polynomial
              has two conjugate complex roots that are very close together.  The optimization
              problem is to compute efficiently the nearest input that has the desired
              singularity.
Our focus will be on the nearest pair of polynomials with a
              common root under coefficient-wise change (infinity norm), the nearest singular
              Toeplitz matrix, and the nearest bi-variate complex polynomial that factors
              over the complex numbers, the latter two under any reasonable norm.

   A
              black box matrix is stored as a function that performs the matrix-times vector
              product.  Efficient algorithms for performing linear algebra computations with
              exact field arithmetic, such as solving a linear
system with a black box
              coefficient matrix, are based on the Lanczos/Wiedemann approach.
Randomization
              techniques, for instance, matrix pre-conditioning and Krylov sub-spacing with
              random projections, avoid self-orthogonality when the coefficients are from a
              finite field and general algorithmic
break-down due to certain invariant
              factors of the matrix. We propose to investigate how the different linear
              algebra problems are interelated, for example if the computation of a solution
              of an inhomogeneous black box linear system can be efficiently reduced to the 
              computation of a column dependency of a black box matrix.

   Generic
              programming is a software design technique that generalizes a program so that
              it can be used with more than one underlying domain.  The proposed
              implementation of our black box algorithms not
only permits the plug-in of a
              black box matrix over a native coefficient field, but the code also imports
              internally needed operations like polynomial and vector operations from
              expertly fine-tuned existing packages across generic interfaces. Our library's
              application program interface provides a serialization mechanism for black box
              objects that is compliant with the MathML/OpenMath philosophy and that
              allows
Internet communication.

  Finally, we propose research on two
              classical problems. First, the polynomial-time computation of dense, low-degree
              factors of high-degree sparse multi-variate polynomials with rational
              coefficients, which would generalize a recent related result by Hendrik W.
              Lenstra, Jr. Second, a time- and space-efficient realization of the
              transposition principle for transforming a matrix-times-vector function to the
              transpose vector-times-matrix operation.

