Title       : Collaborative Cross-Disciplinary Research in Ecology, Endocrinology, and
               Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a9988001

Award Number: 9988001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Kunz kunz@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT        Thomas Kunz     Proposal # DBI - 9988001


Eight research
              teams, each consisting of one or two undergraduate students and two faculty
              mentors, will work on different collaborative cross-disciplinary projects.  The
              purpose of Boston University's REU program is to promote collaborative research
              between students and research biologists whose disciplines have traditionally
              had a single focus.  Each research team includes an organismal biologist
              (ecologist or ethologist) and an endocrinologist or molecular biologist. 
              Proposed research topics include: the role of leptin in the reproductive
              biology of mammals, the immune response of termites to pathogens, the role of
              estrogen in
neurodevelopment in fish, neurochemical correlates of caste
              differences in social insects, genetic population structure in a temperate bat
              species, social behavior and population genetics structure in Ovenbirds,
              evolution of the vertebrate genome by phylogenetic analysis of vertebrate
              isozymes, and programmed cell death during plant development.  Faculty mentors
              have been carefully selected on the basis of their experience and interest in
              working with undergraduates and on their own scholarly contributions.  Five
              students will be selected from four-year colleges and universities in the
              eastern United States that provide limited research opportunities, and five
              students will be selected from a pool of students at Boston University. 
              Recruitment efforts will target minority, women, and physically-challenged
              students.  Selection procedures will be based on scholarly aptitude, research
              potential, and previous experience of the applicants.  A weekly research and
              ethics seminar will include presentations and discussions on topics ranging
              from values and integrity in science, reporting and investigating allegations
              of misconduct, ethical treatment of animals, record keeping and data
              management, and responsible authorship.











