Title       : Geometric Problems in Radiosurgery, Radiation Therapy, and Other Medical
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9988468

Award Number: 9988468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny Z. Chen chen@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaobo S. Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

This project is on the design, analysis, and implementation of 
algorithmic
              techniques for solving geometric problems that arise in 
radiosurgery,
              radiation therapy, and other medical applications.  
Radiosurgery is a
              minimally invasive surgical procedure that uses 
a set of focused beams of
              radiation to destroy tumors.  A key step 
in radiotherapy and radiosurgery is
              to develop a treatment plan that 
defines the best radiation beam arrangements
              and time settings to 
destroy the target tumor without harming the surrounding
              healthy 
tissues.  At the core of radiation treatment planning is a set 
of
              substantially non-trivial geometric optimization problems.
We seek to
              investigate a number of geometric optimization 
problems arising in radiation
              treatment planning, such as beam 
selection (including beam probing and its
              many variations), surgical 
navigation and routing, sphere packing, beam
              shaping, image 
segmentation, shape approximation, and beam source path
              planning.
This interdisciplinary research will draw diverse techniques from
              
computational geometry and other theoretical areas, such as operations
              
research and combinatorial optimization.  Furthermore, this research 
will
              provide a rich source of problems and new challenges that prod 
further
              development of algorithmic techniques in these theoretical 
areas.  The
              planned research includes an important experimental 
component.  Educational
              activities on course development and student 
training in the
              interdisciplinary area of computational medicine are 
also part of the
              project.


