Title       : Nonstandard High Order Multigrid Techniques with Applications to Laminar
               Diffusion Flame Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9988165

Award Number: 9988165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig C. Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will design efficient geometric multigrid methods using
              
intermediate grids to solve convection diffusion problems discretized 
by
              high order compact schemes. The use of intermediate grids aims at 
reducing
              discrepancy between the solutions obtained on different
grids. Symbolic
              computation packages will be used to derive a fourth 
order finite difference
              scheme on the intermediate grids. Special 
relaxation schemes and intergrid
              transfer operators will be developed.
The nonstandard multigrid method with
              high order discretization 
schemes will be used in the numerical simulation of
              laminar diffusion 
flames. The use of intermediate grids is expected to
              alleviate the 
problem haunting existing multigrid methods in the flame
              simulation, 
in which the converged coarse grid correction is not in the
              
convergence domain of the fine grid Newton iteration.

This project
              requires both symbolic and numerical computation 
techniques. The successful
              development of a useful symbolic 
computation procedure will greatly promote
              the awareness and use of 
symbolic computation packages in numerical
              computation community.
The results of this research project will make
              important contribution 
to the understanding of geometric multigrid solution
              of convection
diffusion problems, and of the applications of high order
              compact
schemes to realistic flow simulations. Efficient solution of such
              
problems is central to many numerical simulations in computational 
fluid
              dynamics. The fast laminar diffusion flame code is useful in 
combustion and
              environment protection. Certain U.S. industries related 
to commercial
              burners, pollutant tracking, car and airplane 
manufacturing, combustion, can
              benefit from this research.


