Title       : Mobility Management in Next Generation Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9988532

Award Number: 9988532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian F. Akyildiz ian@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future wireless mobile systems promise universal coverage and require terminals
              to be capable of seamless roaming between networks, which may be of different
              types. Next generation mobile terminals will haveto exist in a world of
              multiple standards, and mobility management 
procedures (i.e., location
              registration, paging and handoff) will have to be interoperable across network
              providers and network backbones as well as geographical regions. 

Location
              registration, paging and handoff will be investigated, and new protocols will
              be introduced to solve these problems. From the standpoint of location
              management, the mobile terminals must register before they enter new systems in
              order to reserve radio resources. In addition, the signaling formats must be
              converted and the mobile terminals must be authenticated. A new scheme is
              proposed, which estimates the user mobility pattern in order to help new
              protocols and to estimate the signaling costs of the new mobility management
              procedures. Also, a new intersystem location update scheme is introduced, which
              reduces the signaling traffic by assigning update distance thresholds based on
              a per-user profile. Furthermore, the boundary location area is introduced,
              which enables the MTs to request location update between two different systems.
              Another problem for future wireless systems is the intersystem paging problem.
              The search operation may be carried out not only in the system where the mobile
              terminal last registered, but also in the system the mobile terminal has passed
              since the last call. A new scheme is proposed that combines and reorders the
              paging areas in decreasing order of location probabilities, until the delay
              bound has reached a certain threshold value as a QoS parameter. For handoff
              management, the radio access system must support intersystem handoffs for
              mobile terminals with multiple connections that are sending and receiving
              multimedia traffic with different Quality of Service (QoS) expectations. Radio
              signal strengths must be measured and compared across different air interfaces
              and power levels, and signaling procedures must cooperate between the switches
              of each system. A new intersystem handoff scheme is proposed that uses boundary
              cells to perform system transformations when mobile terminals begin to handoff
              into new systems. Finally, a new signaling protocol will be developed to
              handoff the mobile terminal into the boundary cell, perform the format
              transformation, and then handoff the mobile terminal into the new system.

