Title       : Improving Usability of Software Process Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9988254

Award Number: 9988254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Lerner lerner@cs.williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: CCR-9988254
PI:  Lerner, Barbara S.
Institution:  Williams
              College
Title:  Improving Usability of Software Process Programs

The goal
              of software process programming is to encode software processes in
a language
              that is amenable to formal analysis and execution.  By executing
a software
              process, the quality, cost, and timeliness of software products
should
              improve.  While process programming languages can describe
              processes
accurately, organizations do not execute process programs to guide
              process
execution.  One impediment to the adoption of process program
              execution is
that little attention has been paid to user interface issues. 
              The research
involves developing extensions to process programming languages,
              developing
a style for more usable processes, and addressing issues of how to
              make a
process program usable to both novice and experienced users. 
              Extensions
allow re-execution of parts of a process to try alternative
              approaches,
dynamic error handling, and customized user interfaces.  The
              extensions
provide more flexibility to process users.  This flexibility is
              balanced
against the demands of the process to guarantee that the quality,
              cost, and
timeliness goals of the process are not compromised.  The
              research
investigates this tradeoff, balancing the programmability of the
              process
language against the usability of the resulting processes, striving
              to
maintain the benefits of process programming while making their
              execution
more acceptable to the user community.


