Title       : Negative Energy in General Relativity and Quantum Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9988464

Award Number: 9988464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Roman roman@ccsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central CT State U
	      1615 Stanley Street
	      New Britain, CT  060532439    860/832-2365

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research discussed here deals with the implications of a very unusual form
              of energy. The existence of this so-called "negative energy" is allowed by the
              laws of quantum field theory, which describe the behavior of matter and energy
              on microscopic scales.  The focus of the research is the extended investigation
              of restrictions imposed by the laws of physics on negative energy.  These
              generalized restrictions would involve the placement of constraints on the
              distribution of negative energy in both time and space.  Regions of negative
              energy also appear to be accompanied by large fluctuations in energy density,
              which could perhaps lead to large fluctuations in the gravitational fields
              produced by the negative energy.  How this would affect the description of
              gravity, given in Einstein's theory as the curvature of the geometry of space
              and time, in these circumstances is currently not well understood. It is hoped
              to investigate this issue as well.

Situations involving negative energy have
              been produced in the laboratory.  The amounts of negative energy generated in
              these experiments are extremely tiny.  However, if the laws of physics impose
              no constraints on negative energy, then one might be able to create large
              amounts of it and thereby produce bizarre macroscopic effects.  However,
              research has shown that quantum field theory does impose some rather strong
              restrictions on negative energy.  These constraints have come to be known as
              "quantum inequalities", and yield severe limitations on the macroscopic effects
              of negative energy mentioned above.  Loosely speaking, they say that large
              negative energies can exist for only short periods of time.  The present
              research aims to extend the scope of these results.

