Title       : Biodegradation of Aromatic Organic Compounds in Alternating Aerobic and
               Denitrifying Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9988086

Award Number: 9988086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317511             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. P. Grady GC@ese.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9988086  Grady  Over 60% of the large production chemicals in the USA are
              aromatic organic compounds.  Consequently, they are common pollutants in
              wastewaters and the environment.  Although their biodegradabilities depend on
              their individual structures, one key feature, the aromatic ring, defines the
              nature of the biodegradation process.  This is because bacteria use different
              enzyme systems to degrade aromatic compounds in the presence and absence of
              oxygen.  Under aerobic conditions, the enzymes catalyzing them are only
              synthesized and active when oxygen is present.  Under anaerobic conditions, the
              ring cleavage reactions are reductive.  Therefore, the enzymes catalyzing them
              are only synthesized and active when oxygen is absent.  This raises questions
              about how bacterial that are cycled frequently between aerobic and anaerobic
              conditions degrade aromatic compounds.  Because of the environmental impacts
              associated with the discharge of nitrogen, nitrogen removal processes are being
              applied with increasing frequency for the treatment of wastewaters.  Such
              processes employ both aerobic and anaerobic zones, with nitrate as the electron
              acceptor in the latter.  In all of these situations one must ask how the
              variation in redox state of the environment influences the biodegradation of
              aromatic compounds.  The purpose of the proposed research is to answer that
              question.
Two types of experiments will be run with mixed cultures of bacteria
              grown in chemostats (continuous cultures without biomass recycle), which will
              be used because they allow close control over both the bacterial growth rate
              and the environmental conditions.  In one, the chemostats will be subjected to
              alternating aerobic and anaerobic (with nitrate as the electron acceptor)
              conditions of different frequency and duration to ascertain how the nature of
              the imposed cycle influences the ability of the culture to remove aromatic
              compounds.  In the other, small quantities of oxygen will be continuously
              injected into otherwise anaerobic chemostats containing nitrate. The results
              obtained from this study will be used to derive guidelines to aid engineers
              faced with the task of designing wastewater treatment systems that are capable
              of removing both nitrogen and aromatic compounds to very low levels.  They will
              also provide a better understanding of how bacteria control oxygen-sensitive
              enzymes when grown in environments that have fluctuations in redox state,
              thereby helping scientists make a better predictions of the fate of aromatic
              compounds discharged to such environments.  Finally, the results will help
              engineers determine the efficacy of adding nitrate as an electron acceptor to
              contaminated aquifers containing low levels of dissolved oxygen. ***

