Title       : Ultrafast Optoelectronics for Broad Bandwidth Microwave Measurements of
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a9988797

Award Number: 9988797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59998              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Robertson wmr@physics.mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal supports research in broad bandwidth microwave/millimeter-wave
              measurements of materials using the Ultrafast Optoelectronics Laser Laboratory
              (UOLL) at Middle Tennessee State University.  The UOLL centers around a
              Terahertz measurement system based on photoconductive antennas which are driven
              by a mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser. The antenna structures for the proposed
              research are
designed to emit polarized, directional radiation over the
              frequency range 10 GHz to 200 GHz; a frequency range of growing technological
              interest and one in which few other broad bandwidth sources exist.

There are
              two research focus areas. (1) Measure the microwave properties of photonic band
              gap materials, in particular determine the dispersion relations of bulk and
              surface electromagnetic modes in dielectric and metallo-dielectric arrays. (2)
              Demonstrate the use of broad bandwidth microwave ellipsometry as a non-contact
              method for determining the microwave dielectric constant and loss of thin films
              on semiconducting substrates.
 
This proposal is submitted under the NSF's
              Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program. A number of factors
              contribute to the value of this research program for undergraduates. Because
              this optoelectronic technique is not widely practiced it is easy to frame a
              number of research projects that can be partitioned into segments which can be
              accomplished in the time frame available to undergraduate students. The science
              is accessible and incorporates and reinforces topics covered in the modern
              undergraduate physics curriculum (particularly electrodynamics, solid state
              physics, Fourier methods, and optics).

Finally, the students develop
              technologically relevant experimental skills in optics and lasers, electronics,
              semiconductors, and thin films.


