Title       : PPD: Communication/Dissemination Project on Science Education Resources for
               Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9988729

Award Number: 9988729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg P. Stefanich stefanich@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project is a communication/information dissemination activity aimed at
              teachers, administrators and teacher educators to improve their knowledge and
              familiarity with resources for the teaching of science to students with
              disabilities.  The project will continue an existing alliance with the National
              Science Teachers Association (NSTA) to enhance equity for all students in
              science.  The mode of delivery will be a two-day preconference program
              presented at the NSTA annual meeting in Orlando, Florida, on April 5-6, 2000,
              and maintaining an exhibit booth in the exhibition hall throughout the meeting.
               
     The project will educate professionals providing services to students
              with disabilities about effective resources, and teaching/assessment
              strategies.  The disability areas addressed will include motor/orthopedic
              impairments, deaf and hard of hearing, visual impairments, learning
              disabilities, cognitive impairments, and behavioral disabilities.  Information
              in the areas of career awareness, teacher education, research on effective
              teaching, methods of instruction, materials and programs, evaluation and
              assessment, and educational organizations and agencies will be disseminated to
              all participants in the project.  
     The proposed effort will address
              responsibilities of educators contained in legislative mandates (I.E.
              Rehabilitation Act, 1973; Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990, Individuals
              with Disabilities Education Act, 1997), inequities reflected in the literature
              concerning opportunities in science for students with disabilities, and
              informational needs of teachers and teacher educators in making science
              instruction responsive to students with disabilities.

