Title       : Tight Frames of Rational Splines and Application to CAD/CAM and Computer
               Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9988289

Award Number: 9988289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Chui chui@arch.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenjie He  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Cardinal splines (i.e. splines with equally-spaced knots) provide a
              
canonical example for demonstrating the mathematical structure of
              
multiresolution analysis (MRA), which is a very powerful tool for the
              
construction of orthogonal, semi-orthogonal, and bi-orthogonal 
wavelets. 
              However, for practical applications, splines with arbitrary 
knots are often
              needed; and although the multi-level (ML) structure of 
spline subspaces is
              still valid, the Fourier approach to the study of 
cardinal splines and their
              corresponding wavelets no longer applies to 
this more general study.  In
              addition, even for the cardinal setting, 
orthogonal and semi-orthogonal
              splines must be replaced by tight affine 
(or wavelet) frames when compact
              support (or finite time-duration) is 
needed for both spline-wavelet analysis
              and spline-wavelet synthesis.  
Furthermore, for CAD/CAM applications, there
              is also the need of 
rational B-splines (or NURBS) for precise representation
              of various 
geometric objects such as conic sections.

This proposal is
              based on our recent results on tight frames of 
cardinal splines and on our
              newly developed complete ML structure of 
NURBS in terms of their weights. We
              propose to introduce non-stationary 
time-domain techniques to build a unified
              mathematical foundation of 
tight affine frames of compactly supported splines
              with arbitrary 
knots, and more generally, of NURBS.  This will be followed by
              
development of efficient algorithms and computational schemes 
associated
              with these new basic functions, which will be used as 
analysis and synthesis
              tools for CAD/CAM and computer graphics 
applications.  We also propose to
              develop software libraries of these 
analysis and design tools that will be
              fully compatible with the 
industrial standards such as IGES, STEP, and PHIGS,
              for the CAD/CAM/CAE 
industries.



