Title       : Interactive Exploration of Complex Datasets Via the Effective Generation of Text
               and Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9988507

Award Number: 9988507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Healey healey@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. St. Amant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is accomplished through an interlocking collection of textual and graphical
              discourse engines, a plan recognition system, and an interaction manager that
              harnesses the power of these tools. Users begin by asking questions about the
              data stored in their dataset. The system answers using a combination of text
              and graphics. Text responses are built by a discourse engine, while graphical
              images are constructed using a perceptual visualization assistant. The
              collection of all possible responses is evaluated to select the most effective
              answer, be it text, graphics, or a combination of the two. A plan recognition
              system is used to analyze the users' queries and their reactions to the
              responses they receive. This allows the system to anticipate future queries,
              cache relevant statistics, and guide the discourse and visualization systems
              during the evaluation and selection of appropriate answers to each user query.
              Results from this project will include: (1) plan recognition and interaction
              plan construction performed by the system to identify and model current and
              future analyses conducted by the users; (2) presentations that are sensitive to
              both the current and anticipated future state of users' investigations; (3)
              assisted navigation techniques; (4) methods for evaluating the effectiveness of
              the use of text and/or graphics; and (5) perceptual visualization techniques.
              Results will be disseminated through journal and conference publications,
              online datasets with results and analysis, and online software demos of
              relevant research components. Although this project will study applications
              from the oceanography and public school domains, these results are relevant in
              any situation where interactive exploration of large, complex datasets is
              required.
http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/healey/NSF-IDM-00


