Title       : Excited State Dynamics in the Liquid Phase: Ultrafast Spectroscopic Studies
               (U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research; Science in Developing Countries).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9215135

Award Number: 9215135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Harris harris@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Technical Narrative:                                                           
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Egypt collaborative research project involving chemists              
              from the University of California at Berkeley and Alexandria                   
              University in Alexandria, Egypt will investigate the excited state             
              dynamics in liquids using ultrashort pulse techniques.  Project                
              funding will enable Dr. Ashraf El-Bayoumi of Alexandria University             
              to spend a total of seven months in the laboratory of Dr. Charles              
              Harris at the University of California at Berkeley.  Additionally,             
              Dr. Harris will travel to Alexandria and spend two weeks in Dr. El-            
              Bayoumi's laboratory.  This cooperative research project will                  
              reveal valuable information regarding fast relaxation processes                
              that occur in the excited state of several molecular systems.  This            
              project will provide useful information regarding some features of             
              the potential energy surface along which the relaxation process                
              occurs, the rates of such processes, and the influence of the                  
              solvent in altering excited-state dynamics.                                    
                                                                                             
              This project in physical chemistry fulfills the program objective              
              of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in               
              the United States and Egypt to combine complementary talents and               
              pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and                 
              competence.
