Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Ferredoxins by NMR and X-ray
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9215142

Award Number: 9215142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Markley markley@nmrfam.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              Two-iron ((2Fe-2S)) ferredoxins comprise an important class of                 
              biological molecules whose function is incompletely understood at              
              the molecular level.  The investigators propose to study three                 
              classes of (2Fe-2S) ferredoxins: those found in mitochondria of                
              steroid metabolizing tissue in vertebrates, those involved in                  
              photosynthesis, and those involved in nitrogen fixation.  Examples             
              of wild-type ferrodoxins from each of the three categories have                
              been cloned and currently are overproduced in the PI's laboratory.             
              The investigators previously determined x-ray structures from                  
              examples of two of the ferredoxin classes and an NMR structure from            
              one.  NMR and x-ray studies of members of the other classes of                 
              (2Fe-2S) ferredoxin are underway.  The experiments are designed (1)            
              to develop an understanding of factors that determine the reduction            
              potential and electron delocalization in (2Fe-2S) ferredoxins, (2)             
              to elucidate mechanisms of electron transfer to and from these                 
              ferredoxins, and (3) to investigate the requirements and energetics            
              of (2Fe-2S) cluster formation.  Roles of individual residues will              
              be investigated by site-directed mutagenesis.  Stable isotope                  
              labels inserted at specific locations will be used to monitor the              
              electronic properties of atoms in the active site.  X-ray                      
              structures will be determined for interesting mutant proteins that             
              can by crystallized and analyzed either by multiple isomorphous                
              replacement or by molecular replacement methods.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the basic motifs found in proteins that function as electron            
              carriers is an iron atom coordinated by four sulfur atoms (an iron-            
              sulfur cluster).  Iron-sulfur clusters are found in all forms of               
              life from bacteria to man.  Iron-sulfur clusters can contain one,              
              two, three, four, or more iron atoms, and their affinity for                   
              electrons varies over several orders of magnitude.  They are                   
              involved in photosynthesis, respiration, nitrogen fixation, and                
              many other important metabolic processes.  This research project is            
              designed to answer the following fundamental questions about                   
              proteins that contain iron-sulfur clusters: (1) How does the                   
              sequence of the protein specify the structure of the iron-sulfur               
              cluster, the number of iron atoms and the geometry? (2) How does               
              the sequence of the protein determine the affinity of the cluster              
              for electrons and thus tune its reactivity for a particular                    
              process? (3) What residues in the protein are responsible for the              
              specificity of electron transfer, and how do they guide that                   
              transfer? This knowledge will enable one to design electron                    
              transfer proteins with desired properties.
