Title       : U.S.- Austria Cooperative Research on Asymptotic Bayesian Analysis and Order
               Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9215099

Award Number: 9215099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Phillips peter.phillips@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 5955,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Peter Phillips of the Cowles                     
              Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University, to                      
              collaborate with Professor Werner Ploberger of the                             
              Institute of Econometrics and Operations Research of the                       
              Technical University of Vienna in Austria.  They plan to                       
              work jointly on several lines of research in econometrics.                     
              First, they will carry out asymptotic analysis of Bayesian                     
              methods for possibly non-stationary time series.  Also,                        
              they will develop generalized Bayes model selection                            
              criteria with specific reference to problems of order                          
              selection in parametric methods.  In addition, they intend                     
              to write computer software to implement the methods they                       
              develop and to apply them to macroeconomic data sets for                       
              the USA, Austria, and several other countries.                                 
                                                                                             
              Scientific interest in Bayesian methods has grown sharply                      
              over recent years and has affected many different fields of                    
              statistics and econometrics.  Many econometricians find the                    
              Bayesian approach particularly well-suited to problems of                      
              time series analysis and inference in econometrics, two                        
              areas being explored in the collaboration of Drs. Phillips                     
              and Ploberger.  Some of their research will contribute to                      
              improved modelling of economic time series.  The other                         
              project they are engaged has an important application in                       
              the development of hypothesis tests under data-based model                     
              selection principles.  Some hypotheses of considerable                         
              interest in economics, like that of the presence of an                         
              autoregressive unit root, remain invariant across different                    
              models.  These investigators plan to exploit this                              
              invariance so that their "Bayes model" criteria can be used                    
              to select a system to conduct an explicit test of the unit                     
              root hypothesis.
