Title       : U.S.-Singapore Cooperative Research on Automatic Fixturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9215993

Award Number: 9215993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy S. King lking@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kingman E. Yee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5927,
Abstract    :
              9215993  King    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Lucy Siu-Bik King, 
              Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering,  GMI
              Engineering and Management Institute, and Dr. Kingman E. Yee,  Department of
              Mechanical Engineering, Lawrence Technological  University, to pursue with Dr.
              Beng Siong Lim, GINTIC Institute  of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Nanyang
              Technological  Institute, Singapore, for a period of 24 months, a program of 
              research on automatic fixturing.  Their research will be directed  toward two
              major goals, namely, (1) the theoretical formulation  of an optimization model
              for finding the positions of fixturing  elements for a given workpart geometry
              and (2) comparing the  fixturing element with fixture components using the
              MOFDEX expert  support system, the Block Jig System, and Modular Fixturing 
              System.  In the PI's previous research, an optimization model has  been
              developed to generate a fixturing configuration design for  prismatic objects. 
              This research will be extended to non-  prismatic workparts such as the sphere,
              cylinder, tetrahedron and  parallelpiped taking into account assembly
              operations and  fixturing element types.  Dr. Lim has developed expert systems 
              for the practical portion of the second goal.    Manual methods of fixturing,
              still prevalent in the manufacturing  environment, may result in delays of
              three to six weeks in an  automotive plant.  Concurrent engineering and
              flexible  manufacturing requires faster turn around time for fixturing  design.
               Automatic fixturing configuration offers a partial  solution to such a demand.
               The expert support system generated  from this collaboration will be
              especially useful for computer-  aided fixturing in industries that use CAD
              (Computer Assisted  Design) systems.  The collaborators have complementary
              expertise  which will be mutually beneficial in this research.  This project 
              is relevant to the objectives of the Division of International  Programs which
              seeks to increase the level of coopera tion between  U.S. scientists and
              engineers and their counterparts in  developing countries through the exchange
              of scientific  information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through 
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This project adds  an
              international cooperative dimension to the Dr. King's research  under NSF
              Grants No. DDM-9196231 and DDM-9215362.  ***
