Title       : Prediction of Multicomponent Adsorption Equilibrium in Industrial Microporous
               Adsorbents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9215604

Award Number: 9215604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315990             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. O'Brien   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research studies, theoretically and experimentally, the                   
              process of equilibrium physical adsorption onto porous solids,                 
              particularly focusing on the effect of polydispersity of the                   
              adsorbent pores.                                                               
              Theoretically, Monte Carlo simulations in the Grand Canonical                  
              Ensemble will be undertaken to study the adsorption process of                 
              multicomponent fluid mixtures at a molecular level, in slit shaped             
              pores within a solid phase of carbon. In the simulation,                       
              interactions among fluid molecules will be represented by a                    
              Lennard-Jones potential, and interactions among the fluid molecules            
              and the adsorbent will be accounted for using a 9-3 potential. For             
              the interactions between like fluid molecules, interaction                     
              parameters will be obtained by matching the predictions of pure                
              component simulations for the liquid density and vapor pressure                
              with experimental values. A set of combining rules will be used to             
              obtain the unlike fluid interaction parameters from those of the               
              like interactions. The simulations will establish pure and mixed               
              component isotherms as a function of temperature and pressure. In              
              addition to the Monte-Carlo simulations, an adsorption theory will             
              be developed which will be based on the Ideal Adsorbed Solution                
              theory (IAS).                                                                  
              Experimentally, equilibrium adsorption measurements will be                    
              undertaken using graphitized carbon and small molecules such as                
              methane, ethane, ethylene, carbon dioxide and propylene in an open             
              flow apparatus. In this apparatus, a gas mixture of desired                    
              composition is passed over the adsorbent, and the effluent gas is              
              monitored until its composition is identical to that of the feed.              
              At that  point, the system is closed, the pressure is measured,                
              and desorption is initiated by heating the adsorbent and allowing              
              the desorbed material to flow to a previously evacuated desorbate              
              tank. The pressure and composition in the desorbate tank is                    
              measured, and from these measurements the amount of material which             
              had been adsorbed onto the adsorbent, and its composition, can be              
              calculated. In addition to the adsorption measurements, pore size              
              distributions will be measured by nitrogen adsorption. The                     
              interpretation of the adsorption results will utilize a new                    
              statistical mechanical model for nitrogen adsorption in a pore                 
              which is based on density functional theory and which is valid for             
              micropores (20 A and smaller) as well as mesopores (20-5000 A).                
              The pore size distribution will be factored into the theory, and               
              theoretical predictions will be compared with experiments.
