Title       : Materials Development and Processing for Fabrication of a Microdynamical Optical
               Switch (REU SUPPLEMENT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9215070

Award Number: 9215070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denice D. Denton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leon McCaughan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9294,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to develop the                                   
              materials and processing capabilities required                                 
              to fabricate an optical micro-switch for fiber                                 
              optic networks.  The switch consists of a                                      
              polymer channel waveguide fabricated on a                                      
              cantilevered micromechanical beam.  This                                       
              beam can be coupled to one of the two                                          
              stationary polymer guides using an electrostatic                               
              comb drive.  All three polymer guides are                                      
              coupled to fiber pigtails via V-groove                                         
              alignment.  The use of polymer waveguides                                      
              instead of fibers drastically reduces the                                      
              reduces the required motion for alignment                                      
              (and therefore the required switching power).                                  
              Micromechanics, in addition to producing the                                   
              switching action, makes fiber alignment and                                    
              packaging relatively straightforward.                                          
              Fabrication of such a device will require the                                  
              marriage of high aspect ratio x-ray lithography                                
              fabrication and polymer processing.  The                                       
              micromechanical switch is fabricated in metal                                  
              because of its superior mechanical properities.                                
              The optical waveguides are fabricated using                                    
              polymers whose optical properties can be                                       
              tailored for a variety of applications.  The                                   
              materials challenges to be addressed include                                   
              the tailoring of the mechanical properties of                                  
              electroplated metal films, the control of the                                  
              optical properties of polymers, and the                                        
              understanding of the long term reliability of                                  
              the materials used.  This device represents a                                  
              synthesis of polymer, x-ray lithographic, and                                  
              micromechanical processing.  The materials                                     
              and processes developed for this work will be                                  
              useful for a wide array of applications in solid                               
              state circuits, sensors and actuators, and                                     
              photonics.
