Title       : Spin-Orbit and Magnetic Scattering and Non-Equilibrium Properties by Weak
               Localization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1995     
File        : a9215486

Award Number: 9215486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerd Bergmann bergmann@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Weak localization of electrons in thin metal films is used to                  
              observe electron scattering from impurity atoms arising from spin-             
              orbit and magnetic electron-impurity atom interactions.  Transport             
              data measured as a function of an applied magnetic field can be                
              interpreted to yield information about the electronic structure of             
              the impurity atoms.  Earlier research on s and p impurities is                 
              being expended and extended to include d impurities.  An additional            
              subproject will investigate thin films under the influence of a                
              high current density.  This corresponds to a steady non-equilibrium            
              state with the electron temperature considerably above the phonon              
              temperature.  Such measurements yield information about the                    
              electron-phonon system, the electron-phonon interaction and the                
              Kapitza resistance between film and the substrate.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Because of quantum effects, electrons in metals display both                   
              particle and wave properties.  At low temperatures, the electron               
              waves are coherent over extended distances and influence the                   
              properties of the metal.  In particular, the transport properties              
              such as the resistance are modified because the electron waves can             
              interfere with each other.  An external magnetic field alters the              
              phase of the electron waves and modifies the interference.  As a               
              consequence the resistance depends on the magnetic field.  (For                
              historical reasons, this phenomena is called weak localization).               
              A careful analysis of the magneto-resistance reveals detailed                  
              information about the fate of the electrons as a function of time.             
              For example, we can determine the rotation of the electron spin as             
              a function of time on the very short time scale of pico-seconds                
              (one millionth of a millionth of a second).  Such a rotation occurs            
              when the electron encounters impurities and is called spin-orbit               
              scattering.  This scattering is being studied for various impurity             
              atoms (copper, zinc, gold, tin, etc.) in host magnesium metal.  The            
              research provides important information about the magnetic and                 
              electronic properties of metals and alloys and will aid in the                 
              development of new materials with useful properties, particularly              
              at low temperatures.
