Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Transport Processes in Micropores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1995   
File        : a9215726

Award Number: 9215726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5912,9108,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports the travel to Australia by two U.S.                        
              investigators as part of a cooperative research program between                
              Cornell University and the Australian National University to                   
              study the transport behavior of fluids in narrow pores, using the              
              methods of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and molecular                  
              simulation. The senior collaborators will be Professor                         
              K. E. Gubbins and Dr. L. A. Pozhar from Cornell and Professor                  
              D. J. Evans at the Australian National University.                             
                                                                                             
              The objectives of the research, to be conducted over a two year                
              period, are to develop and test a kinetic theory of inhomogenius               
              fluids, and to apply it to the prediction of diffusion, viscous                
              flow and heat transport in model micropores. In addition,                      
              molecular dynamics simulations will be used to test the kinetic                
              theory and nonequilibrium simulations of transport processes in                
              micropores of simple geometries (slits and cylinders) will be                  
              made to obtain an understanding of the effects of pore size and                
              shape, type of pore wall, and state conditions on transport                    
              processes in such confined fluids. Microporous materials are                   
              widely used in industry to carry out chemical reactions and to                 
              effect purification and separations.  The proposed work is needed              
              to design better and more efficient processes for such                         
              industries.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project, supported jointly by NSF and the Australian                      
              Department of Industry, Technology and Commerce (DITAC),                       
              brings together the expertise of the researchers in                            
              computational and theoretical statistical mechanics.
