Title       : U.S.-China Workshop on International Research Data Management Training: A
               Proof-of-Concept Prototype Workshop for CERN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1994     
File        : a9215275

Award Number: 9215275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64269              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Parmenter parmentr@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1196,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will provide for research data management (RDM)                  
              training to Chinese Ecological Research Network (CERN) scientists              
              responsible for design of a system of RDM within CERN, and serve               
              as a proof-of-concept prototype for collaborations that could be               
              achieved with similar international organizations, particularly                
              developing countries, beginning to address RDM needs of long-term              
              ecological research (LTER).  IT will also serve to meet an                     
              immediate and documented need within the Chinese ecological                    
              community.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The 12-week training will address basic concepts of managing LTER              
              data across both the US-NSF LTER and CERN networks and will                    
              include lectures, demonstrations, discussion and hands-on                      
              computer experience. LTER RDM personnel will team-teach modules                
              focused on the needs of CERN.  The training will cover a range of              
              RDM issues from principles of design and organization to                       
              implementation.  Discussions will focus on the needs for                       
              international collaboration and sharing of long-term data sets                 
              and establishment of international data management objectives.                 
              This will establish groundwork for protocols and standards to                  
              facilitate international data exchange and set the stage for                   
              future CERN-LTER cooperative efforts.  The resulting curriculum                
              will be used to develop other courses - tailoring each, as this                
              one will be to fit particular needs of emerging international                  
              LTER programs.
