Title       : Preparation of Ultrafine Magnetic Particles Using Microemulsions and Vesicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9215384

Award Number: 9215384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dinesh O. Shah shah@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In recent years there has an increasing demand for the                         
              preparation of ultrafine magnetic oxides of uniform size which                 
              are mainly used in computer data storage, audio and video                      
              recording, magnetic fluids and fabrication of certain                          
              microwave devices.  The primary objective of the proposed                      
              research program is to synthesize nanoparticles of magnetic                    
              oxides using microemulsion processing and intravesicular                       
              precipitation.  These are unique methods which can be used to                  
              produce ultrafine, microhomogeneous particles with a narrow                    
              size distribution, which cannot be achieved by conventional                    
              methods such as solid-state reaction, bulk precipitation, sol-                 
              gel processing and spray drying.                                               
                                                                                             
              Microemulsion processing consists of the precipitation of                      
              precursor hydroxides or carbonates of magnetic oxides within                   
              the aqueous cores (typically 10 - 50 nm in size) of water-in-                  
              oil microemulsions.  These nanosize precursors would then be                   
              further processed and calcined to produce the magnetic oxides.                 
              Intravesicular precipitation consists of aqueous phase                         
              precipitation or reduction inside organically constrained                      
              microdomains defined by vesicles.  Each vesicle becomes a                      
              submicroreactor of dimensions of the order of a few hundreds                   
              of angstroms.  Cations trapped in the intravesicular spaces                    
              will react with anions permeating through the vesicle wall                     
              from the extravesicular region or be photolytically/chemically                 
              reduced to form the product.  Intravesicular coprecipitation                   
              as well as precipitation upon encapsulated seed particles will                 
              be used to create nanocomposites, opening up the possibility                   
              of tailoring the functionality of products by manipulating                     
              both their morphology and composition at a near molecular                      
              scale.  The results of the research would delineate the                        
              similarities as well as differences between the two processes                  
              (microemulsion processing and intravesicular precipitation) in                 
              relation to the mechanisms involved and the products formed in                 
              them.
