Title       : Spatially Resolved Diagnostics Using Tunable Laser Absorption Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9215080

Award Number: 9215080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Varghese varghese@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Accurate measurements of temperature and species                               
              concentrations are important for characterization of high                      
              temperature gas flows, particularly in the area of combustion.                 
              Optical measurements are desirable since they are                              
              nonintrusive, nonperturbing, and the probe is not subject to a                 
              hostile environment.  An absorption measurement provides a                     
              simple quantitative definition of the concentration of the                     
              absorbing specie along a line-of-sight; this is sometimes                      
              adequate information, but more often spatially resolved                        
              measurements are needed.  In principle, two-dimensional                        
              temperature and concentration fields should be recoverable                     
              from a limited number of line-of-sight measurements using                      
              tomographic reconstruction, a method widely used in medical                    
              imaging.  However, accurate quantitative reconstructions of                    
              temperature and concentration fields have been difficult to                    
              achieve because reconstruction algorithms are very sensitive                   
              to errors in the input data.  The principal objective of this                  
              program is to measure temperature and concentration fields                     
              simultaneously using a reconstruction technique that exploits                  
              the tuning capability of infrared diode lasers to greatly                      
              reduce the sensitivity of the reconstruction methods to both                   
              random and systematic errors in the input data.  The study                     
              will begin with reconstruction of radial temperature and                       
              concentration profiles (CO and CO2) in an axisymmetric flow,                   
              with subsequent extension of the procedures to reconstruction                  
              of two-dimensional sections of three-dimensional flows.                        
                                                                                             
              The application of quantitative laser diagnostics to                           
              industrial scenarios has been hampered by the typical high                     
              cost of equipment involved and by the user sophistication                      
              required for achievement of quantitative results.  Success                     
              with the these lower-cost, more user-friendly systems may well                 
              lead to wider usage in industry; the software and hardware                     
              developed should enable implementation of tomographic                          
              absorption diagnostic techniques in a wide variety of                          
              applications.  Potentially, further development of this                        
              technology, with use of inexpensive laser diode sources, may                   
              allow instrumentation packages cheap and robust enough for use                 
              in in-plant process control systems.
