Title       : An Investigation of the Thermomechanical Behavior of Fiber Reinforced Thermoset
               Composite Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9215287

Award Number: 9215287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim A. Osswald tim@neptune.me.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   An investigation of the thermomechanical behavior of fiber                
              reinforced composite parts will be conducted.  The objective of the            
              project is to continue research in modeling, analysis and process              
              simulation of the thermomechanical behavior of fiber reinforced                
              thermoset parts.  Such a study will increase the understanding of              
              the phenomena and the physics behind shrinkage, warpage and surface            
              waviness of reinforced plastic parts.  The project will be divided             
              into two portions:  and experimental and a computer modeling                   
              portion.  The experimental aspect of the research deals with                   
              thermomechanical material properties characterization.  Here, the              
              effect that degree of cure has on the elastic constants and on                 
              shrinkage during solidification will be studied.  In the second                
              portion of the project the shrinkage due to cure will be introduced            
              and a constitutive model for the material tensor will be developed             
              and implemented into existing finite element computer simulations              
              of the thermomechanical processes that take place during molding               
              of thin and thick fiber reinforced thermoset parts.  The simulation            
              considers parts of complex geometry molded under realistic                     
              industrial processing conditions.                                              
                   Understanding the thermomechanical behavior of plastics and               
              being able to predict filling patterns, fiber orientation,                     
              temperature fields during cure, residual stresses, voids and                   
              cracks, shrinkage, warpage and surface waviness before a part is               
              actually manufactured leads to higher part quality and eliminates              
              some of the expensive and time consuming tasks done in the early               
              stages of part and mold design.
