Title       : Dissertation Research: Primate Reproductive Patterns in a Hybrid Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1992    
File        : a9215981

Award Number: 9215981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shimelis Beyene  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary purpose of this study is to understand the behavioral              
              mechanisms involved in the process of hybridization between two                
              species of Old World monkeys in the Awash Hybrid Zone (AHZ) in                 
              Ethiopia.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              While anubis and hamadryas baboons generally live in different                 
              habitats, their ranges overlap in Ethiopia and, despite marked                 
              differences in morphology and social organization, they                        
              hybridize.  Although earlier studies suggested the zone was                    
              narrow and stable, it now appears to be expanding, and previously              
              "pure" anubis groups contain a significant number of hybrid                    
              individuals.  While there have been studies of the role of male                
              actions in determining events contributing to hybridization,                   
              there have been none relating to female behaviors.                             
                                                                                             
              In the AHZ males of varying phenotypes coexist within the same                 
              social group and their contrasting morphologies and mating                     
              strategies make this location the ideal testing ground for                     
              exploring the existence and the basis of female partner                        
              preference.  Female behaviors such as presenting frequency,                    
              grooming and proximity maintenance will be recorded using focal                
              animal sampling.  Behaviors of other group members and broad                   
              ecological parameters will be recorded to assess the context in                
              which activities occur.
