Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in Mathematical Sciences-
               "Compensated Compactness, Homogenization and H-Measures" June 28-July 3,1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9215004

Award Number: 9215004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria E. Schonbek schonbek@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Many important physical phenomena are modelled by nonlinear               
              partial differential equations.  The aim of this conference is to              
              present some general techniques recently developed to study                    
              existence and qualitative behaviour of solutions to nonlinear                  
              PDE's.  In particular it will focus on competing effects of                    
              oscillations and nonlinearity in partial differential equations.               
              The theory of compensated compactness was developed to solve some              
              fundamental problems of continuum mechanics using tools of                     
              functional analysis, weak convergence and Young measures.                      
              Studying oscillations solely by means of Young measures gave a                 
              static and not a dynamic description.  To further understand                   
              homogenization, geometric optics and obtain more precise results               
              on propagation of oscillations and concentrations effects, Luc                 
              Tartar introduced a quadratic microlocal tool:  the H-measures.                
              The methods that will be discussed in this conference are aimed                
              to answer basic questions aring in physics and applied                         
              mathematics by means of rigorous mathematical tools.                           
                   This project will support an NSF/CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Compensated                         
              Compactness, Homogenization and H-Measures, to be held June 27 to              
              July 1, 1993, at the University of California, Santa Cruz.  This               
              project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in               
              the Mathematical Sciences on Compensated Compactness,                          
              Homogenization and H-Measures to be held June 28 - July 3, 1993,               
              at the University of California, Santa Cruz.  Professor Luc                    
              Tartar of Carnegie Mellon University and  a corresponding member               
              of the French Academy of Sciences,  will be the principal                      
              lecturer.  To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical                  
              research, the National Science Foundation each year supports a                 
              number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the                        
              Mathematical Sciences.  Each five-day conference features a                    
              distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic on                 
              important current research in one sharply focused area of the                  
              mathematical sciences.  The lecturer subsequently prepares an                  
              expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally              
              published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for              
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American                 
              Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical                      
              Statistics.  Certain features differentiate these conferences                  
              from typical research conferences.  These are:  (1) Focus on a                 
              single important and timely area of research by a leading                      
              practitioner,  (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through              
              regional emphasis,  (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and                 
              timeliness, and  (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.
