Title       : Transport and Thermodynamic Properties of Mesoscopic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1996   
File        : a9215065

Award Number: 9215065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred D. Stone douglas.stone@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical studies will be conducted on the transport and                     
              thermodynamic properties of solids at low temperature focusing on              
              the physics of novel microstructures and semiconducting                        
              heterostructures.  The research will extend further our                        
              understanding of quantum mechanical interference effects and their             
              interplay with Coulomb interactions and high magnetic field in                 
              mesoscopic and macroscopic conductors.  Topics will include                    
              thermodynamic properties of mesoscopic systems in both non-                    
              interacting and interacting models, mesoscopic fluctuation                     
              phenomena in the ballistic regime and their explanation in terms of            
              the quantum theory of chaotic systems, and both the mesoscopic and             
              macroscopic properties of two-dimensional electron systems in high             
              magnetic field.  Calculations will be done analytically using                  
              impurity-averaged perturbation theory, semi-classical methods and              
              random matrix theory, and numerically using recursive Green                    
              function techniques, for instance.  The objective is to obtain a               
              quantitative and microscopic description of phenomena which are                
              currently at the very forefront of experimental investigations and             
              which have important implications for future microelectronic                   
              technology.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Research will be done on electrical transport (current) in devices             
              which are of intermediate between large (macroscopic) and atomic               
              (microscopic) size.  This mesoscopic region is such that                       
              microscopic effects are seen on the macroscopic scale resulting in             
              unusual and useful physical phenomena.  Besides affecting our                  
              understanding of basic physics, these studies will have important              
              ramifications for microelectronics.
