Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program: A Numerical Study of the Tropical
               Atlantic Circulation with an IsopycnicCoordinate Circulation Model (NUSTRAC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9215739

Award Number: 9215739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rainer Bleck bleck@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510101   Climate Models                          
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 5913,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science award will                                
              support travel to Brazil for Rainer Bleck of                                   
              the University of Miami, along with a graduate                                 
              student, in collaboration with Edmo Campos of                                  
              the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.  The                                      
              project aims to study, in a numerical                                          
              framework, dynamic and thermodynamic processes                                 
              governing oceanic circulation in the tropical                                  
              Atlantic.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The model to be used is the thermodynamically                                  
              active version of the Isopycnic Coordinate                                     
              model developed at Miami by Bleck and others.                                  
              The model's main advantage in this context will                                
              be to eliminate inadvertent, numerically                                       
              induced vertical heat diffusion.  The                                          
              researchers also plan to conduct a                                             
              comprehensive study of the oceanic response to                                 
              atmospheric thermodynamic forcing.  They will                                  
              also focus on the main interannual and decadal                                 
              variability signal, commonly called the                                        
              "Atlantic SST dipole."  The U.S. side will                                     
              benefit from access to equatorial phenomena of                                 
              water mass exchanges, which will add                                           
              significantly to the U.S. models of circulation                                
              in the North Atlantic.  The Brazilian side will                                
              gain an enhanced capability in ocean modeling,                                 
              which will position the country to contribute                                  
              to future research on global climate change.
