Title       : Noncompetitive Inhibition of Acetylcholine Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9215105

Award Number: 9215105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236472             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9106,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Information moves from the brain to muscle through neurons.  The               
              transfer of information between neuron and muscle involves the                 
              release of a chemical called acetylcholine from the neuron and the             
              diffusion of acetylcholine to the muscle.  Acetylcholine binds to              
              proteins called acetylcholine receptors on the surface of muscle               
              cells, transiently opening small ion channels in the cell membrane.            
              These channel openings initiate muscle contraction.  The electric              
              organs in invertebrates are extraordinarily rich in these                      
              acetylcholine receptors and, consequently, are the model system                
              used to study the molecular basis of action of acetylcholine or any            
              other agent that acts on acetylcholine receptors.  Over the last               
              twelve years, using quantitative fluorescence spectroscopy, Dr.                
              Johnson has developed a unique approach for the study of structural            
              features of intact ligand receptors.  He will continue to use this             
              approach to delineate the sites of binding of inhibitors of the                
              acetylcholine receptor.  Specifically, he will localize the sites              
              of binding of two noncompetitive inhibitors of the acetylcholine               
              with respect to the surface and side of the cell membrane, as well             
              as their orientation when bound to the receptor.  This information             
              will significantly contribute to the development of a molecular                
              understanding of the actions of chemicals on this receptor.                    
              Moreover, concepts and experimental approaches developed in the                
              study of the acetylcholine receptor should easily be exportable to             
              the examination of other neurotransmitter and hormone receptors.
