Title       : Dynamic, Concave-cost, and Lattice Programming with Application to Inventory
               Control and Scheduling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1994       
File        : a9215337

Award Number: 9215337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur F. Veinott, Jr. VEINOTT@STANFORD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This project will continue work on dynamic, lattice, d-Schur-             
              convex-cost and concave-cost programming with applications to                  
              inventory control, scheduling, networks, and multiperson decisions.            
              The theory of lattice programming and of substitutes, complements              
              and ripples in network flows will continue to be developed to                  
              enable one to predict the direction of changes of optimal and                  
              equilibrium decisions resulting from changes in parameters without             
              computation.  This work will be continued and extended in a variety            
              of significant directions including stochastic network flows,                  
              Leontief substitution systems and the development of efficient                 
              algorithms.  Decision problems in which there are economies-of-                
              scale lead to minimum-concave-cost mathematical programs.  These               
              problems will continue to be studied with the aim of identifying               
              broad classes of problems that can be solved in polynomial time.               
              Important problems of sequential decision making under uncertainty             
              can be studied as Markov branching decision process.  A variety of             
              problems will be studied in this area including controlled                     
              populations, geometric population growth, complexity of computation            
              and generalized semi-Markov decision processes.                                
                   Special attention will be focused on developing approximation             
              methods with guaranteed high-effectiveness and fast running times              
              for large-scale systems.  This work will be applied to yield                   
              management, single- and multi-product/echelon/facility inventory               
              models under uncertainty, and other areas.
