Title       : Casting the Net: Towards a Model for Collaboration and Communication on the
               Electronic Network; A Symposium to be held in Washington, DC.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1994   
File        : a9215234

Award Number: 9215234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Keeler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Renear  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Neuman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Ransdell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Kloesel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elec Peirce Consor
	      Academic Computers Center
	      Washington, DC  20057    317/274-2173

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              In the humanities and sciences alike, electronic networks are                  
              increasingly used to access, disseminate, and work with research               
              data and to communicate with colleagues in connection with this                
              research.  The imminent development of the National Research and               
              Education Network (NREN) is greatly accelerating this process, but             
              also brings with it the need to develop structures of                          
              communication, collaboration, and critical control which are                   
              largely unprecedented.  Basic questions about what is feasible and             
              what is desirable need to be addressed.  We also have little shared            
              understanding of how to handle the problem of network management so            
              as to insure the preservation of academic autonomy.                            
                                                                                             
              In view of this, twenty-five experts in network development,                   
              database design, electronic information management, and network                
              user research are being convened to consider how to turn to maximum            
              advantage the opportunities implicit in the development of NREN as             
              a medium for research and education.                                           
                                                                                             
              Rapid experimental prototyping is needed, and at this                          
              symposium/workshop, a substantive conception of an electronic                  
              research and learning environment will be presented as a hypothesis            
              to be critiqued systematically by the participants in the interest             
              of establishing a concrete understanding of what is required to                
              make such a prototype intellectually sound and technologically and             
              fiscally feasible.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The results of this symposium will be reported to decision makers              
              in the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National                  
              Science Foundation.
