Title       : Travel to attend the U.S.-Italy Workshop on "Systems, Modelsand Feedback: With
               Applications to Underwater Robots"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1992       
File        : a9215532

Award Number: 9215532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzyh-Jong Tarn tarn@wurobot.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed workshop will focus directly on research topics of                
              systems, models and feedback with applications to underwater                   
              robots.  Special emphasis will be placed on the use of recent                  
              advances in nonlinear and intelligent control theory in analysis,              
              synthesis, operation and control of underwater robots.  The use                
              of nonlinear and intelligent control theory in flight control,                 
              satellite control, and robot control in both the United States                 
              and Italy was very successful in the last decade; this workshop                
              will certainly generate important results in the modeling,                     
              control and operation of underwater robots.                                    
                                                                                             
              Because underwater robots and its control in both the United                   
              States and Italy is continuing to grow in importance.  This                    
              workshop will focus on the most timely and current subject of                  
              research.  The participants from both countries consist of                     
              leading researchers and they have already developed fruitful                   
              interactions through previous contacts.  Further collaboration                 
              would lead to deeper understanding of the important problems in                
              the area.  So this workshop should benefit both countries and                  
              lead to building valuable international connections and achieving              
              international cross-fertilization of ideas.  It certainly will                 
              lead to the advancement of modeling, control, and operation of                 
              underwater robots.  In fact, we have received requests for                     
              participation in the workshop by well-known researchers from                   
              Europe and Japan.
