Title       : Reaction, Transport, and Structure Evolution Phenomena in the Densification of
               Fibrous Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1995  
File        : a9215031

Award Number: 9215031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stratis V. Sotirchos svs2@che.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9163,9178,9251,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Low-density materials exhibiting high strength and an ability                  
              to hold up under highly strenuous conditions of stress,                        
              temperature, pressure, etc. are needed in many high-                           
              temperature aerospace and energy applications.  Fiber-                         
              reinforced ceramic matrix composites are materials that                        
              satisfy the requirements of low density and acceptable                         
              toughness because fiber reinforcement usually leads to                         
              strengthening of the homogeneous isotropic material that forms                 
              the matrix of the composite.  Chemical vapor infiltration                      
              (CVI) is a method that can be used to fabricate ceramic matrix                 
              composites without damaging the preform of fibers or whiskers                  
              used for reinforcement.  During this process the gaseous                       
              reactants, or the products of their decomposition in the gas                   
              phase that surrounds the fibrous preform, are transported                      
              through the pores and form a ceramic matrix throughout the                     
              preform by chemical vapor deposition (CVD).  CVI leads to                      
              products of very good mechanical properties, can produce                       
              objects of complex shape and large size, and can be used for                   
              many ceramic-ceramic composites including oxides and                           
              nonoxides.  In addition to composite fabrications, CVI can be                  
              used to partially densify membranes made from ceramic or other                 
              materials and in this way produce selectively permeable                        
              membranes for special applications (such as separations).                      
                                                                                             
              Theoretical and experimental work is planned to study the                      
              fundamentals of the interaction of transport processes (heat                   
              and mass), reaction, and structure evolution during                            
              densification of porous preforms by CVI.  The deposition of                    
              silicon carbide from methyltrichlorosilane will be used as the                 
              model system in these studies.  The experimental work will                     
              include deposition experiments using porous and nonporous                      
              substrates, film and pore structure characterization, and mass                 
              transport coefficient measurements.  The deposition                            
              experiments will be carried out in a hot-wall reactor,                         
              operating in a gravimetric arrangement, while structure                        
              characterization will be carried out using microscopy, Raman,                  
              XRD, electron microprobe, gas adsorption and mercury                           
              porosimetry.  Theoretical work will involve the development of                 
              models that summarize the relative importance of the various                   
              factors that occur during CVI.  In addition to contributing to                 
              the elucidation of the fundamentals of CVI, this project will                  
              also generate information for any application involving                        
              transport in media consisting of fibrous structures.***//
