Title       : Structure and Physical Properties of Quasicrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1996  
File        : a9215231

Award Number: 9215231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marko V. Jaric   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The main objectives of this condensed matter theory project are to:            
              (1) develop general computational methods and tools for                        
              determination and analysis of quasicrystal structures using                    
              experimental diffraction data; (2) identify kinetic and equilibrium            
              factors responsible for quasicrystal formation and stability; (3)              
              characterize the nature of disorder in quasicrystals.                          
              Determination of quasicrystal structure is a necessary first step              
              leading to an understanding and calculations of physical properties            
              of quasicrystals, such as their electronic and magnetic properties.            
              A computer package for calculating the average quasiperiodic                   
              structure of a quasicrystal from its diffraction data will be                  
              developed using a method recently introduced by the principal                  
              investigator.  Studying the growth-induced disorder and phase                  
              fluctuations in quasicrstals will significantly advance the                    
              understanding of the competition between crystal, quasicrystal and             
              glass formation in real materials.  Quasicrystal stability and                 
              thermal fluctuations will be investigated through Monte Carlo                  
              simulations of tilings.  Other more general disorder will be                   
              simulated using tiling growth algorithms.  Special emphasis will be            
              placed on the competition between crystal and quasicrystal                     
              structures.  Quasicrystal formation will also be studied with                  
              renormalization group calculations of the liquid-icosahedratic                 
              transitions.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This theoretical and computational research will contribute to the             
              understanding of the properties of quasicrystals.  Ten years after             
              the discovery of this new state of matter the basic conditions for             
              the formation of this unique state of matter versus that of the                
              crystalline or glassy state are still undefined.  These basic                  
              conditions need to be determined before comprehensive models of                
              specific materials properties can be implemented.  The proposed                
              research will provide a major impetus to resolution of these                   
              conditions.
