Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of the Representation Theory of Quantum
               Affine Lie Algebras to Solvable Lattice Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1992  
File        : a9215075

Award Number: 9215075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23005              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kailash C. Misra misra@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   During the last two decades representation theory of affine               
              Lie algebras has led to many interesting and important                         
              applications in many areas of mathematics and physics.  One such               
              connection has been established with certain two dimensional                   
              solvable lattice models in statistical mechanics.  The                         
              interaction between quantum affine Lie algebras and solvable                   
              lattice models has recently led to many new discoveries both in                
              representation theory of affine and quantum affine Lie algebras                
              as well as solvable lattice models and integrable systems.                     
              Professor Miwa is a pioneer in this field and possesses a unique               
              overview.  He can give a well organized presentation of the major              
              ideas and recent research results, and prescribe future                        
              directions for research in this field, during the course of the                
              ten lectures.                                                                  
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Application of the                  
              Representation Theory of Quantum Affine Lie Algebras to Solvable               
              Lattice Models, to be held June 1 - 5, 1993, on the main campus                
              of North Carolina State University in Raleigh.  Professor Tetsuji              
              Miwa will be the principal lecturer/  To stimulate interest and                
              activity in mathematical research, the National Science                        
              Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional                    
              Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences.  Each five-day              
              conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten                  
              lectures on a topic on important current research in one sharply               
              focused area of the mathematical sciences.  The lecturer                       
              subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon these                 
              lectures, which is normally published by the American                          
              Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied                 
              Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association                
              and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.  Certain features                
              differentiate these conferences from typical research                          
              conferences.  These are:  (1) Focus on a single important and                  
              timely area of research by a leading practitioner,  (2) Continued              
              effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis,  (3)                   
              Panel review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and  (4)                    
              Published monographs for a wider audience.
