Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ethnoarchaeology of Andean Pastoralism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1992   
File        : a9215525

Award Number: 9215525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Axel E. Nielsen  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Schiffer, Mr. Axel Nielson                  
              will conduct field research to collect data for his doctoral                   
              dissertation. He will spend 18 months working in the community of              
              Cerrillos located in the highlands of Bolivia. Cerrillos is one                
              of the few communities of the Bolivian Altiplano that still                    
              practices a purely pastorial economy that has characterized the                
              Andean highlands for thousands of years. Inhabitants still                     
              maintain a long-distance caravan trade using llamas as pack                    
              animals. Mr. Axel Nielson will conduct an "ethnoarchaeological"                
              study: that is he will examine present practices in an attempt to              
              understand the past. While it is known that pastoralism was                    
              practiced prehistorically in many parts of the world, it is not                
              well understood what role this way of life played in the                       
              development of complex civilizations. In part this is because                  
              archaeologists don't understand how to interpret the material                  
              remains they recover. It is not clear what kind of archaeological              
              "signals" a pastoral way of life leaves on the ground.                         
                                                                                             
              Mr. Nielson research will visit all households in the community                
              and select several for intensive study. He will participate in                 
              caravan trips and in the main non-daily activities carried out                 
              throughout the annual cycle. He will survey pastures and water                 
              resources and conduct an in-depth analysis of surface refuse                   
              distributions at selected settlements.                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will provide scientists                  
              with the tools to interpret a little-understood aspect of the                  
              past. A major road construction program is planned for this                    
              region and the behaviors Mr. Nielson plans to observe will soon                
              disappear. The project will also assist in the training of a                   
              promising young scientist.
