Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1995     
File        : a9215024

Award Number: 9215024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98803              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Loring loring@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Gilfeather  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The central focus of Loring's work will be relations on                   
              operators and the associated universal C*-algebras.  These will be             
              studied in connection with K-theory, perturbation problems, lifting            
              problems and representation theory.  Gilfeather will work on                   
              extending recent results on Hochshild cohomology of an algebra                 
              taking values in that algebra.  In particular, he will investigate             
              completely bounded cohomology for non-selfadjoint algebras.  A                 
              related area involves automorphisms motivated by various                       
              constructions from algebraic topology.                                         
                   The general area of mathematics of this project has its basis             
              in the theory of algebras of Hilbert space operators.  Operators               
              can be thought of as finite or infinite matrices of complex                    
              numbers.  Special types of operators are often put together in an              
              algebra, naturally called an operator algebra.  These abstract                 
              objects have a surprising variety of applications.  For example,               
              they play a key role in knot theory, which in turn is  currently               
              being used to study the structure of DNA, and they are of                      
              fundamental importance in noncommutative geometry, which is                    
              becoming increasingly important in physics.
