Title       : Development of Computer Vision Research, Visit by a U.S. Scientist to Pakistani
               Universities and Research Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9215654

Award Number: 9215654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7650               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mubarak Shah shah@cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5943,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports a visit                                    
              by Dr. M. Shah of the University of Central                                    
              Florida (UCF) to Pakistan to organize a                                        
              seminar and initiate cooperative research in                                   
              Computer Vision (CV).  His program will                                        
              include a seminar and experimentation at the                                   
              Mehran University of Engineering and                                           
              Technology (MUET) in Jamshoro, and visits to                                   
              two other major engineering colleges in                                        
              Karachi.  The scope of the seminar covers                                      
              imaging geometry, segmentation, two                                            
              dimensional shape representation, dynamic                                      
              scene analysis, shape from X, matching, and                                    
              texture.  The seminar will include programing                                  
              work by the participating students.  The                                       
              visit is intended to stimulate research in                                     
              this relatively new area in Pakistan and to                                    
              identify areas of mutual scientific interest.                                  
                                                                                             
              Scope:  Computer Vision is a dynamic and                                       
              growing branch of Computer Science.  It has                                    
              many applications such as in industrial                                        
              automation and robotics, traffic control,                                      
              object tracking, measurement of cloud and                                      
              wind motion, and in the biomedical field.                                      
              The UCF has a major department of computer                                     
              science which is designated by the state of                                    
              Florida as a Center of Excellence.  Dr. Shah                                   
              is the leader of the CV group in that                                          
              department.  His collaborator in Pakistan is                                   
              Dr. A.Q.K. Rajput, chairman of the Department                                  
              of Electronic Engineering and Computer                                         
              Systems at MUET.  The interaction with                                         
              faculty and students at the seminar and the                                    
              other visits are likely to open a vista for                                    
              increasing research in this area in Pakistan,                                  
              to the benefit of both countries.
