Title       : Solution of Large Markov Models for Computer Performance and Dependability
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1994      
File        : a9215064

Award Number: 9215064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119699             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Muntz muntz@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ability to evaluate options early in the design phase is                   
              essential for today's complex computer-communication systems.                  
              Models are required to be able to specify and analyze designs                  
              prior to expending large amounts of capital on actual                          
              construction of the system.  Performance and reliability are                   
              two of the major criteria for system design evaluation, and                    
              the main approaches to evaluation are simulation and                           
              stochastic modeling.  The most widely used class of stochastic                 
              models is Markov chains.  Markov models have their                             
              limitations, but where applicable they are generally less                      
              costly than simulation and also have a theoretical foundation                  
              that permits one to consider formal error bounds, sensitivity                  
              analysis, etc.  The main limitation of Markov models is the                    
              amount of computer memory and processor time required for                      
              representing and solving the models.  The amount of required                   
              resources grows very rapidly with the complexity of the model                  
              and unfortunately, models of real systems are often quite                      
              complex.  The thrust of this research is to develop analysis                   
              techniques which greatly extend the range of models that can                   
              be analyzed with Markov chain numerical methods.  The only way                 
              to deal with the state space explosion problem is to exploit                   
              properties of the particular class of problems of interest.                    
              Although it is often effective to identify and take advantage                  
              of special problem structures, the success of this research                    
              will also be judged by the generality of the results, i.e.,                    
              the ability to handle as wide a class of problems as possible.                 
                                                                                             
              The approach taken here is to examine several classes of                       
              important problems in computer system performance and                          
              reliability modeling and show that certain properties of each                  
              of these problem classes suggest methods of analysis that will                 
              permit computation of tight bounds on the solution of models                   
              that would be impossible to solve via standard numerical                       
              solution methods.  The results of this research will provide                   
              both specific results on a set of applications (dependability                  
              analysis, load balancing, parallel processing and protocol                     
              analysis) that are of great interest by themselves but even                    
              more importantly will contribute to the body of formal                         
              techniques that will provide the basis for advanced design                     
              analysis tools.
