Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolutionary History of Marsupial and Placental
               Mammals: A Study of Evolutionary Constraints in Mammalian Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0104927

Award Number: 0104927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Flynn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolutionary History of Marsupial and Placental
              Mammals: A Study of Evolutionary Constraints in Mammalian Limbs

Karen Sears
              and John Flynn 

Marsupials compose only six percent of living mammals and
              are less physically diverse than placental mammals. Traditionally, it has been
              assumed that low marsupial diversity is due their unique mode of reproduction
              constraining their evolution. Immediately after their early birth, newborn
              marsupials, using only their forelimbs, crawl a distance one hundred times
              their body length to the teat where they attach and complete their development.
              The primary goal of this study is to test the hypothesis that the obligate
              commitment of the marsupial forelimb and shoulder girdle in propelling the
              newborn to the teat has constrained its evolution. Constraints are defined as
              factors that limit physical variation. Variation is the raw material of natural
              selection, and therefore species or lineages with more variance can evolve new
              physical forms more easily. 

Constraints have long been cited as important
              factors in evolutionary history but have not been adequately tested. Aside from
              illustrating the role of constraints in the evolution of mammalian limbs, an
              understanding of the role of a constraint in this system will provide a base
              for understanding the role of constraints in other systems. A three-tiered
              approach incorporating genetic, developmental physical and adult physical data
              from living and extinct mammals will be used to test the hypothetical
              constraint on marsupial forelimb development. Genetic data will provide
              explanations for the observed differences in timing of developmental events in
              marsupials and placentals. Changes in developmental timing are important
              because they provide a mechanism for constraint. Physical data will be used to
              examine patterns of variation within individuals, within species and within
              marsupials and placentals. If marsupials are constrained relative to
              placentals, they should show less physical variation during development,
              especially before birth, and achieve less adult physical diversity. Combining
              different types of data will allow unique insights into the process of
              evolution and the role that constraints play in it. 

