Title       : "Peep and the Big Wide World:" A Television Science Series for Three to Five
               Year Olds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0104700

Award Number: 0104700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5911050            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate Taylor kate_taylor@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brigid Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              WGBH is producing and disseminating two seasons of a daily, half-hour television
              science series and accompanying outreach for three to five year olds.  The
              series will be carried nationally as part of Discovery Television's newly
              expanded Discovery Kids.  The project, "Peep and the Big Wide World," will
              model a developmentally-appropriate process of inquiry and exploration, nurture
              young children's innate curiosity, catalyze further hands-on exploration of the
              world around them, and motivate parents and care-givers to support and
              encourage these activities.  The television programs will combine animation and
              short, live-action segments.  The animation will weave the early childhood
              science curriculum into stories about three birds and their animal friends as
              they explore the world.   Science content, unifying concepts, and habits of
              mind will be reinforced through two-minute live-action segments that show kids
              engaged in science play relating directly to the previous story.

The
              television series will be supported by a comprehensive "Anywhere Science"
              outreach component of the project.  "Anywhere Science" reinforces the fact that
              opportunities to experience and enjoy science exist in most facets of life.  It
              will offer a range of activities -- through both web and print materials --
              that can be enjoyed by just about anyone, just about anywhere.  "Anywhere
              Science" is being designed to show parents and caregivers how important it is
              to support children's curiosity and how easy it is to engage in activities that
              help develop their science "habits of mind."  The outreach campaign will be
              built around the new National Association for the Education of Young Children
              professional development standards and Head Start's science framework.  

The
              content director for "Peep and the Big Wide World" is Karen Worth, Senior
              Scientist at the Education Development Center and the Co-Director of the Center
              for Urban Science Education Reform.  She is also the Principal Investigator of
              "Tool Kits for Early Childhood Science Education" that is developing national
              standards for preschool science education.  The Executive Producer for the
              project is Kate Taylor who has previously served as Executive Producer
              for"ZOOM," " Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego," and "Degrassi Junior
              High."  The creator of PEEP and animation artist is Kai Pindal, former Head of
              Animation at Danish Television.  The head writer is Kathy Waugh who has written
              four seasons of the Emmy winning children's series, "Arthur."  Evaluation will
              be conducted by Rockman et al.  

Advisors for the series include Barbara
              Bowman, President of the Erikson Institute for Advanced Study in Child
              Development; Diane Levin, Professor of Education at Wheelock College; Tera
              O'Hora, Consultant and Workshop Facilitator for "Science Beyond the Sandtable;"
              Kathy Paget, an early childhood educator working as a science curriculum
              developer and evaluator of science-related educational projects at the
              Technical Education Research Center; Diane Whitehead, a Quality Initiative
              Coordinator for the National Head Start Association; and Elizabeth Young,
              Director of Head Start Child Care in Cambridge, MA.


