Title       : Transport and Critical Behavior in Mesoporous Random Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0104323

Award Number: 0104323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eldred H. Chimowitz chim@che.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yonathan Shapir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
CTS-0104323
Chimowitz, Eldred H/ U of Rochester

The principal
              investigators hypothesize that in the near-critical regime the dominant
              transport mechanism in supercritical fluid-microporous membrane systems will
              occur by diffusion of surface-bound solute species with little contribution
              from void regions of the membrane because of the effects of critical
              slowing-down therein.  In this case the principal investigators have argued
              that his should uniquely lead to highly enriched solute fluxes through the
              membrane which would be a significant outcome for the proposed research
              objectives.

The specific goal in the first year of the project will be to
              use computer simulation to study near-critical transport phenomena through
              microporous membrane systems using a novel relaxation-dynamics simulation
              technique, particularly suited for calculations in the critical region.  The
              relaxation-dynamics simulation ensemble consists of two chambers, a
              phenomenological construction chosen to mimic concentration-driven diffusion
              processes.  Each respective chamber's structure can be set up to resemble the
              membrane of interest.  The two chambers are separated initially by an
              impermeable partition with the two profiles meeting at a discontinuous
              concentration interface.  Once the partition is removed, diffusion between both
              chambers occurs, and molecular fluxes/selectivities can be directly enumerated
              as the system relaxes towards its overall equilibrium state at the given
              thermodynamic conditions.  The dynamics in the entire ensemble will be
              generated by a kinetic Monte-Carlo, particle-exchange algorithm.  The main
              objective of these simulations will be to evaluate this new simulation
              methodology and use it to study the properties of the near-critical membrane
              system described above.  The principal investigators have currently benchmarked
              these computational procedures in homogeneous fluid systems and now have the
              computational resources and theory in had to use them to carry out a systematic
              study of near critical dynamics in confined structures.  They hope to be able
              to complete a comprehensive investigation of this issue within next year,
              leading to new results that they intend to write up for publication.

These
              simulation results will be of significant value in providing a conceptual
              framework for guiding experimental work in this area, which they aim to
              emphasize during the latter half of the project.  The objective here will be to
              build and commission an experimental system for reliably acquiring data for
              model solute permeances through mesocale inorganic membranes as supercritical
              transport conditions. The principal investigators view the ability to do this
              as central to exploring the viability of the concepts described herein; funds
              have been requested to facilitate this endeavor.  This will require the
              modification of a high-pressure absorption apparatus, currently in their
              laboratory, to accommodate a ceramic membrane module, which they intend to
              purchase from the US Filter Corporation.  During this time their dynamic
              simulation capability in these systems should be fully functional, which will
              advance their goal of a useful interaction between both simulation and
              experimental aspects of the project.

