Title       : Disorder and Dynamics in Silicate and Aluminosilicate Liquids, Glasses, and
               Crystals: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0104926

Award Number: 0104926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Stebbins stebbins@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stebbins
EAR-0104926

	This proposal is for renewed funding for a program  of
              research on atomic-scale structure and dynam-ics of crystalline, glassy, and
              molten silicates and oxides of interest to the Earth Sciences. This program
              emphasizes the application of techniques of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to
              obtain fundamental data to help better understand and predict processes of
              interest in geochemistry, petrology, and geophys-ics.
	NMR is an
              element-specific experimental technique that can provide quantitative data on
              local struc-ture around atoms such as H, Li, B, C, O, F, Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, K
              (etc.) in crys-talline and amorphous sol-ids and liquids, out to distances of
              second atom neighbors and some-times beyond. It is also uniquely sen-sitive to
              atomic motions at relatively slow time scales (seconds to nanoseconds), that
              are particularly in-teresting in processes such as diffusion, phase
              transitions, and viscous flow. An unusual capability of this research effort is
              in situ, high tempera-ture NMR to temperatures up to 1500  degrees C.
	Under
              previous funding, this project has produced a wide range of results on
              coordination en-vironments of both cations and anions in glasses and melts, 
              how composition, temperature and pressure change the structure, and how these
              changes affect thermodynamic and transport prop-erties. In particular,
              quantifying the extent of structural disorder in liquids, and relating this to
              configurational entropy and viscosity, have been emphasized; related questions
              of disorder in crystalline silicates and aluminosilicates have also been of
              high priority. During the current funding period, significant progress has been
              made in determining the degree of Al-Si ordering in aluminosilicate glasses and
              melts, including for the first time the use of 17O  "triple quantum" NMR
              ("3QMAS") to directly count the proportions of Al-O-Al oxygens. A statistical
              thermodynamic model of the ordering, formulated independently from 29Si NMR
              data, is well supported by these results and allows prediction  and comparison
              with data on properties. Other studies using this method have made new
              contributions to our understanding of the complex process of water dis-solution
              in aluminosilicate melts and to detect variations from strict "aluminum
              avoidance" in zeolites.  For the latter, new NMR methods including "five
              quantum" techniques have shown dramatically en-hanced spectral resolution. A
              newly installed 14.1 Tesla spectrometer (600 MHz 1H frequency), and ac-cess to
              an 18.8 T instrument at Stanford (800 MHz), have allowed dramatic improvements
              in resolution and sensitivity, which have been especially useful in studying
              tiny (1 to 10 mg) high pressure samples to determine structural changes in
              melts and in mantle minerals such as Al-bearing MgSiO3 perovskite. 
	Many of
              these projects will continue and be extended if this proposal is funded. A
              particular emphasis will be on quantifying the effects of temperature on melt
              structure, a critical and poorly understood issue that is at the heart of
              understanding melt properties.  A major tool in this effort will be a recently
              con-structed fast quench apparatus that will allow sampling of the melt
              structure from a wide range of "fictive temperatures", even for small,
              expensive, isotopically enriched samples. Further in situ, high temperature NMR
              will be used to characterize dynamics in aluminosilicate melts directly. 
              Studies will continue of disorder in crystalline aluminosilicates (including
              framework and sheet silicate minerals), and its effects on the site-specific
              rates of exchange among framework oxygens and H2O. Collaborations on high
              pres-sure glasses will continue, to explore simultaneous changes in both cation
              and anion coordination and dif-ferent P/T pathways for recording pressure
              effects on melt structure; collaborations on site occupancy and order/disorder
              in upper and lower mantle minerals will also be extended. New NMR methods and
              tech-nologies will continue to be developed which should have a wide range of
              applicability both within and outside of the Earth Sciences.

