Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Genetics of the Speciation Gene, Maternal
               Hybrid Rescue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0104974

Award Number: 0104974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9966               (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Allen Orr aorr@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Speciation - the splitting of one species into two - creates biodiversity.  As
              two interbreeding populations evolve mechanisms preventing the exchange of
              genes, they become new species with independent evolutionary fates.  Genetic
              exchange between species is often limited by the sterility or inviability of
              their hybrids.  At least in animals, such hybrid problems are caused by genetic
              incompatibilities: some genes from species A no longer function properly with
              those of species B when brought together in hybrids.  The work proposed here
              will investigate the genes that cause hybrid inviability between species of the
              fruitfly Drosophila. 

Using the genetic and developmental techniques
              available in these model organisms, the project will first identify the DNA
              sequences of genes that miscommunicate in hybrids and, second, characterize
              their lethal interaction.  The experiments will focus on the role of one
              candidate "speciation gene", maternal hybrid rescue.  Once identified at the
              molecular level, one can then ask how the sequences of such genes changed
              between species, why their products fail to properly interact in hybrids, and
              what evolutionary forces drove their divergence.  Only by genetically
              dissecting hybrid problems can biologists begin to understand the evolution of
              genetic incompatibilities and thus the origin of new species. 

