Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Playback Experiments to Examine Contextual Usage of
               Shared Whistles by Allied Male Bottlenose Dolphins, Tursiops Truncatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a0104982

Award Number: 0104982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9975               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Tyack ptyack@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie L. Watwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PLAYBACK EXPERIMENTS TO DEMONSTRATE CONTEXTUAL USAGE OF SHARED WHISTLES BY
              ALLIED MALE BOTTLENOSE DOLPHINS, TURSIOPS TRUNCATUS. 
Peter L. Tyack and
              Stephanie L. Watwood
Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
               Woods Hole MA 02543.

Dolphins and whales (known to biologists as the
              cetaceans) constitute one of the few mammal groups that demonstrate highly
              developed vocal learning abilities.  Dolphins not only learn to produce an
              individually distinctive signature whistle as infants, but adults retain the
              ability to imitate sounds. There has been growing interest in the role of vocal
              matching during the formation of social bonds in birds and humans, and dolphins
              provide an opportunity for studying this issue in a mammal that independently
              evolved abilities of vocal learning (Tyack 2000).  Call imitation is used in
              bird species primarily between individuals with close social relationships or
              between territorial competitors. Most evidence suggests dolphins match calls
              either to initiate an interaction with another individual, or as a "badge" of
              group membership. When dolphins are interacting, they may imitate the
              individually distinctive whistle of an animal with whom they share a strong
              bond.  Smolker and Pepper (1999) described whistle convergence in socially
              interacting male dolphins which formed a close-knit alliance, suggesting that
              whistle sharing is important for individuals with close relationships.  
This
              study proposes to examine the use of convergent or imitated whistles by allied
              male bottlenose dolphins in naturally occurring reproductive contexts or other
              social contexts. Playback experiments will test whether allied male bottlenose
              dolphins use shared whistles to attract potentially receptive females or to
              guard females from competitor non-alliance males.  It has been difficult to
              study the individual vocal responses of free-ranging animals until recently. 
              This study uses a small, towed linear array that can determine the direction
              from which sounds are produced in the water column, allowing for the
              identification of individual signalers (Tyack and Miller 1998).  The research
              will be carried out in Sarasota Bay, Florida, where a community of individually
              identifiable dolphins has been studied for 30 years.  Playback stimuli will be
              generated from high-quality recordings from a variety of age-sex classes
              recorded during temporary capture-release events during the last 15 years. 
              Analyses of these recordings for alliance males demonstrated a high degree of
              similarity between the whistles of alliance partners. 
This proposal makes use
              of recent developments in acoustic localization to obtain identified whistles
              from free-ranging, socially interacting bottlenose dolphins.  The combination
              of focal behavioral sampling, acoustic localization, and playback experiments
              presents a new way to understand the role of imitation in social communication.
               Playback experiments have been invaluable in deciphering the use of specific
              vocalizations in birds and primates.  The proposed research presents an
              opportunity to examine acoustic social behavior in cetaceans on a much finer
              scale than previously attempted with free-ranging animals.  The results from
              this study will be much more comparable to similar studies in terrestrial
              species.



