Title       : Geometric Variational Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0104007

Award Number: 0104007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon G. Wolfson wolfson@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract- DMS-0104007-Geometric Variational Problems

The principal
              investigator proposes to continue the study, joint with 
R. Schoen, of
              constrained variational
problems for lagrangian cycles. In its most basic form
              the problem 
can be posed as follows: Consider a symplectic
manifold with a
              metric compatible with the symplectic form. Fix a 
homology class that can be
              represented by a lagrangian cycle. 
Find a lagrangian cycle that minimizes
              volume 
among all lagrangian cycles representing this class and derive optimal
              regularity of this cycle. 
In the case that the symplectic manifold is
              Kaehler,
with Kaehler-Einstein metric, sufficient regularity of the minimizer
              
implies that the minimizer is both lagrangian and minimal (zero mean
              curvature). 
If the first Chern class is negative such submanifolds could be
              unique, in a suitable sense,
and then useful in understanding the geometry of
              the ambient manifold. 
If the Kaehler manifold is a Calabi-Yau manifold
              sufficient regularity implies 
that the minimizer is a calibrated submanifold,
              a special lagrangian submanifold.
We propose to investigate the existence and
              regularity of this and 
related varitional problems and to study the
              consequences of these results on the
geometry of Kaehler-Einstein
              manifolds.



A consequence of the proposal is an existence theorem for
              special 
lagrangian submanifolds of a Calabi-Yau manifold.
This result is an
              essential part of the program proposed by 
Strominger-Yau-Zaslow for the
              geometric construction of "mirror
symmetry". Mirror symmetry is one of the
              most interesting and 
important problems currently being studied in
              mathematics and 
theoretical physics. At its core it proposes a duality
              between a class of 
manifolds called Calabi-Yau manifolds. This duality allows
              
computations to be performed on one manifold that yield a result for its
              "mirror". 
Thus computations that are otherwise extremely difficult can be
              achieved.
The realization of mirror symmetry will effect such diverse subjects
              
as algebraic geometry, differential geometry, topology, partial
              
differential  equations and string theory.
The current interest in this
              subject helps bridge the gap between 
physics and mathematics. In
              two-dimensions our proposal has some 
close analogies to a well-known model
              problem
in non-linear elasticity. The regularity theory developed here will
              
shed light on the difficult regularity problems of that theory. 
Finally
              this problem is the first attempt to make a systematic study 
of a variational
              problem with a geometric constaint. 
This idea will have other important
              applications in 
geometry and its applications.

