Title       : Moduli of Spin Curves, Geometric Vertex Algebras and Quantum Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0104397

Award Number: 0104397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arkady Vaintrob vaintrob@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0104397.

The investigator will study two groups of
              problems related to
physical models of topological string theory and
              two-dimensional
gravity and their interaction with geometry and other branches
              of
mathematics. Based on physical ideas and methods, E.Witten
conjectured
              that certain topological invariants of the moduli spaces
of Riemann surfaces
              with higher spin structures assemble in a
generating function that can be
              determined by an infinite system of
differential equations (the so-called
              Gelfand-Dickey hierarchy).
The goal of the first part of the proposal is to
              study geometric and
algebraic structures related to this conjecture by using
              techniques
from the theory of Gromov-Witten invariants and
              quantum
cohomology. Besides exposing deep connections between
              seemingly
unrelated areas of geometry and analysis, a goal of this part of
              the
project is to develop tools for analyzing more general
              cohomological
field theories of spin type and the corresponding spin analogs
              of
quantum cohomology and Gromov-Witten invariants.  The second part of
the
              proposal is related to applications and generalizations of the
so-called
              chiral de Rham complex, a canonical sheaf of vertex
algebras introduced in
              joint work with Malikov and Schechtman. The
main goal here is to find a
              rigorous geometric foundation for the
physical models of two-dimensional
              superconformal field theory on
smooth varieties and orbifolds.

String
              theory is a proposed physical theory which attempts to unify
all kinds of
              forces and, in particular, combines Einstein's theory
of gravity with the
              quantum theory. Because this theory cannot yet
be verified on experiments,
              physicists working in string theory are
testing it on sophisticated
              mathematical models. Often the same
physical quantity can be computed by more
              than one method which
gives answers expressed in terms of very different
              mathematical
structures. This suggests the existence of deep ties between
              various
seemingly remote parts of mathematics and leads to formulation
              of
non-trivial conjectures connecting different mathematical objects,
usually
              geometric and analytical in nature. The goal of the current
project is a
              mathematical study of some of these conjectures and
interactions. Besides
              producing new mathematical results, it should
give mathematical verification
              of some physical models and provide
more direct links between mathematical and
              physical methods of
analysis of these models.

