Title       : Novel fast and accurate methods for partial differential equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0104229

Award Number: 0104229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88407              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tobin A. Driscoll driscoll@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will research high-order and pseudospectral methods for the
              numerical approximation of solutions of linear and nonlinear partial
              differential equations of evolution.  The proposed activities divide into
              methods for time and space: high-order time stepping without severe stability
              restrictions, even in the presence of stiffness, and the use of radial basis
              functions for spatial differencing (with emphasis on the need for efficient and
              stable computation). Analytical and numerical techniques will be used to frame
              and solve interesting issues.

Computational simulation is a vital part of
              research and design in science and engineering. Many problems of academic and
              industrial interest remain beyond present computing power, and there are also
              significant benefits in solving tractable problems more quickly and accurately.
              Innovations in both hardware and software will be needed to continue the
              progress of recent decades. The research in this proposal is directed at
              finding and improving the techniques that will be used in scientifically
              oriented software in the near future. There is an emphasis on phenomena that
              propagate or evolve over long distances or times. Specific fields of study that
              could benefit include optical communications, imaging by electromagnetic or
              acoustic illumination, and computational chemistry.

