Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of Harveya Hook. (Orobanchaceae) and the
               Evolution of Photosynthetic Loci in the Holoparasitic Genera Harveya and
               Hyobanche L.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0104642

Award Number: 0104642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea D. Wolfe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harveya Hook. (Orobanchaceae) is a genus of parasitic plants native to South
              Africa.  Harveya species parasitize other plants by means of specialized root
              organs called haustoria.  Little is known regarding delimitations of species
              within Harveya, relationships among species, or if Harveya species are specific
              to particular host plants.  Goals of this study include the examination of
              morphological characters to determine species delimitations, the inference of
              phylogenetic history from morphological characters and DNA sequences, and
              determination of host specificity by excavation of haustoria.  In parasitic
              plants, genes encoding photosynthetic proteins are not functionally
              constrained.  These genes may bear function-reducing mutations.  Because
              parasitic plants obtain nutrients from a host plant rather than through
              photosynthesis, these mutations are not detrimental to fitness.  Therefore,
              these mutations may be passed to offspring and become fixed in populations.
              Deterioration or deletion of photosynthetic genes has been documented in
              parasitic plants of diverse lineage.  Another parasite, Hyobanche L., is the
              sister genus of Harveya.  Hyobanche bears mutations in the gene rbcL, a
              chloroplast gene encoding the large subunit of Rubisco, a protein necessary for
              photosynthesis.  These mutations render rbcL non-functional in this genus.  One
              might expect Harveya to demonstrate similar function-ending mutations in this
              gene.  However, in all Harveya species examined thus far, rbcL encodes a
              functional protein. Two hypotheses may be invoked to explain the absence of
              these mutations.  (a) The loss of Rubisco functionality has occurred via a
              different pathway in Harveya than in Hyobanche. (b) Rubisco retains function in
              Harveya, in facultative photosynthesis or an unknown, non-photosynthetic role. 
              In this study, genes encoding both the small subunit (rbcS) and large subunit
              (rbcL) will be sequenced in Hyobanche and Harveya to compare functionality. 
              Additionally, RNA and protein products of these genes will be assayed to
              determine the evolutionary pathway by which Rubisco functionality has been lost
              in these genera or if Rubisco serves some non-photosynthetic function.
       
              The importance of this study is several-fold.  South Africa maintains the
              greatest floral diversity of any temperate region of equal size.  However, many
              species may become endangered as population growth continues, and human
              habitations expand into wild areas.  Conservation efforts will rely on
              knowledge of the evolutionary history and ecological needs (e.g. suitable plant
              hosts) of threatened organisms.  Secondly, the dichotomy of rbcL functionality
              in Hyobanche and Harveya provides an ideal system for the study of evolution of
              photosynthetic genes in non-photosynthetic plants.  Furthermore, rbcL and rbcS
              have an integrated function, but are coded in different genomes of the plant:
              rbcL in the chloroplast genome and rbcS in the nucleus.  Loss of function of
              one of these genes may result in loss of function in the other.  To date, no
              study has examined if mutations occurring in one genome may be mirrored by
              mutations in the other.  Hyobanche and Harveya offer an excellent framework for
              investigating this phenomenon.



