Title       : Dissertation Research: A Functional and Mechanistic Investigation of Yolk
               Androgens in the European Starling (Sturnus Vulgaris)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0104907

Award Number: 0104907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth K. Adkins-Regan er12@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dissertation Research: A Functional and Mechanistic Investigation of Yolk
              Androgens in the European Starling (Sturnus Vulgaris)

Elizabeth Adkins-Regan
              and Kevin Pilz

Female birds deposit steroid hormones, such as testosterone,
              in the yolks of their eggs. In captive-bred canaries, high levels of "yolk
              testosterone" in eggs cause elevated growth rates and begging behavior in the
              chicks that hatch from those eggs. There is currently no information regarding
              the behavioral effects of yolk hormones in other species of birds. Nor is there
              well-substantiated evidence that females deposit different levels of hormones
              in eggs under different ecological circumstances to maximize their reproductive
              success. This study intends to fills these gaps in our knowledge by studying
              two types of "yolk androgens", one being testosterone and the other being a
              related hormone called androstenedione, in wild-living European starlings
              (Sturnus vulgaris). The first goal of this research is to document the effects
              of yolk androgens on European starling chick growth and behavior. Eggs will be
              injected with hormone or with a control solution and the growth and begging
              behavior of the chicks will be monitored until the chicks are ready to leave
              the nest. The second goal of this research is to test the hypothesis that
              females who engage in the reproductive strategy of brood parasitism deposit
              high levels of yolk androgens in their eggs. A brood parasite female lays her
              eggs in the nests of other females to avoid raising the chicks herself;
              starlings sometimes brood parasitize other starlings. If yolk androgens cause
              chicks to compete more, by begging more and growing faster, then a female who
              lays brood parasitic eggs should deposit high levels of androgen in those eggs
              so that her chicks will be able to selfishly outcompete their unrelated
              nestmates. The third goal of this research is to examine whether female
              characteristics such as body size and age are related to the levels of yolk
              androgens that females deposit in eggs. This data will be used to determine if
              the small size and young age of brood parasitic females may explain why brood
              parasitic eggs have high levels of yolk androgens. This data will also be used
              to test the hypothesis that "high quality" females (larger, older females)
              should invest more yolk androgens in eggs than "low quality" females. 

In
              summary, this research will investigate within a single species of wild
              songbird, 1) the effects of yolk androgens on chicks; 2) whether females
              allocate androgens to eggs in ways which benefit their reproductive success;
              and 3) whether female allocation of yolk androgens varies with female
              characteristics such as body size and age. This research will increase our
              knowledge of hormone effects on development in birds and provide understanding
              of non-genetic means by which females can adaptively manipulate offspring
              characteristics. The research may also be useful as a model of maternal hormone
              effects on developing offspring in mammalian species. 

