Title       : Dissertation Research: The Scale of Predator-Prey Interactions: Gene Flow and
               the Geographic Mosaic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0104995

Award Number: 0104995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie edb3@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0104995
Brodie 

Coevolution is the process by which two participants
              reciprocally affect the evolution of traits in each other.  Typically,
              coevolution is considered to be a process that occurs between different
              species.   The geographic mosaic theory of coevolution predicts that
              coevolutionary interactions will vary across geographic locales.  Furthermore,
              this theory states that processes that differentially affect the genetic makeup
              of individual locales (e.g. migration, extinction, recolonization) will play a
              role in the outcome of the coevolutionary interaction globally and locally.  
              The current research will test how migration between populations affects the
              dynamics of a predator-prey coevolutionary interaction on different geographic
              scales.  The target species for the project are the toxic newt Taricha
              granulosa and its resistant garter snake predator Thamnophis sirtalis.  Data on
              toxicity in newts and resistance in garter snakes will be collected to evaluate
              the strength of the coevolutionary interaction in populations.  Tissue samples
              will be collected for genetic analyses that will estimate migration between
              populations.

This research will test the geographic mosaic theory of
              coevolution in a predator-prey system, thereby giving a better understanding of
              coevolutionary interactions.   Understanding how species interact is important
              to the understanding of ecosystems and important to the conservation of
              ecosystems.  Migration of animals between populations can play a critical role
              in the balance and persistence of populations.  This project has implications
              for the release of captive bred animals into natural populations (simulating
              large scale migration).  Additionally, tetrodotoxin (the toxin found in
              Taricha) is widely used in neurobiology as a sodium channel blocker.  Studying
              garter snake resistance sheds light on natural sodium channel variation and
              function in the nervous system.         

