Title       : Dissesrtation Research: A Cophylogenetic Analysis of Avian Hosts and their
               Parasites: Toucans (Aves: Piciformes) and Chewing Lice (Insecta: Pthiraptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0104919

Award Number: 0104919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8067               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Sheldon fsheld@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A cophylogenetic analysis of avian hosts and their parasites: toucans
(Aves:
              Piciformes) and chewing lice (Insecta: Pthiraptera)

     I am using nuclear
              and mitochondrial DNA sequences to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of an
              avian host group (Ramphastos toucans) and two of its parasitic chewing louse
              genera (Austrophilopterus and Menecanthus), which differ in life history
              characteristics.  The object of this study is to determine how parasite groups
              with different ecological, behavioral and morphological characteristics respond
              to identical geographical and habitat perturbations (diversification and
              speciation of the host group).  I will compare host and parasite histories by
              superimposing the phylogenies of the parasites and their hosts to determine
              whether or not parasite lineages with differences in ecology, behavior, and
              morphology respond similarly to speciation events in their hosts.  If
              differences in the life history of the chewing lice are important, the
              different parasite lineages should vary in their degrees of cospeciation
              (parallel speciation).  However, if
parasite lineages respond to host
              isolation events similarly, then one would expect the phylogenetic trees of the
              two parasite lineages to be congruent.

     Insights gained via this simple
              system should shed light on patterns of speciation in more complex systems of
              free-living organisms. Phylogenetic studies can answer important questions
              about speciation. However, one problem faced by phylogeneticists is that, when
              studying free-living organisms, they often lack  nformation about the history
              of the study organism's habitats and geographic distribution.  Thus, a
              useful
first step in phylogenetic studies is to reconstruct this history.
              Cophylogenetic studies of hosts and their parasites do this by superimposing
              the parasite phylogeny onto the phylogeny of the host. Speciation events in the
              host group are analogous to biogeographic vicariant events (e.g., when
              geographic barriers islolate  opulations leading to speciation).  Speciation,
              or lack thereof, in the parasites represents a response to geographic and
              ecological changes caused by host speciation events (vicariant events).  By
              comparing  parasites with different ecological, morphological, and behavioral
              characteristics we will begin to understand how these different life history
              characteristics affect the process of speciation.
