Title       : Nonlinear Dispersive Waves and Applications to Geophysical Fluid Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0104329

Award Number: 0104329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Camassa camassa@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is organized around two leading themes in internal gravity wave
              propagation in stratified fluids: (a) interplay between nonlinearity and
              dispersion, and (b) instabilities and resonances.  Within the first theme, the
              long term goal is to provide a model of internal waves in layered
              stratification that correctly accounts for dispersion and high nonlinearity, to
              be used in alternative to the currently adopted non-dispersive and weakly
              nonlinear models.  The aim is to retain the advantage of the simplicity of
              these theories with respect to the full Euler (or Navier-Stokes) governing
              motion equations, while still maintaining the ability to describe wave dynamics
              of practical interest.  Highly nonlinear regimes often generate instabilities. 
              The causes and evolution of these instabilities for fully nonlinear internal
              waves are the focus within the second theme.  In particular, stability criteria
              based on the Howard-Miles theorem for stationary shear flows and parametric
              instability occurring at stable Richardson's number will be revisited in the
              context of internal gravity waves.

This research focuses on an area of wave
              propagation which has widespread atmospheric and oceanic applications, and,
              therefore, large societal implications.  For instance, large internal waves
              generated by wind forcing of the upper ocean may have a strong feedback effect
              on the intensity of hurricanes.  Thus, numerical codes based on models capable
              of representing accurately large amplitude waves and their dispersive behavior
              (responsible for the spreading of wave energy over increasingly larger regions)
              can play an important role in hurricane forecasts, at little additional cost
              with respect to the currently employed hydrostatic codes.  The award will
              support work that will help establish the theoretical and technical foundations
              of such improved computational codes.
