Title       : Efficient Computation in Multi-level Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0104129

Award Number: 0104129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452913             (Estimated)
Investigator: David van Dyk vandyk@stat.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jun S. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EFFICIENT COMPUTATION IN MULTI-LEVEL MODELS

In recent years, a new trend has
              been growing in applied statistics---it is becoming ever more feasible to build
              application specific models which are designed to account for the structure
              inherent in any particular data generation mechanism.  Such models have long
              been advocated on theoretical grounds, but recently the development of new
              computational tools (e.g., hardware, software, and algorithms) for statistical
              analysis has begun to bring such model fitting into routine practice.  Of
              course, much work remains to be done. The flexibility of such methods comes at
              a cost---they require problem specific coding, long computation times, and
              present difficulties in ascertaining convergence.  This proposal aims to tackle
              some of these difficulties using newly developed efficient Monte Carlo
              techniques.  The PIs plan to study a number of outstanding theoretical
              questions concerning the behavior and extended application of these efficient
              methods by developing new algorithms for a number of important models which are
              prime candidates for these methods.  The PIs are involved in several on-going
              substantive data analytic projects (e.g., in computational biology and high
              energy astrophysics) which both help to clarify the relevant theoretical
              questions and stand to benefit from the new methodology.  The computational
              goals of this research are by no means an end unto themselves, but rather a
              means to improved data analysis and statistical inference. As has been so
              clearly illustrated in recent years improved computational tools can open up
              whole new areas of statistical application, as well as increase reliability,
              thus improving statistical inference.

Research will focus on such newly
              developed Monte Carlo techniques as multi-point Metropolis and the methods of
              conditional, joint, and marginal data augmentation.  Multi-point Metropolis
              generalizes the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm by allowing multiple dependent
              proposals at each iteration. As a consequence the multi-point method is more
              able to jump further, is less likely to be caught in a local mode, and thus can
              substantially improve mixing.  The methods of conditional, joint, and marginal
              augmentation have already substantially improved performance of the EM and Data
              Augmentation algorithms in a wide range of models (e.g., mixed-effects models,
              finite mixture models, multivariate t-models, probit generalized linear models
              and generalized linear mixed model, Poisson image models, etc.). In particular,
              these new algorithms maintain the stable convergence properties of EM and DA
              while sometimes reducing the required computation time by over 99%.  These
              methods, especially in tandem, have the potential to significantly improve and
              extend Markov Chain Monte Carlo in statistical practice.  This program is being
              jointly funded by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and Astronomical
              Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities from the Directorate
              of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

