Title       : Southwestern Archaeological Tree-Ring Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0104242

Award Number: 0104242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Dean jdean@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Through a three year award, the National Science Foundation will continue its
              long term  support of the University of  Arizona Laboratory of Tree-Ring 
              Research. This grant allows the laboratory to hire three inidviduals to analyze
              samples collected from archaeological sites.    The technique of tree-ring
              dating was pioneered at the University of Arizona.  Because the rate of
              treegrowth is determined by environmental  conditions, yearly growth rings in a
              tree vary in form and thickness. It is possible to build up a tree ring
              chronology by  cross matching trees from the present to well back in the 
              prehistoric past and then to use this `master record` to date  small wood
              samples collected from archaeological and other  situations. For archaeologists
              in the Southwestern United States,  this technique has been a boon because it
              allows materials to be  dated within one year. This far exceeds the accuracy of
               radiocarbon dating.    Because it has not been adequately supported and
              because many  archaeologists lack the funds to pay for its services, the 
              Arizona laboratory has not  been able on its own to keep pace with 
              archaeological requests for sample dating. This grant will  help  to remedy
              that situation.  In particular, it will benefit young  scientists and those not
               associated with more wealthy main line research  institutions.
