Title       : RUI: High Pressure Studies of Carbon Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0104176

Award Number: 0104176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uma D. Venkateswaran venkat@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0104176
Venkateswaran

This individual investigator award will fund a
              professor at a predominately undergraduate institution for a research project
              that will investigate the optical and electrical properties of carbon nanotubes
              subjected to high pressure.  During the three-year period, the following
              experiments will be performed: (1) High-pressure Raman studies on solubilized
              single walled carbon nanotube samples that contain individual tubes and small
              bundles of 2-3 tubes, leading to an.  understanding of the effects of van der
              Waals coupling between the tubes.  (2) Raman studies on iodine and C60 doped
              nanotubes aimed at probing the effects of encapsulated atoms on the vibrational
              properties of nanotubes.  (3) Development of experimental techniques to measure
              electrical transport properties at elevated pressures and study of the gas
              adsorption properties of nanotubes as reflected by the changes in their
              electrical resistivity and thermopower.  A key component of this proposal is
              the involvement of undergraduate students in research.  Research collaborations
              with the Pennsylvania State University, proposed in this project, will provide
              an opportunity for undergraduate students to visit a research university and
              participate in materials synthesis.  Our experimental research is expected to
              stimulate further theoretical work on carbon nanotubes and related
              materials.
%%%
The dominant technological thrust of the twenty-first century
              will be the new ability to control materials properties and fabricate devices
              at the nanoscale level.  Carbon nanotubes are unique molecular structures in
              the form of tiny, long tubes made of carbon atoms.  They are light, have high
              mechanical strength and flexibility, and can exhibit metallic or semiconducting
              electrical behavior.  These versatile properties make carbon nanotubes strong
              candidates for the basis of innovation in nanotechnology.  The rapid progress
              made in the field of carbon nanotubes in the recent years, promise interesting
              possibilities for a wide variety of applications.  However, to develop this
              potential to the level of reliable devices, a deeper understanding of their
              fundamental physical properties is needed.  This individual investigator award
              will fund a professor at a predominately undergraduate institution for a
              research project that will study the optical and electrical properties of
              carbon nanotubes and train undergraduate students in materials characterization
              techniques.  This project focuses on the understanding of the fundamental
              interaction among tubes in nanotube bundles and on the effects of introducing
              other molecules, such as iodine or fullerene, inside the tubes as well in the
              channels between tubes in a bundle.  In addition, the undergraduate students
              will have an opportunity to participate in frontier research in this exciting
              field.
***

