Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and Evolution of Subsocial Behavior in the New
               World Treehopper Subfamily Membracinae (Homoptera: Membracidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0104893

Award Number: 0104893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9383               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan N. Danforth bnd1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0104893
Danforth and Lin
	Insects in the New World treehopper subfamily
              Membracinae (5 tribes, 38 genera and about 447 species) show a range of social
              behavior from (1) solitary individuals, to (2) nymphal or adult aggregations,
              to (3) highly developed maternal care with parent/offspring 
communication via
              substrate-borne vibrations. The behavioral variation in membracine treehoppers
              provides an excellent opportunity to study the evolution of subsocial behavior
              in insects. However, our current knowledge on the evolution of subsocial
              behavior in this group is limited because of an incomplete picture of their
              phylogenetic relationships. We don't know how many times maternal care has
              evolved, whether maternal care gives rise to solitary behavior, or exactly how
              complex forms of maternal care involving communication and signalling have
              evolved.
	In order to more fully understand the historical patterns of social
              evolution in membracine treehoppers, a phylogenetic study of this group will be
              conducted using both morphological and molecular (DNA sequences from nuclear
              and mitochondrial genes) data by graduate student Chung-Ping Lin under the
              guidance of Dr. Bryan Danforth at Cornell University. New collections will be
              made from South America to augment existing samples and museum holdings. The
              results of phylogenetic analyses will provide a historical framework to
              reconstruct the likely direction of behavioral character changes among
              membracine treehoppers. This information will then be used to identify the
              origins of subsocial behavior and to trace the development of subsocial
              behavior over evolutionary time. The result of this study will contribute not
              only to our understanding of subsocial behavior in this fascinating group of
              insects but to knowledge of evolution of sociality in general.


