Title       : Topology, Geometry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0104196

Award Number: 0104196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford H. Taubes chtaubes@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raoul Bott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Mazur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0104196			

The three principle investigators on this
              proposal will be
involved in research in the following areas:  Barry Mazur
              will be involved
in at least four major projects.  The first concerns Euler
              systems and
their applications in algebraic geometry, arithmetic and analytic
              number
theory.  The second project will study interpolations of
              modular
eigenforms via special curves.  The third concerns the ABC conjecture
              in
number theory and the fourth concerns rational points on
              rationally
connected varieties.  Raoul Bott will conduct research at the
              interface
between mathematics and physics including research topics that
              relate to
computational complexity, equivariant cohomology, diffeomorphism
              groups
and toric varieties.  The major project of Clifford Taubes concerns
              the
coding of smooth 4-manifold structures by the pseudo-holomorphic
              curves
defined by their self-dual 2-forms.  The first long range goal is to
              read
off invariants of smooth 4-manifolds from these curves.  The second
              goal
is to use them to simplify a presentation of the manifold.


Here are
              some comments of a less technical nature about this
research:  Barry Mazurs
              work concerns properties of the integers and
relations between them.  A
              typical question asks for integers, say a, b
and c, that satisfy some given
              equation.  An example is the equation of
Pythagoreas, which asks that the sum
              of the squares of a and b equal that
of c.  There are very general and natural
              classes of such relations (such
as those involved in the now proved Fermat
              conjecture) that probe to the
heart of the theory of numbers; and the study of
              such equations forms the
core of Mazurs research.  Raoul Botts work probes the
              manner in which
families of symmetries can be used to simplify computations in
              mathematics
and theoretical physics.  These symmetries relate different
              structures and
often this relation equates a simple to understand property of
              one system
to a mysterious and not understood property of another.  Clifford
              Taubes
major project probes the possibilities for the large scale structure
              of
four dimensional universes.  Our universe has four dimensions, these
              the
usual three dimensions of space plus time as the fourth.  This said,
              the
research seeks to provide a complete list of the possible large
              scale
structures for a universe such as ours.  To put this in perspective,
              there
is a conjectured list for all possible three dimensional spaces, but
              there
is as yet no credible conjecture for a similar list for four
              dimensions.


