Title       : Theoretical Studies of Josephson Arrays, High-Temperature Superconductors, and
               Inhomogeneous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0104987

Award Number: 0104987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Stroud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0104987
Stroud

Theoretical research will be conducted in three areas of
              materials research: (1) the physics of superconducting arrays and related
              materials: (2) fluctuations and inhomogeneities in cuprate-based high
              temperature superconductors; (3) linear and nonlinear response of
              macroscopically inhomogeneous materials.  

Superconducting arrays are
              arrangements of superconductors which are weakly coupled together by Josephson
              or proximity-effect interactions.  They have a wide variety of potential
              applications and are also good models for superconducting thin films.  In this
              area continued study of underdamped Josephson arrays coupled to a resonant
              cavity will be carried out.  In addition, a study of noise produced by magnetic
              flux motion in arrays and films will also be undertaken, as well as a study of
              conditions under which a superconducting array can lock into a coherent state. 
              Finally, a study will be made of quantum effects in superconducting arrays,
              films and smaller groups of junctions.  

Models for terahertz absorption in
              the underdoped high temperature superconducting materials will be studied. 
              Also to be investigated are models of low-angle grain boundaries in the
              ab-planes of the high temperature superconductors, since grain boundaries limit
              the critical current.  The c-axis current-voltage characteristics of these
              materials will also be investigated, as well as the conditions governing the
              position and width of the Josephson plasmon resonance in the most anisotropic
              materials.  Also, recent calculations o fquantum melting of the vortex lattice
              at zero temperature will be compared to experiment. 

The PI will also extend
              recent work on macroscopically inhomogeneous media to the study of magnetic
              composites.  Here the problems to be addressed include magnetoresistance
              arising from the inhomogeneous conductivity tensor in a material with a
              ferromagnetic domain structure, and the behavior of magnetic multilayers
              coupled through nonmagnetic layers, which will be studied by a model analogous
              to the Lawrence-Doniach treatment of layered superconductors.  Finally, the PI
              will study the electromagnetic response of collections of small metal and
              dielectric particles contained in an optical microcavity.

The research
              involves studies of several fundamental questions in condensed matter physics,
              and may lead to a wide variety of technological applications.  It will also
              contribute to human resources in science and technology by training graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows.

%%%
Theoretical research will be
              conducted in three areas of materials research: (1) the physics of
              superconducting arrays and related materials: (2) fluctuations and
              inhomogeneities in cuprate-based high temperature superconductors; (3) linear
              and nonlinear response of macroscopically inhomogeneous materials.  

The
              research involves studies of several fundamental questions in condensed matter
              physics, and may lead to a wide variety of technological applications.  It will
              also contribute to human resources in science and technology by training
              graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.

***

