Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution and Diversification of Bursera subgenus
               Bullockia (Burseraceae).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0104898

Award Number: 0104898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9974               (Estimated)
Investigator: Beryl B. Simpson beryl@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Common Summary for non-specialists: (217 words)
Biologists have claimed that
              hybridization between species is an important evolutionary phenomenon in
              plants, yet the vast majority of corroborating evidence derives from research
              using herbs growing in temperate climates.  As a consequence, we do not know
              how accurately this assertion describes the evolutionary biology of tropical
              woody plants.  To address the applicability of this idea to tropical plants, we
              will examine a group of tropical trees touted for its propensity to hybridize
              at the species and population level.  The group, Bursera subgenus Bullockia
              (family Burseraceae), consists of over 40 species that range from Arizona to
              Bolivia.  It is purported to include a handful of stabilized hybrid species and
              multiple, localized hybrid swarms.  We will construct phylogenies or
              evolutionary hypotheses of relationships of the species using nuclear DNA
              sequences and chloroplast restriction site data to determine whether "hybrid"
              species indeed exist in this group.  We will also genetically fingerprint a
              potential hybrid swarm of Bursera species located in the Galapagos to test for
              hybridity and to elucidate the geographic component of gene flow between
              species of these long-lived trees.  The results of this study will contribute
              new information to our generalized understanding of hybridization in tropical,
              woody plants while they augment the systematic knowledge of Bursera and the
              exclusively tropical family of trees to which it belongs.
Significance
              summary: (197 words)
This project will examine a commonly held belief in plant
              evolutionary biology using a group of tropical trees.  This assessment is
              significant because the premise that interspecific hybridization is a potent,
              relatively common evolutionary phenomenon is based primarily on information
              from temperate, herbaceous plants and need not necessarily apply to tropical
              woody plants, which have radically different life histories.  We will increase
              our generalized understanding of the extent and evolutionary consequences of
              interspecific hybridization by testing purported stabilized hybrid species in a
              tropical, woody plant genus, Bursera (family Burseraceae).  We will also
              improve our understanding of the formation of hybrid swarms and gene flow
              between tropical, woody plants by testing the isolated, geologically young
              populations of Galapagos Bursera for reported evidence of introgression. 
              Additionally, the hypotheses of evolutionary relationships generated by this
              project will contribute new information to the systematics of Bursera and the
              Burseraceae, a family mostly unstudied at the molecular level.  This project
              will help answer not only longstanding questions about the evolutionary history
              of this particular group such as whether stabilized hybrid Bursera species
              exist and whether Bursera can form interspecific hybrid swarms but also whether
              Bursera and Commiphora, its African relative, are congeneric. 

