Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Structure of the Late Stage Ectomycorrhizal
               Fungus, Russula brevipes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0104976

Award Number: 0104976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Miller FUNGI@UWYO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Miller

Relatively little research has been conducted on the historical and
              reproductive factors that affect genetic characteristics of fungi that form
              mutualistic associations with host trees.  In an effort to elucidate the
              genetic structuring of the mutualistic ectomycorrhizal fungus, Russula
              brevipes, studies utilizing various molecular markers were designed to
              determine how historical and geographical barriers (e.g., ice ages and the
              formation of mountains) affect dispersal, genetic makeup and population
              differentiation.  Collections of R. brevipes from many locations in the Pacific
              Northwest and Rocky Mountain region will be made to assess genetic
              differentiation.

Ectomycorrhizal fungi (EMF) form indispensable symbiotic
              relationships with tree roots by providing water and nutrients, increasing
              seedling survivability, and protecting against root pathogenic organisms.  R.
              brevipes forms mutualistic associations with valuable timber and recreation
              trees in the western U.S. including lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), Douglas
              fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis).  In the Rocky
              Mountains, lodgepole pine is never replanted into massive clearcuts and
              regeneration is dependent on processes of natural seedling establishment and
              survival mediated by EMF.  It is important to understand the population biology
              and genetic structure of EMF, particularly since these fungi may affect
              survivability of their hosts by mediating competition between species through
              interconnected networks below-ground.

