Title       : International Workshop on Earthquake Simulation in Geotechnical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a0104521

Award Number: 0104521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75229              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiangwu Zeng xxz16@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Considerable progress has been made in recent years in earthquake simulation
              techniques in geotechnical engineering through, for example, centrifuge
              modeling, 1g shaking table experiments, and numerical and field simulations. 
              These latest developments significantly enhance the research capabilities in
              geotechnical earthquake engineering, and generate enormous opportunities as
              well as great challenges for this research community.  These newly-available
              capabilities significantly expand the types of research that can be conducted. 
              For example, the simulation of large field structures such as earth dams,
              in-depth field investigations, and closer-to-real-life computer simulations
              become feasible.  At the same time, the significant investment in research
              facilities combined with the limited funding resources available requires that
              future research focus on making maximum use of these new capabilities.  This
              workshop will help to facilitate this by bringing together experts from around
              the world to discuss the capabilities and limitations of the new facilities, to
              discuss the research topics that can be conducted using these facilities, to
              develop ideas of collaboration among groups of researchers, to find innovative
              and effective ways of information dissemination, and to address the unique
              challenges resulting from the implementation of the George E. Brown, Jr.
              Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES).

Approximately 30 US
              and international experts will meet in Cleveland, Ohio in July 2001.  In
              addition, a web discussion site will be setup before, and continue after the
              workshop.  It will be accessible not only to the workshop participants, but to
              all interested researchers, thus allowing non-participants to join in and
              contribute to the workshop discussions.  The workshop proceedings will be
              posted online for wide dissemination and accessibility.

