Title       : Dissertation Research: Anaerobic Methane Oxidation in Freshwater Wetlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a0104954

Award Number: 0104954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6257               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Yavitt jby1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Methane is a natural component of the earth's atmosphere.  However, the increase
              in the concentration of atmospheric methane since the turn of the century is a
              likely contributor to the enhancement of the greenhouse effect.  A significant
              portion of atmospheric methane comes from freshwater wetlands where
              microorganisms produce methane in oxygen depleted soil.  It is known that
              microorganisms living in the oxygenated part of the soil can consume some of
              the methane produced, so that the amount of methane leaking to the atmosphere
              is the difference between production and consumption.  It is also possible that
              this methane consumption can occur in the oxygen depleted zone of the soil, yet
              this process is poorly understood.  Most evidence for this process comes from
              sediments beneath the ocean, yet I have found strong evidence that large
              amounts of methane also can be consumed by microorganisms in the oxygen poor
              soil of a freshwater wetland in central New York State.  The process is elusive
              and linked to seasonal climate patterns, which may be why the process was not
              seen by earlier investigators.  This proposal requests funds to examine the
              extent of the process in peatlands in central New York State, Maryland, West
              Virginia, and Sweden.  These are all well studied sites where the process would
              be expected to occur. Primary objectives are to assess the role of
              microorganisms that use iron instead of oxygen to consume methane, and how iron
              availability might limit the process.  Results of this study should provide
              valuable insight into the relationship between atmospheric methane and wetland
              methane emissions.  Moreover, a mechanistic understanding of methane emissions
              is essential in order to predict how methane emissions from wetlands will
              respond to future environmental changes.   
