Title       : Computational Complexity Theory and Circuit Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0104823

Award Number: 0104823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Allender Allender@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of research in complexity theory is to classify the complexity of real
              world computational problems by providing lower bounds on the resources
              required to solve them.  To date - in spite of impressive lower bounds for
              restricted types of circuits- almost the only useful progress toward this goal
              has come via the tool of reducibility, which allows one to show that problem is
              complete for complexity class.

Many of the most important complexity classes
              can be characterized in terms of Boolean circuits of restricted size or depth,
              etc.  Recently, it has become apparent that arithmetic circuits are also very
              useful in this regard.   The relationships between Boolean and arithmetic
              circuit complexity are still only poorly understood, although there has been
              significant progress on this front recently.  This project will work to clarify
              these relationships further.

Specially, this project will exploit new
              insights about the complexity of arithmetic operation, in order to investigate
              the power of small space-bounded complexity classes and complexity classes
              defined in terms of small-depth circuits.  Also the tools of Kolmogorov
              complexity will be applied, in order to obtain a better understanding of the
              complexity of graph reachability problems.  More generally, the project will
              attempt to clarify the relationship among complexity classes, and the various
              notions (nondeterminism, unambiguity, symmetry, Boolean and arithmetic
              circuits, etc.) that define models of computation characterizing important
              complexity classes.

