Title       : Engagement in Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2001 
File        : a0104726

Award Number: 0104726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470732             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Dugas dugas@brc.tamus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Coutu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1537      ENRICHMENT COURSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In Texas, 57% of incarcerated youths have prior offenses.  Multiple
              organizations (Bell County, Central Texas College, Central Texas Workforce
              Board, ESRI, Inc., Killeen Independent School District, Texas A&M University
              System, and Texas Youth Commission) will demonstrate different and innovative
              learning methods to close this revolving door on the juvenile justice system. 
              "Engagement in Learning" will stimulate learning through technology and engage
              the student in life-long learning through hands-on deliverables.  Student
              engagement will be achieved by circumventing poor reading skills through
              hands-on applications of modern technologies.  This three-year program is
              comprised of teacher and student training, classroom research and exploration
              projects, and the integration of students into the workplace.  Killeen ISD will
              train teachers in basic computer skills and in project-based learning that
              integrates modern technology into the classroom through appropriate curriculum.
               Other trained teachers from the region will serve as mentors to the teachers
              that directly serve the incarcerated population.   Several follow-up sessions
              will be incorporated to strengthen 'teachers supporting teachers.' 
              Approximately 250 students will be selected and trained for 100 and 150
              hands-on learning hours in aligned science education curriculum (e.g. Life
              Management Skills, Geographic Information Systems, Health and Safety,
              Horticulture and Food Sciences).  Working in teams, students will utilize
              scientific processes to simulate real-world experiences that utilize science
              curriculum.  Each project will be developed collaboratively through the student
              team and teacher facilitation and will utilize project-based management methods
              and hands-on learning to build and reinforce student learning and self-esteem. 
              The evaluation process will examine the effectiveness of intensive
              project-based learning on the at-risk population of incarcerated juveniles and
              will study the power of technology in changing life direction.
