Title       : Properties of galaxies: constraints from gravitational lensing and dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0104751

Award Number: 0104751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Hunter hunter@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0104751   

Mathematical Sciences: Properties of
              galaxies: constraints from gravitational lensing and dynamics   

Abstract
              DMS-0104751  
Hunter      

The project will follow two complementary two
              lines of investigation of the large-scale structure of galaxies.  The first
              line is concerned with the gravitational lensing that occurs when a galaxy lies
              close to the line of sight between us and a much more distant source, such as a
              quasar.  Electromagnetic waves from the distant source are both bent and slowed
              down as they pass close to the galaxy.  As a result, the "gravitational lens"
              may produce multiple images of that quasar.  A number of quasars that are
              multiply imaged by galaxies are now known.  The configuration of those images
              and their relative magnitudes is determined by the distribution of mass in the
              intervening galaxy.  The principal investigator has developed methods for
              calculating the lensing properties of elliptical lenses.  Applied to
              observational data, these properties can be used to make deductions about the
              distribution of mass in the lensing galaxy.  He will develop methods that are
              more powerful and refine them as necessary after testing them on observational
              data.  The second line of investigation is concerned with the dynamics of the
              stars, which are the major visible components of galaxies.  Its ultimate aim is
              to build dynamical models of galaxies, but two preliminary topics are to be
              studied first.  One is investigation of how central density cusps and central
              black holes, which are widely believed to be present in many galaxies,
              influence the orbits of the stars, and to what extent they allow galaxies to be
              triaxial.  The other is to improvement of a procedure for analyzing orbits and
              computing their fundamental frequencies and orbital densities.  The two lines
              of investigation are complementary because both the orbits of the stars in a
              galaxy, and the gravitational lensing properties of that galaxy, are influenced
              by all the matter of the galaxy, whether visible or dark. 

This project
              looks at galaxies, the fundamental building blocks of the Universe, from two
              perspectives.  One is that of gravitational lensing and the other is that of
              the motions of the stars of the galaxies.  Light rays are bent when they pass
              close to a massive object such as a galaxy.  Consequently, a galaxy that
              happens to lie between us and a distant quasar can cause us to see multiple
              images of that object.  This phenomenon is known as gravitational lensing.  It
              is of much current interest because it provides a tool for investigating the
              combined effects of the visible and dark matter content of a galaxy, since both
              contribute to the lensing.  There are a number of instances of galaxies that
              produce four images of the same distant quasar.  The principal investigator is
              developing theories for deducing what those image systems, their configurations
              and their relative strengths, tell us about the arrangement of mass in those
              galaxies.  That arrangement is critical for the structure of the galaxy. 
              Galaxies contain swarms of hundreds of billions of stars.  The motions of those
              stars are governed by the gravitational forces due to all the mass of the
              galaxy, both visible and dark.  Understanding the motion of stars in galaxies
              will facilitate understanding the large-scale structure of the universe.

