Title       : Superfluid Turbulence in the Low Temperature Regime
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0104288

Award Number: 0104288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Roberts roberts@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Natalia G. Berloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SUPERFLUID TURBULENCE IN THE LOW TEMPERATIRE REGIME 

	The two most common
              approaches to study of superfluid turbulence are the HVBK theory and the
              classical theory of vortex filaments. There are many shortcomings in these
              models that make them unrealistic and ad hoc. The main objective of our
              proposal is to use a third approach based on certain forms of nonlinear
              Schroedinger equation (NLS) for two closely related purposes: to provide
              microscopically realistic parameters for HVBK theory and the classical theory
              of vortex filaments and to elucidate superfluid turbulence using new variants
              of the NLS that are more faithful to real helium II. More specifically we plan:
              (1) use NLS equations to study the process of vortex line reconnection in
              sufficient detail to characterize quantitatively the accompanying radiation of
              sound and Kelvin waves. The results will allow us to define reconnection rules
              that could be used when classical theory is applied to superfluid turbulence.
              (2) Use NLS theory to simulate superfluid turbulence in the low temperature
              regime to study the transition between weak and strong turbulence states in the
              superfluid. (3) Analyze dissipative NLS models that include damping from the
              mutual friction between superfluid and normal fluid. (4) Study and classify
              attractors, bifurcation sequences, and routes to chaos in solutions of forced
              and dissipative NLS equations. Our main goal is, however, to elucidate
              superfluid turbulence in the low temperature regime in which experiments are
              currently in the planning stage. 

	Superfluid turbulence has been studied
              experimentally for many years and has by now become a major branch of cryogenic
              physics. In addition to the intrinsic intellectual challenges of the subject,
              there are several reasons for this. Helium is used as a coolant for
              superconducting magnets and for infrared detectors, to name just two of several
              engineering applications. The flow commonly becomes turbulent in these
              contexts. The subject also has implications beyond the field of helium
              research, such as in the study of high temperature superconductivity, systems
              of magnetic spins, melting transitions of crystals, and the origin of glitches
              in neutron star rotations. Superfluid turbulence may also provide insights into
              classical fluid turbulence, especially at high Reynolds numbers, where the
              vorticity has an intermittent, fractal character.  

