Title       : Second-order Cone Programming : Algorithms and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0104282

Award Number: 0104282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Goldfarb goldfarb@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Garud N. Iyengar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large Second-order Cone Programming: Algorithms and 
Applications.

PI. 
              Donald Goldfarb and Garud Iyengar.

Abstract. 

Second-order cone programs
              (SOCPs) are convex optimization 
problems in which a linear function is
              optimized over the 
intersection of an affine linear manifold with the
              Cartesian 
product of second-order (Lorentz) cones.  Linear programs (LPs),
              
convex quadratic programs (QPs),  and quadratically constrained  
convex
              quadratic programs can all be formulated as SOCPs, as 
can many  other
              problems that do not fall into these three problem 
classes. On the other
              hand, since a second-order cone constraint 
is equivalent to a linear matrix
              inequality, semidefinite 
programs (SDPs) include SOCPs as a special case. 
              Computationally 
speaking, an SOCP falls  between an LP or a QP and an SDP.
              Interior 
point methods solve all of these problems in polynomial time.
              
Although, the  computational effort required to solve an SOCP is 
greater
              than that required to solve an LP or a QP, it is 
substantially less than that
              required to solve an SDP of similar 
size and structure. However, in many
              ways, an SOCP is closer to 
an SDP than an LP or QP since its feasible set is
              non-polyhedral. 
The proposed research focuses on several aspects of  SOCPs,
              
including the development of numerically stable algorithms for 
SOCPs that
              take advantage of sparsity in the data, the study of 
SOCP-based approximation
              algorithms for hard combinatorial optimization 
problems, the study of
              computational aspects of cut generation methods 
for mixed 0-1 SOCPs and the
              applications of SOCPs in robust financial 
optimization. 

SOCPs are
              excellent models for applications that arise in a broad range 
of fields from 
              engineering, control, and finance, to robust and 
combinatorial optimization.
              The wide applicability of SOCPs and the 
need for efficient, numerically
              stable algorithms to solve them makes 
their study worthwhile.  

