Title       : Scalable Compression and Transmission of Internet Multimedia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0104834

Award Number: 0104834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zixiang Xiong zx@lena.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL #0104834
TEXAS ENGINEERING EXP. STA.
XIONG, ZIXIANG

This ambitious
              project explores several new directions in the algorithmic design and
              architecture of challenging multimedia communication systems.  A unified
              approach is taken for transmission of multimedia data over heterogeneous
              networks (e.g., the Internet) and noisy channels (e.g., a wireless LAN) based
              on scalable source coding. Topics covered in the project are:

1) Scalable
              multimedia data compression based on efficient arithmetic coding of bit planes
              of transform coefficients. For image coding, the wavelet transform is used like
              in the new JPEG-2000 standard. The focus is on introducing progressiveness in
              the traditionally non-progressive trellis coded quantization scheme. The 3-D
              wavelet transform is adopted for fully scalable video coding.  A new nonuniform
              modulated complex lapped transform (NMCLT) is applied for audio coding. To
              achieve high arithmetic coding performance, a significant amount of effort is
              invested in high-order context modeling of the NMCLT or wavelet coefficients.
              In addition, new methods are studied for masking quantization noise of the
              NMCLT coefficients for audio coding and exploring the motion information for
              3-D wavelet video coding.

2) Scalable transmission of Internet multimedia
              via optimal packetization and joint congestion and error control. A dynamic
              programming based optimal packetization scheme for scalable multimedia bit
              streams is
studied. Suboptimal but low complexity packetization schemes are
              also investigated. Congestion control is used to determine the available
              transmission rate and an end-to-end optimal error control scheme devised
to
              mitigate the effects of pack loss. This is achieved by optimally trading off
              scalable source coding and unequal error protection.

