Title       : Markov Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0104343

Award Number: 0104343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $689885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasa R. Varadhan varadhan@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0104343
Varadhan
	The focus of this project is interacting particle systems
              and their scaling limits. When we have a large system of particles interacting
              through local interactions, the evolution of such a system when it starts far
              away from equilibrium poses several questions. Density being often the only
              conserved quantity, there is usually some sort of a transport equation
              appearing as the scaling limit. Superposed on it is the motion of individual
              particles, which is usually an inhomogeneous Markov process after the
              interactions are somehow averaged in the scaling limit. Laws of large numbers
              as well as fluctuations and large deviations from them are some of the
              interesting problems in this context. In addition the coefficients arising in
              the limiting descriptions are functions of density and or other parameters and
              the regularity of their dependence on the parameters is also of
              importance.
	There are a large class of physical processes where the rules of
              behavior are prescribed at the level of individual units. These rules concern
              the nature of the interaction between individual units that could involve some
              randomness as well. But one needs to make predictions of the collective
              behavior of the units at a much larger scale. This project deals with the
              derivation of the rules of collective behavior from models of interactions at
              the level of individual units. In the physical sciences examples of such
              problems that have been successfully studied include the rules of fluid flow
              that are derived from the laws of interaction between molecules that make up
              the fluid. Similar problems in the social sciences, for instance one of
              predicting macroeconomic behavior based on models of economic exchange between
              individuals, have not been adequately addressed. 

