Title       : Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0104163

Award Number: 0104163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $838649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Schoen schoen@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract for DMS-0104163
PI: Richard M. Schoen

Professor Schoen is
              proposing to study the existence of an extremal metric
which defines the
              Bartnik quasilocal mass for a domain in a spacetime of
general relativity.
              This would yield an existence theorem for
asymptotically flat solutions of the
              static vacuum Einstein equations with
suitable boundary conditions. It is part
              of a variational approach for
constructing three dimensional geometries.
              Schoen's second project
involves the construction of special lagrangian, and
              more generally
minimal lagrangian, submanifolds in Calabi-Yau and
              Kaehler-Einstein
manifolds. The approach is to construct hamiltonian
              stationary
submanifolds by direct volume minimization among lagrangian
              submanifolds,
and to obtain sufficient regularity to show that they are
              minimal
lagrangian. Schoen's third project is to further develop the harmonic
              map
approach to prove the rigidity of smooth actions of lattices in
              semisimple
Lie groups on compact manifolds. Professor Mutao Wang proposes to
              study
the mean curvature flow for special classes of submanifolds
              of
codimension greater than one. The major thrust is to obtain stability
              and
regularity properties of the flow. Dr. Baozhang Yang will study
              singular
behavior of Yang-Mills connections in arbitrary dimension. This study
              will
include an investigation into the structure of blow-up sets and
              asymptotic
behavior near singularities.

 
This research project concerns
              the study of geometric shapes which
optimize certain physical and geometric
              energies. For curved spacetimes in
general relativity, there is no natural
              mass-energy density which can be
assigned to the gravitational field, so
              Bartnik proposed to measure the
gravitational mass of a region in a spacetime
              by minimizing the total mass
of all physical spacetimes which contain this
              region as a subset. This
minimal mass spacetime, if it can be shown to exist,
              will be a static
solution of Einstein's equations. One of the goals of this
              project is to
find a way to construct such static solutions, and to use them
              to study
three dimensional geometry. It is expected that three dimensional
              spaces
have natural geometries on them which are uniquely characterized by
              their
curvature properties. Another goal of this project is to construct
              certain
special surfaces in Calabi-Yau manifolds, the spaces of
              string
theory. These (three dimensional) surfaces, called special
              lagrangian
submanifolds, are analogous to soap films in that they are surfaces
              of  
least possible area. Finally, it is proposed to study the
              evolution
problem for surfaces which is called the mean curvature evolution.
              This is
an evolution problem which moves a surface in space in such a way that
              its
area is decreased most rapidly. Understanding the behavior of
              this
evolution is important for simplifying and smoothing complicated
              surfaces
in an optimal way. Mathematically this is a difficult problem because
              the
surfaces may develop singularities such as cone points and tears
              which
must be accounted for. 


