Title       : Computer-intensive Methods for Nonparametric Time Series Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a0104059

Award Number: 0104059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris Politis dpolitis@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Resampling and subsampling offer viable approaches to obtaining valid
              distributional approximations in the context of dependent data while assuming
              very little about the underlying stochastic mechanism.  Many important
              questions still need to be addressed in order for these modern approaches to be
              applied safely and accurately in practice.  The main issues the investigator
              wishes to tackle include the following:  (a) Extend the realm of applicability
              of subsampling by considering self-normalized statistics and/or extrema of time
              series with possibly heavy tails together with extrapolation/interpolation of
              subsampling estimators.  (b) Investigate the performance of the Local Bootstrap
              in forming confidence bands for conditional moments and prediction intervals
              for future values of a Markov process, as well as constructing hypothesis tests
              for time-reversibility.  (c) Show that nonparametric estimation of conditional
              moments via flat-top kernel smoothing is not appreciably affected by the curse
              of dimensionality when the underlying function is ultra-smooth.  (d)
              Investigate the performance of the newly proposed Local Block-Bootstrap in the
              case of a nonstationary series with a slowly-changing stochastic structure. 
              (e) Propose the Tapered Block-Bootstrap algorithm, and show that it achieves
              superior performance as compared to the well-known Block-Bootstrap.  (f)
              Propose a new block/bandwidth choice estimator with superior rate of
              convergence.  And finally  (g) consider the issue of a possibly integrated time
              series, and propose a new computer-intensive procedure, the Continuous-Path
              Block-Bootstrap, for statistical inference.
 
Correlated data, such as time
              series and spatial data, are often encountered in many diverse scientific
              disciplines including economics, meteorology, electrical engineering, etc.  The
              general goal of this project is to further the development of
              computer-intensive statistical analysis methods that are applicable in the
              setting of correlated data but do not rely on unrealistic or unverifiable model
              assumptions.  Addressing this issue fruitfully will have many practical
              applications.  For example, in a daily series of exchange rates or stock
              returns spanning a decade (or more), there may be evidence that the stochastic
              structure of the series has not been invariant over such a long stretch of
              time.  Creating a practical way to model such nonstationarities and devising
              appropriate resampling methods for inference would be most helpful for economic
              applications.  For a different application, consider the problem of stochastic
              simulation of manufacturing systems or a Gibbs-type sampler simulation; the
              development of subsampling/resampling for `almost' stationary time series would
              be most helpful in order to assess convergence and accuracy of the simulation. 
              In the context of spatial statistics (e.g., mining and geostatistics,
              atmospheric and environmental science, etc.), the data typically correspond to
              measurements obtained at spatial points that are irregularly spaced.  For
              example, a measurement may indicate the quality or quantity of the ore found in
              some location X, or a measurement of precipitation or air quality at location Y
              during a fixed time interval.  The irregular nature of the measurement
              locations presents an added complication that, however, can be by-passed by
              specially designed versions of resampling/subsampling.

