Title       : Problems in Surface Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0104151

Award Number: 0104151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Masur masur@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Problems in Surface Geometry and Topology
Abstract
Howard Masur

The
              principal investigator proposes to work on problems in the geometry 
and
              topology of surfaces.  The geometric problems consist of studying the

              dynamics of flows on flat surfaces with cone angle singularities. 
A
              particular example is the study of billiards in polygons with angles that 
are
              rational multiples of pi.  The particular aspect of this study will be to

              attempt to find the asymptotic growth rate for the number of periodic orbits.

              For some billiards such as the square, the growth rate is known.
 Other more
              interesting examples are certain right triangles.
 The principal investigator
              will study additional examples such as the
square with a slit or barrier. The
              idea is to find asymptotic quadratic
estimates. The topological problems
              concern the mapping class group of a 
surface. This group is one of  the main
              objects of study in surface topology. 
 One of the recent developments in
              group theory is to study the large scale
or asymptotic geometry of a group. 
              The principal investigator proposes to
study the large scale geometry of the
              mapping class group with a goal of
showing that the mapping class group is
              quasi-isometrically rigid. 

 
In the field of dynamical systems one studies
              the motion of objects. 
The field had its origins  in the study of the motion
              of the
planets.  Billiards are another closely related example. There one has
              a
point mass  that moves in straight lines so that when  it  encounters
the
              boundary of a region, it rebounds so that the angle of reflection
equals the
              angle of incidence. Billiards have been studied for over 100
years. In order
              to understand such a dynamical system one
needs to understand the long term
              behavior of the orbits. One particular
example of this long term behavior are
              the study of the periodic
orbits.  These are the  orbits that repeat
              themselves. The study of
periodic orbits for billiards in polygons in the
              plane is the main subject
of this proposal.  

