Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Relationships within Passiflora L. Section
               Cieca Mast. (Passifloraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0104824

Award Number: 0104824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter S. Judd wjudd@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Passiflora (plant family Passifloraceae) is a large genus consisting of
              approximately 500 species primarily occurring in tropical America, Southeast
              Asia, and Australia.  Passion flowers are popular garden plants because of
              their beautiful, intricate flowers and are grown commercially for their fruit. 
              Additionally, they are being investigated for their medicinal applications. 
              Passiflora section Cieca currently comprises 13 species of herbaceous to woody
              vines that are characterized by small flowers without petals, filaments of the
              corona in two series and reticulate seed coats.  The section is distributed in
              the southern United States, Mexico, Central America, South America and the
              Caribbean.  The flowers are primarily pollinated by bees and wasps, with an
              interesting shift to hummingbird pollination in three species occurring in
              Jamaica and southern Mexico.  One species within section Cieca, Passiflora
              clypeophylla, is suspected to be extinct but this has not been definitively
              proven.    Three others are listed as endangered or threatened.  In order to
              examine the evolutionary relationships within section Cieca, we will conduct a
              detailed revision of the group focusing on the combined analysis of DNA
              sequences and morphological characters. Close attention will be paid to
              pollination biology in order to examine the selective forces that have led to a
              change from bee and wasp to hummingbird pollination.  Where possible the
              butterfly herbivores of the species within section Cieca will be observed and
              identified in order to supplement literature reports and to investigate the
              close relationship between passion-vine butterflies (Heliconiinae) and
              Passiflora.  A detailed key, descriptions, distribution maps, and illustrations
              will be included in the revision, along with cladistic, biogeographical and
              ecological analyses.
	The proposed study will significantly contribute to a
              better understanding of evolution at the species level in the Passifloraceae. 
              This investigation will be the first to incorporate modern cladistic methods in
              a morphological study of any group within the genus Passiflora.  The proposed
              research will also use combined morphological and molecular data matrices to
              develop hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships in the section and will
              contribute to a better understanding of the utility of such an approach in
              plant systematics. In addition, this research will permit the evaluation of the
              Heliconiinae-Passiflora coevolutionary relationship based upon a well-supported
              phylogenetic hypothesis for a group of species within Passiflora.  Lastly, this
              study will be one of the few studies to attempt to determine the evolutionary
              forces that have led from hymenopteran to bird pollination in a group of
              closely related, tropical species. Thus, the result of the proposed study will
              be a more extensive understanding of evolutionary trends and relationships
              within a group of rapidly evolving plant species of the neotropics. 


