Title       : Direct and Inverse Problems in Diffractive Optics Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0104001

Award Number: 0104001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Bao bao@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the next five years, the Principal Investigator proposes 
to examine the
              mathematical issues and develop computational methods
for solving the
              following classes of direct and inverse problems
motivated by industrial
              applications: scattering and diffraction by periodic 
structures (gratings),
              second harmonic generation in nonlinear diffractive 
optics, and inverse and
              optimal design problems in diffractive optics.  
The main topics of the
              proposed work are as follows:
-- Modeling, analysis, and computation of the
              diffraction by periodic 
chiral structures and the scattering by a perturbed
              diffractive structure. 
Modeling and design of electromagnetic resonances.
--
              Well-posedness of the nonlinear Maxwell equations in second
              harmonic
generation.  An interface least-squares finite element method for
              solving
the three-dimensional model problem.  Structure (grating)
 enhanced
              nonlinear optical effects.  Effects of coatings on nonlinear 
diffractive
              optics.
-- Optimal design of diffractive structures.  A relaxation technique
              
(homogenization) and a local approach for the optimal design problem. 
              
Uniqueness, stability, and regularity studies of the inverse diffraction
              
problem.  Numerical solution of inverse and optimal design problems in
              
diffractive optics.

The recent enabling technologies of high-performance
              computing facilities
and microlithographic fabrication techniques have led to
              an explosion of
applications of diffraction in optics, establishing
              diffractive optics 
as one of the most rapidly advancing areas of current
              research 
in optical engineering.  The practical applications and scientific
              developments 
have driven the need for rigorous partial differential
              equation
models, mathematical analysis, and numerical algorithms
to describe
              the diffraction of complicated grating structures, to compute 
electromagnetic
              fields and thus to predict the performance of a given 
diffractive structure
              in linear, chiral, and nonlinear optical media, as well 
as to carry out
              optimal design of new structures.  The proposed research has 
significant
              potential for evolving new mathematics and science and providing 
industry
              with guidance to design and fabricate new optical devices.

