Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Seismic Hazard Mitigation and Soil Strength
               Mapping for Land Use Planning in Tushka Area, Upper Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0104310

Award Number: 0104310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roelof J. Versteeg versteeg@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1307,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0104310
Versteeg

Description: This project supports a collaborative project
              between Dr. Roelof Versteeg, Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia
              University and Dr. Raafat Fat-Helbary, Aswan Seismological Center, the National
              Research Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics, Aswan, Egypt.  
They plan to
              create a useable seismic hazard and soil strength maps for the Tushka Project,
              a massive new infrastructure effort in Upper Egypt.  The PIs plan on combining
              probabilistic seismic hazard maps that describe the frequency of exceeding
              specified ground motion levels with a surface wave analysis technique that can
              provide detailed site effects.  They will combine MASW type of inversion
              techniques with imaging to obtain shear-wave velocity profiles that can be of
              great use for engineering projects.  The results will be made available in a
              GIS environment.  This work will develop a technique that can usefully
              complement macro-scale hazard analysis, and make refined microzonation of
              hazard a real possibility useful in siting of critical facilities.

Scope:
              The project has important scientific and practical implications.  The geography
              of the Upper Egypt area is important and has been affected by recent human
              development including the construction of the Aswan High Dam.  This research
              will document and interpret geophysical and geotechnical data and will seek to
              develop practical information for future projects.  Dr. Versteeg has the needed
              experience in the acquisition and processing of geophysical data as well as the
              integration of these data into GIS based product for use by non-geophysicists. 
              Dr. Fat-Helbary is experienced in the Tushka seismic studies.  He will lead the
              effort for collection of the large-scale data sets, and will lead the effort in
              creating ground motion acceleration maps.  Both sides will benefit from this
              collaboration and from the opportunity to learn from the type of planning that
              is underway to develop a region of the world that has historical significance. 
              The experience and methods developed in this proposed project will be
              applicable to future developments in Egypt as well as in other parts of the
              world.  The PIs are well qualified for the planned.  The project meets INT
              criteria for support of collaborative research.
