Title       : Imaging the Mechanics of Shallow Subduction: the Oaxaca GPS Array
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0104299

Award Number: 0104299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis C. DeMets chuck@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1322,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DeMets 
0104299 

The Oaxaca GPS study is designed for a detailed geodetic
              study of the mechanics of subduction along the 350-km-long Oaxaca segment of
              the Middle America trench, where the trench lies closer to the coast (50-65 km)
              than for any other continental land mass on Earth.  Interseismic loading of the
              locked subduction interface in this region gives rise to high elastic strain
              gradients everywhere within 75-100 km of the coast.  Surface displacements
              measured via geodetic techniques are thus sensitive to the distribution of
              loading and/or slip along the nearby subduction interface.  This makes the
              coastal and near-coastal areas of Oaxaca a superb and possibly unsurpassed
              region for studying the mechanics of subduction in the upper, seismogenic area
              of the subduction interface.  Forward and inverse modeling of the expected
              spatial resolution of a 40-site GPS array in Oaxaca indicates it would have a
              level of resolution 5-12 times better than that of the dense Japanese GPS
              array.  Measurements of site displacements in Oaxaca will allow many questions
              to be addressed, including at least the following: (1) Is interseismic coupling
              relatively homogeneous along the fault and if not, what is the spatial scale of
              the heterogeneity? (2) How does the geodetic coupling coefficient compare to
              the seismic coupling coefficient of 0.5-0.75 estimated for this trench segment
              and what does any difference between the two imply about aseismic processes
              that may accommodate slip along the subduction interface? (3) Does the degree
              and/or pattern of coupling evolve through time?  (4) Is the downdip edge of the
              locked zone located at a depth of 20 km, as proposed by Suarez and Sanchez
              (1996) to explain the general absence of large (M > 8) earthquakes along the
              Cocos-North America subduction interface?  (5) Is there any evidence for slowly
              propagating ruptures (slow earthquakes) that help to relieve interseismic
              loading?  Given that large earthquakes tend to recur every few decades along
              most segments of the Middle America trench, measurements during the
              interseismic phase will also eventually enable us to attack many additional
              questions about subduction mechanics, including in particular the comparative
              patterns of interseismic loading and coseismic slip release.  The results of
              this work will add new and useful observations to the still-modest set of
              observations that constrain conceptual models for the mechanics of shallow
              subduction, and should also bear on the applicability of rate- and
              state-variable friction laws to subduction mechanics.   The study, which is
              co-funded by CONACYT, NSF, and the Vilas foundation of UW-Madison, represents a
              partnership between Dr. Enrique Cabral at UNAM, Dr. Bertha Marquez at the
              University of Guadalajara, and Dr. Charles DeMets at UW-Madison. 

