Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Offspring Recognition and Brood Parasitism in African
               Finches: Implications for Signal Mimicry and Diversification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0104481

Award Number: 0104481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Winkler dww4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,9198,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Offspring Recognition and Brood Parasitism in African Finches: Implications
              for Signal Mimicry and Diversification
David W. Winkler and Justin G.
              Schuetz

Communication between parents and offspring is widespread among
              birds. However, the signals that nestlings employ in this dialogue have
              undergone extreme elaboration in only two families of birds, the Estrildid
              finches and the brood parasitic Viduid finches. The mouth patterns of estrildid
              nestlings are incredibly diverse; each species possesses a unique combination
              of spots, colors, and markings on its palate and tongue. Viduid nestlings,
              which are raised alongside estrildid host nestlings, have mouth markings that
              precisely match those of the host species they exploit. Presumably, mimicry
              occurs because raising parasites is costly and because host parents that
              discriminate against foreign-looking young are favored by natural selection.
              However, to date, there is scanty evidence for nestling recognition in
              estrildids and only a few studies of wild host populations have been
              undertaken. Previous work suggests that food availability, host learning, and
              nestling phenotypes may influence whether host parents recognize and reject
              nestlings. Controlled aviary experiments in combination with fieldwork will
              help to assess the relative importance of these variables. Captive populations
              of known-age hosts and parasites have already been established, and research in
              Tanzania, where a viduid exploits more than one host species, will allow for
              tests of nestling discrimination. Throughout aviary and fieldwork, variation in
              nestling morphologies within and across species will be documented. In addition
              to informing our understanding of offspring recognition behavior, results from
              this research will provide insight into host-parasite interactions and the
              processes that affect the evolution of animal signals.


