Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Inference from Bryozoan Hox Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0104984

Award Number: 0104984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Shank tshank@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Halanych  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the evolutionary origin of bryozoans, a group of
              aquatic animals with many species that form colonies by asexual reproduction. 
              Although association of bryozoans with molluscs, annelids, and other protostome
              taxa is well supported, relationships among these groups is not.  Data
              suggesting that bryozoans diverged from a common ancestor before other members
              of the clade Lophotrochozoa is, however, intriguing and warrants further
              investigation.  The present study will investigate Hox genes, which are
              important transcription factors in early development.  The DNA sequence of Hox
              genes, as well as their arrangement within the genome, has been conserved over
              the course of animal evolution, making them good candidates for understanding
              relationships between widely divergent groups of animals.  DNA sequencing and
              gene mapping will be utilized to investigate the Hox genes of representatives
              from two major lineages of bryozoans, cheilostomes and phylactolaemates.  These
              data will be combined with other information to infer the relationships between
              bryozoans and other major lineages of animals.

Results of this study will
              provide important information concerning the early evolution of animal
              development and body plans.  Additionally, the sequencing and mapping of
              bryozoan Hox genes will provide a platform for future work on the origins of
              zooid polymorphism in bryozoan colonies.

