Title       : Control problems for systems of strongly coupled partial differential equations
               with variable coefficients.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0104305

Award Number: 0104305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irena Lasiecka il2v@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Triggiani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, the emerging technology of smart materials and 
structures has
              brought to the fore of scientific investigation the 
pressing need to control,
              optimize, and stabilize dynamical 
'interactive' structures, whose components'
              behavior is governed by 
partial differential equations (PDEs).  A canonical
              illustrative example 
of keen national interest is the noise reduction problem
              in an acoustic 
chamber (aircraft's or rotorcraft's cockpit or cabin, etc). 
              This couples 
the oscillatory behavior of the unwanted acoustic pressure
              (noise field) 
within the chamber with the elastic vibrations of a flexible
              wall of the 
chamber, possibly reinforced by sandwiched layers, and possibly
              
accounting for thermo-elastic effects.  Pairwise sets of piezo-electric
              
patches bonded on the flexible wall, once suitably wired, develop an
              
elastic moment that is meant to dampen out the noise in the acoustic
              
chamber.  Mathematically, the acoustic pressure is modeled by a second
              
order scalar hyperbolic equation (wave equation), while the flexible 
wall
              is modeled by a plate-like Kirchhoff equation with or without 
structural
              damping.  In the first case, the plate has a parabolic 
behavior, in the
              second a hyperbolic behavior, resulting therefore in 
either
              hyperbolic/parabolic coupling, or in hyperbolic/hyperbolic 
coupling of the
              overall structure.  Two additional key, novel, 
distinguishing features of the
              present project are: (i) first, the 
linear or non-linear PDEs describing the
              coupled structure have variable 
coefficients in space, which is always the
              case when the properties of 
the medium depend from point to point; (ii) and,
              moreover,  the flexible 
wall may be curved (rather than flat), and thus
              modeled by a shell 
(rather than a plate).  Accordingly, differential
              geometric methods are 
then proposed in the control theoretic analysis of the
              overall coupled 
structure, to cope with these two serious difficulties.  The
              goal is to 
optimally control - according to a pre-assigned optimality
              criterion - 
and asymptotically stabilize the coupled structure.  The
              methodology of 
this project consists in first establishing a mathematical
              theory, to be 
followed next by a numerical analysis thereof, to yield
              effective and 
computable algorithms.

Recent Federal research has
              convincingly demonstrated smart 
materials/structures to be a laboratory
              reality.  This is also confirmed 
by a Workshop Report for the National
              Science Foundation entitled: 
"Rebuilding and enhancing the Nation's
              infrastructures: a role for 
intelligent material systems and structures",
              1993.  These new structural 
concepts actively damp noise and vibration,
              suppress flutter at trailing 
edges of airfoils and enable active twist/camber
              of both fixed wing and 
rotorcraft; attenuate or suppress water borne
              signatures (active 
acoustic signature control), etc. The transition of novel
              smart
structures into new, truly revolutionary platforms faces many obstacles.
               
The most significant is design optimization: both of the smart structure
              
and its communication and control systems. The present project aims at
              
producing a contribution in this area, based on solid mathematical
              
foundations and analysis.

