Title       : Integrable systems, the Whitham equations and conformal maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0104621

Award Number: 0104621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Krichever krichev@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0104621

The algebraic-geometric theory of soliton
              equations developed in the middle 
seventies has become one of the most
              powerful tools in the theory of integrable
models, and has had enormous
              influence on many branches of mathematics and 
theoretical physics. The main
              objective of the present project
is a further development of this approach to
              integration of non-linear 
equations, models of solid state physics, and
              models of quantum field theories.
An immediate goal is to construct integrable
              models corresponding
to various supersymmetric gauge Seiber-Witten models,
              
which can be instrumental in investigating key physical issues such as
              
duality, the renormalization group, or instanton corrections.
Another goal
              of the project is a classification of commuting difference 
operators.
              Particular attention will be paid to connection of this 
theory with the
              Hitchin system which is central in modern theory of 
the moduli space of
              vector bundles over algebraic curve.

Recent progress in understanding
              non-perturbative structures in 
supersymmetric gauge theories has shed new
              insight upon the role of 
integrable structures in modern theoretical
              physics.
The nineteenth century saw many aspects of geometry and
              analysis,
particularly the development of Abelian functions, drawn together in
              
the study of integrable systems. The works of Jacobi, Abel, Riemann 
and
              Weierstrass enabled a number of important integrable
problems of mechanics and
              physics to be solved. The modern discovery of 
soliton theory has led to a
              renewed interest to the theory of integrable 
systems. Nonlinear phenomena
              could now be treated, and the ever-growing 
interest in this theory is
              connected with the fact that it is applicable to 
equations which possess a
              remarkable universality property. They arise in the
description of the most
              diverse phenomena in plasma physics, the theory of
elementary particles, the
              theory of superconductivity and in nonlinear optics.
Geometry and algebraic
              geometry, functional equations and special functions,
Lie algebras and groups
              all come together in their study. This ubiquity of 
integrable systems
              together with the beautiful structures that underly them 
has been confirmed
              recently by discovery of  unexpected relations between the 
Whitham
              perturbation theory of soliton equations developed in earlier works 
of the
              author and the Riemann mapping theorem. It seems urgent to develop 
methods
              which can identify various Whitham hierarchies with conformal maps 
for more
              general types of domains. A range of possible applications
include flows in
              porous media, fundamental theory of  pattern formation.

