Title       : Dissertation Research: Relative Effects of Differential Seed and Seedling
               Predation by Crabs on Tropical Forest Composition and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0104791

Award Number: 0104791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7674               (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Ronald Carroll   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Relative Effects of Differential Seed and
              Seedling Predation by Crabs on Tropical Forest Composition and
              Structure

0104791- Carroll.  Ecologists have debated for more than a century
              in the theoretical literature over the predominant mechanisms that structure
              plant communities over a heterogeneous landscape.  Proposed mechanisms include
              plant response to variable environmental conditions, differential seed
              dispersal, differential competitive abilities among plant species, and
              differential seed predation.  There have been few empirical comparative studies
              that investigate the relative importance of these proposed hypotheses. 
              Recently, several studies have debated the significance of differential
              herbivory versus plant response to environmental conditions on observed
              mangrove community shifts, yet no comparable investigations have been conducted
              in terrestrial forests.  Preliminary data from a secondary coastal forest in
              Costa Rica suggests that herbivorous land crabs and terrestrial hermit crabs
              have the ability to induce the shifts in forest community structure observed in
              tropical coastal forests. Through the use of vegetation analyses, seed traps,
              crab exclosures and controls, and manipulations of environmental conditions,
              this dissertation research will determine the relative effect of seed and
              seedling predation pressure by crabs on the patterns of coastal forest
              regeneration.  The results of this study will be of practical management use in
              coastal forest conservation efforts throughout the tropics.  Researcher
              collaborations with faculty and students of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma
              of Costa Rica fosters an essential working relationship among native Costa
              Ricans and the Cabo Blanco Absolute Reserve that is viewed as the model of
              conservation by their Park Service.

