Title       : U.S. National Committee for CODATA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0104236

Award Number: 0104236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Uhlir puhlir@nas.edu  (Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1679      INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION ACT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Academy of Sciences will undertake a broad range of activities to
              generate advice for and provide information to the National Science Foundation
              and the U.S. scientific community regarding a wide range of issues dealing with
              the national and international management and exchange of data.  These
              activities will include national and international conferences, symposia and
              workshops on data policy, management and exchange issues. The USNC will assure
              that U.S. interests in database issues are represented effectively in the
              CODATA Committee and other relevant fora.  Data management and policy issues
              are at the forefront of those confronting the conduct of basic research at both
              the national and international level.  In part as a result of series of legal
              decisions, many countries, including the United States, have adopted or are
              considering adopting legislation to assign a legal "right", akin to copyright,
              to those who generate databases.  Such a right would enable those who generate
              databases to not distribute them, to sell them, to restrict their use, or to
              apply some combination of these restrictions. Basic research, which depends on
              the full and open exchange of scientific data, could be severely impacted if a
              new general "right" were not to provide for the full and open exchange of data
              for scientific purposes, especially basic research sources. The budgets of
              agencies which fund research might also be severely impacted if the scientists
              they sponsor were required to pay for all of the data they need from other
              sources, especially if the price were to include support for the full economic
              costs of acquisition of the data and possibly a profit as well. The USNC will
              also interact closely with its counterpart organizations in other countries,
              especially to transmit to them information regarding U.S. interests and
              concerns and will conduct outreach activities in the U.S. and abroad.
