Title       : Statistical Distances, Estimating Functions, and Mixture Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0104443

Award Number: 0104443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce G. Lindsay bgl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator and his colleagues study important topics in three
              major areas of statistics. The work on statistical distances, the first area,
              is focused on developing understanding of distances as measures of loss when
              one is building a statistical model. Important considerations in developing
              this theory include the tradeoff between statistical sensitivity and robustness
              of interpretation. The results have wide implications in model building. The
              research on estimating equations, area two, targets the development of the
              generalized method of moment methodology into wider statistical contexts than
              current knowledge allows. A second topic in this area concerns the
              reconciliation of fixed and random effects modeling. The final area is mixture
              models, where a number of important applications in bioinformatics are leading
              to demands for improved mixture model tools.

This research work focuses on
              both theoretical and applied problems. Statistics has always relied heavily on
              the building of appropriate statistical models. The use of computational power
              has allowed statisticians to handle larger and larger data sets with
              increasingly sophisticated models.  In the process, there is increased need for
              understanding the extent to which a simplified but restrictive model might be a
              very good description of reality without being strictly correct; this is the
              basis for the investigation of statistical distances. Although theoretical in
              nature, this has implications throughout statistics and could lead to a more
              meaningful use of models. A second investigation is focused on a class of
              statistical methods that allow one to reduce the restrictiveness of model
              building assumptions; the goal is to expand the range of applicability of these
              methods. There are many potential applications in social sciences and medicine.
              The final subject of investigation springs from an increased demand for
              statistical tools in the area of biology, especially in genomic research; the
              principal investigator is applying expertise in his modeling area to three
              different applications. In each application the statistical model used, the
              mixture model, has direct scientific meaning as a tool for measuring the
              heterogeneity in biological processes.
