Title       : Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0104399

Award Number: 0104399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ceperley ceperley@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0104399
Ceperley
The long range goal of this research program is to develop
              practical, efficient theoretical methods to accurately predict the properties
              of many-electron systems.  The methods and computational algorithms so
              generated can be applied to important idealized systems, such as the
              homogeneous electron gas, as well as to realistic problems in condensed matter.
               The rapid development of these computational quantum methods will have a
              qualitative impact upon the course of many fields of science including physics,
              materials science, chemistry and even biology.

The approach is a combination
              of quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations and density functional theory (DFT). 
              QMC can provide exact results for some many-body problems, the principle goal
              is to extend the range of problems for which the method can be applied.  On the
              other hand, DFT is the only current method feasible for accurate large-scale
              simulations of real systems.  The research concerns both the basic theory, as
              well as tests of approximate forms using QMC. 

Continued development of QMC
              methods, with emphasis upon more accurate wavefunctions and improved boundary
              conditions and upon developing new methods able to use much larger
              computational facilities will be undertaken.  Applications of QMC methods to
              physical problems will include nanoscale quantum devices and two-dimensional
              electron systems in the presence of disorder, where there is much experimental
              and theoretical controversy concerning the possible metal-insulator transition.
               General theoretical methods for studying dielectric polarization and
              functionals in correlated systems will be developed.  We will extend the
              lattice model calculations to continuum systems that can serve as the basis for
              improved universal density-polarization functionals.  We will also continue
              work started recently using time-dependent DFT to predict excitation spectra of
              materials, nanostructures and quantum dots.  The first system studied will be
              silicon clusters, where intense blue light emission has been recently
              discovered.  A long range goal is to develop both many-body methods and
              imporved functionals that can go beyond DFT approximations for ground state
              energies and excitation spectra.
%%%
The long range goal of this research
              program is to develop practical, efficient theoretical methods to accurately
              predict the properties of many-electron systems.  The methods and computational
              algorithms so generated can be applied to important idealized systems, such as
              the homogeneous electron gas, as well as to realistic problems in condensed
              matter.  The rapid development of these computational quantum methods will have
              a qualitative impact upon the course of many fields of science including
              physics, materials science, chemistry and even biology.
***

