Title       : The Late Pleistocene through Recent Peoples of Northeast Africa: Measures of
               Affinity based on Dental Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0104731

Award Number: 0104731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Irish ffjdi@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Who were the post-Pleistocene peoples of Egypt, Nubia, and Africa's Horn? How
              closely related were they? Were they native to northeast Africa, immigrants, or
              both? Is there continuity with recent peoples? These, and other long-standing
              questions have been asked by countless African researchers. 

Yet, despite
              many archaeological and a lesser number of biological-based studies,
              particularly among Dynastic populations, there has been little agreement
              regarding the answers. The proposed project is intended to build upon these
              previous studies and, specifically, several dental investigations by J Irish --
              in which 36 dental traits in samples throughout North and sub-Saharan Africa
              (n= 1,625 individuals) were compared. The objectives of the new project are to
              address the more specific, region-oriented questions in three ways. First, up
              to 5,000 dentitions in a cross-section of northeast Africans (and comparative
              West Asian and European samples), will be examined for the same traits, plus 32
              dental measurements. This work will be done to discern collective traits across
              time/space beyond what little is known, and identify trends in occurrence.
              Second, those groups most dentally alike will be identified using inferential
              statistics. It is widely held that dental similarity approximates genetic
              relatedness. These numerically-derived affinities can then test existing
              hypotheses concerning population origins, relationships, migration, and
              microevolution. 
Previously, such hypotheses were derived and tested via
              artifactual evidence, or biological data subject to environmental and
              methodological bias. Dental anthropology is a proven field that minimizes these
              factors. Third, the findings will be contrasted with published genetic,
              linguistic, cultural, and other data to test for concordance among methods.
              These objectives, when met, will provide a better understanding of diachronic
              population history in a region that fostered some of the greatest civilizations
              the world has ever known.  

