Title       : Homological algebra of quantum invariants in dimension four
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a0104139

Award Number: 0104139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail G. Khovanov mikhail@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0104139
Mikhail G. Khovanov

The project aims to construct quantum
              invariants of 
4-dimensional objects.  It is based on the author's recent
              
discovery of a doubly-graded cohomology theory of links in 
the 3-sphere.
              The Euler characteristic of the cohomology 
groups is equal to the Jones
              polynomial.  We would like to 
extend this theory to link cobordisms. The
              invariant of a 
cobordism will be a homomorphism between cohomology groups
              
assigned to the boundaries of the cobordism. Furthermore, 
the theory should
              extend to tangles and tangle cobordisms. 
To a tangle we'll associate a
              functor between triangulated 
categories associated to the boundaries of the
              tangle, and 
to a tangle cobordism a natural transformation between functors.
              
These triangulated categories will be related to highest weight
categories
              of modules over simple Lie algebras, as well as 
categories of modules over
              certain Frobenius algebras, such 
as cyclotomic Hecke algebras. In addition,
              we will look for 
cohomology theories lifts of other quantum invariants of
              links 
and 3-manifolds, including the Alexander and HOMFLY polynomials 
and
              Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants.   

An n-dimensional manifold is an
              object that locally looks 
like an n-dimensional space. A circle can be
              approximated by 
a tangent line in the neighbourhood of a point, and is a
              
one-dimensional manifold (n-manifold, for short). The global 
structure
              distinguishes the circle from the line, though. 
Surfaces provide examples of
              two-manifolds.  It turns out that 
one and two-manifolds are easy to classify,
              while in higher 
dimensions classification is hard. It is a theorem that 
in
              dimensions greater than three there can be no satisfactory classification, and
              topologists seem to be fairly close to 
finding one for three-manifolds. Given
              a pair of manifolds, 
it is a tough question to decide whether or not they are
              
isomorphic. One approach is to extract some tangible invariant 
out of a
              manifold, such as a number, or a polynomial, and then 
compare these numbers.
              Most of the times the numbers are different 
and tell us that the manifolds
              are different, too. Dimension 
three is special in that there is a wealth of
              such invariants. 
These invariants, moreover, link three-manifold topology
              with 
deep algebraic structures. There are indications that the 
invariants
              can be lifted to the next dimension, to invariants 
of four-manifolds, and my
              goal is to find them and compare to 
analytical invariants of 4-manifolds that
              arise from solutions of 
certain partial differential equations. 



