Title       : A Study of Several Stochastic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0104232

Award Number: 0104232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64119              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vlada Limic limic@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator plans to work on several topics in probability
              theory.  The aim of the first project is to study transience/recurrence
              behavior of edge reinforced random walks on graphs.  The purpose of the second
              project is to characterize stability and optimality of batch service policies
              for queueing systems.  The third project is a rigorous study of the NK model of
              protein evolution. The main interest here is in determining the exact or
              asymptotic behavior of various quantities in the corresponding fitness
              landscape.  The fourth project involves a sequence of interacting Moran model
              particle systems and their scaling limit, the interacting Fisher-Wright
              diffusions.  The goal here is to develop tools and techniques that will help
              one answer questions about fine properties of the interacting
              diffusions.

Random processes with reinforcements appear in models of
              biological systems.  A particle performing an edge reinforced random walk on a
              graph has memory and prefers to traverse edges that were traversed before.  It
              is known that some reinforced random walks exhibit behavior very different from
              that of the classical random walks without memory.  The aim of the first
              project is to show that edge reinforced walks for which each edge is reinforced
              only once, by a fixed amount, are not so different from the classical random
              walks.  The batch service queueing system is a model of a retail store delivery
              van, or a terminal in a computer network which downloads software packages. 
              The purpose of the second project is to describe a large class of batch service
              policies that keep the queueing system stable, and to find easy to implement
              policies in this class, that are close to optimal with respect to a specific
              cost function.  The NK model is an idealization of protein evolution in the
              presence of selection.  The interacting Moran models represent a subdivided
              population with a resampling mechanism within each subpopulation, and migration
              of individuals to neighboring subpopulations. The properties of both models are
              of interest to geneticists. 

