Title       : Studies on Pseudo-holomorphic Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a0104331

Award Number: 0104331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Parker parker@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0104331

This project involves analytic aspects of the
              theory of 
pseudo-holomorphic curves.  The aim is to develop
effective
              methods for computing Gromov-Witten invariants of 
symplectic manifolds and
              enumerative invariants of algebraic 
manifolds. This work builds on the P.I.'s
              recent work with E. Ionel 
on the `sympletic sum formula' for GW invariants.
              The first project   
involves extending the sum formula to the `modified  GW
              invariants' 
recently defined by the P.I.'s student Junho Lee. This would make
              the 
formula applicable to  K\"ahler surfaces with $p_g>0$ where there
              are
important  conjectures that are not currently approachable by GW
methods.
              The second project is a symplectic approach to understanding 
physicists'
              predictions about the generating functions which count 
curves in Calabi-Yau
              3-folds. The goal is to prove the predicted 
formulas by adapting some
              analytic methods C. Taubes  developed to relate 
the Seiberg-Witten and Gromov
              invariants. The last two projects also relate 
to the sympletic sum formula. 
              One seeks  formulas  expressing the 
relative Gromov-Witten invariants of a
              pair $(X,V)$ in terms of the
usual GW invariants and the descendant classes of
              $X$ and $V$.  The 
other proposes  extending the sum formula to a more general
              type of 
symplectic sum which occurs in algebraic geometry when one considers
              
projective linear systems.


One of the most basic problems in mathematics
              is to determine the 
solutions of a system of polynomial equations, and an
              important first 
step toward that goal is to determine the NUMBER of
              solutions.  There 
is an explicit formula for the number of simultaneous
              solutions of a 
set of n  polynomials in n variables.  One can then ask for
              the 
number of  solutions for n  polynomials in n-1 variables.  In this 
case
              there is a free parameter, so the locus of solutions will be a 
union of
              curves.  How many?  This question has been systematically 
studied for 100
              years, but only a few  special cases
were solved.   Then, around 1990, it was
              realized that these problems 
can be translated into symplectic geometry, and
              then tackeled using 
the powerful machinery of mathematical gauge theory.
              (Gauge theory, 
originally part of physics, has been the focus of many very
              fruitful 
interactions between mathematicians and physicists  over the past
              
twenty years; it includes Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten theory, and 
String
              theory).  This  `Gromov-Witten invariant' approach led quickly 
to formulas
              answering some of the original enumerative problems, and 
there are clear
              indications that there are more to be discovered. 
This project is  aimed
              toward further developing the symplectic gauge 
theory in order to
              produce
additional general formulas and to meld these formulas into a coherent
              theory.

