Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Unconventional Heavy Fermion Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0104240

Award Number: 0104240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bohdan Andraka andraka@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will support research focused on fundamental
              problems of strongly correlated 4f- and 5f-electron systems. The physical
              properties of this large class of systems challenge conventional theories of
              condensed matter based on a Fermi liquid theory. The aim of the proposed
              research is to; 1) investigate the non-Fermi liquid behavior of nearly magnetic
              heavy fermion metals; 2) investigate the role of crystal structure, crystalline
              and magnetic anisotropy in heavy fermions; 3) test various theoretical models;
              and 4) search for new materials with exotic properties.  The project will
              involve both the synthesis and characterization of heavy fermion materials. 
              Experimental techniques employed in this research will include transport,
              thermodynamic, and magnetic probes in a wide range of temperatures and magnetic
              fields, using the facilities of National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and the
              Microkelvin Laboratory, aided by international collaborations.  The project
              addresses the widely recognized national shortage of qualified personnel able
              to synthesize novel materials of research quality by expanding graduate
              training in materials synthesis and characterization. Students involved in this
              project will receive training in synthesis and fundamental measurement
              techniques.  They will be prepared for careers in fundamental and/or applied
              research.
%%%
Materials containing Lanthanum and the Actinide elements have
              been the source of many recent fundamental discoveries that have challenged our
              current understanding of matter.  Due to strong electron correlations, these
              heavy fermion materials exhibit many exotic properties.  They show extreme
              sensitivity to temperature, magnetic field, pressure, and frequency.  Thus they
              may be a source of important technological applications. This individual
              investigator award will support a project focused on searching for new exotic
              states of matter as well as new heavy fermion materials, in addition it will
              test several theoretical models of these interesting materials.  Samples
              prepared in-house, or obtained through international collaborations, will be
              studied by electric, magnetic, and thermal probes using state-of-the art
              facilities of National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and Microkelvin
              Laboratory. This project will address the widely recognized national shortage
              of qualified personnel able to synthesize novel materials of research quality
              by expanding graduate training in materials synthesis and characterization.
              Students involved in this project will receive experience in working at
              national facilities as well as in international collaborations. This training
              will prepare them for careers in fundamental and/or applied research.
***

