Title       : Polishing Glass-Ceramics with Ceria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0104198

Award Number: 0104198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Barry Carter carter@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dramatic increases in data-storage capacity have changed how we use computers.
              Ceramic platters offer significant advantages over current Aluminum-based
              technology. They are more rigid, while still light, and can be rotated faster,
              or simply moved, without increased fluctuations normal to the platter that
              would cause a head crash and drive failure. Glass platters are now in
              production but glass-ceramic platters would offer even greater performance.
              Polishing ceramic platters is difficult because the material is hard, and in
              the case of glass-ceramics, it is chemically inhomogeneous. 
              Chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) involves fracturing the material at the
              surface while not creating subsurface damage and smoothing the surface to
              produce a finish that is 100 times smoother than the size of the particles in
              the polishing medium. Ceria currently give the best results when polishing
              glass, not because it is particularly hard, but because it gives the best
              combination of hardness and chemistry. It is known that the chemistry at the
              point of contact is a critical factor-ceria polishing always involves water. 
              Methods for polishing glass-ceramics are still being developed with ceria being
              the primary candidate. In this program, students work with cutting-edge
              techniques including electron microscopy, atomic-force microscopy and
              spectroscopy at the near-atomic scale. They apply their training in chemistry
              and mechanics to today's critical technology.

Actually, there are many
              aspects of device fabrication which involve producing a smooth flat surface.
              For example, CMP is also used to planarize layers while building multilayer
              chips and to prepare the ends of optical fibers for optimizing
              interconnections. In the new high-speed hard-drives, the glass platters which
              support the magnetic storage media must be polished so flat that bumps are less
              than 10's of atoms high on a three-inch disk; compare this to smoothing the USA
              so no hill is higher than a few inches! Polishing has developed as an art but
              we need now to understand the science and to train students in both the art and
              the science. Our program addresses two problems: a lack of basic knowledge and
              the shortage of trained scientists who understand the art and science of CMP.
              This project shows students in materials science why they need those basic
              courses in chemistry, mechanical engineering and electrical engineering and how
              these disciplines combine in an industrial setting, not just for this project
              but for many applications of CMP. Our interdisciplinary research program brings
              together a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students from different
              disciplines. The students meet our industrial colleagues, and visit the
              companies working with this technology. Skilled scientists who understand CMP
              and can fuller utilize the state-of-the-art instrumentation are a national need
              in the industrial workplace.

