Title       : Dissertation Research: Species Recognition in Brood Parasites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0104333

Award Number: 0104333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9551               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Sherman pws6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              TITLE:  Dissertation Research: Species Recognition in Brood Parasites 
FACULTY
              SPONSOR:  Paul W. Sherman 
STUDENT:  Mark E. Hauber 

Most birds and mammals
              are reared among family members. Therefore, learning the characteristics of
              siblings and parents results in appropriate species recognition. Because brood
              parasites lay their eggs in nests of other birds, imprinting on foster parents
              would lead their young to misidentify their own species. How does recognition
              develop in parasites? This project investigates species recognition in the
              brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater), a common brood parasitic bird of North
              America. By combining continuous observations at naturally parasitized nests,
              selective removals of female parasites to limit early social experience of
              fledgling cowbirds, DNA parentage analyses, playbacks of conspecific
              vocalizations throughout parasitic offspring development, and plumage
              manipulations of hand-reared juveniles, this study evaluates the relative
              importance of social learning and self-referent phenotype matching in the
              development of cowbird species recognition. This study will be informative for
              research on species-, kin-, and mate-recognition mechanisms in general. In
              addition, because species recognition is a poorly known aspect of the biology
              of most host-parasite systems, findings from this work will also increase our
              understanding of host- and self-recognition. 


