Title       : Anthropoid Origins Symposium (New)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0104892

Award Number: 0104892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16785              (Estimated)
Investigator: Callum F. Ross cross@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Kay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will underwrite a symposium organized to bring together scientists
              with divergent opinions on questions surrounding the origins of anthropoids,
              the group of primates including monkeys, apes and humans.   The participants
              will address such questions as: How are anthropoids related to other primates? 
              Where and when did the group originate? What functional and adaptive
              innovations characterize anthropoids today? What is the adaptive significance
              and evolutionary history of these innovations? 

This is an exciting time for
              those interested in deepening our knowledge of primate evolution.  Newly
              recovered middle and late Eocene primates from Asia and Africa have been
              variously interpreted as supporting competing hypotheses regarding anthropoid
              relationships and biogeographic origins. Equally divergent views exist
              concerning the antiquity of the major groups of living anthropoids-catarrhines
              and platyrrhines (Old World and New World Monkeys). There is an improved
              understanding of function and adaptation in the visual system, brain, and
              feeding apparatus, key anatomical systems where distinctive anthropoid features
              are concentrated. New methods for estimating visual acuity and activity
              patterns in fossil primates are providing insights into the evolution of the
              visual system. The rapid accumulation of information on color vision in
              primates, including new genetic evidence of possible trichromacy in
              strepsirrhines, and new behavioral data on the benefits of color vision, makes
              this an exciting time to evaluate the role of chromatic perception in
              anthropoid evolution. Research into the primate visual system by
              neuroscientists has generated a plethora of important data in recent years,
              making this an ideal time to bring these researchers together with
              anthropologists. Primate behaviorists and ecologists are developing new models
              to explain the origins of group living in primates and anthropoids provide an
              excellent test of these ideas. The fossil record of early anthropoids allows
              testing of these models, revealing novel trait combinations that can provide
              critical falsification of these models and suggest the sequence in which
              current trait associations have evolved.  Molecular approaches continue to aid
              in clarifying our understanding of the timing and tempo of evolutionary
              change.

The objective is to bring together some of the key researchers in
              these fields to discuss their views, to enhance intellectual exchanges among
              paleontologists and neontologists who study the visual and masticatory systems,
              molecular systematics, and phylogenetic analysis as applied to the study of
              adaptation.



