Title       : Dissertation Research: The Origin and Spread of Grass-dominated Ecosystems
               during the Late Tertiary of North America and How it Relates to the Evolution
               of Hypsodonty in Ungulates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0104975

Award Number: 0104975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8967               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nan Crystal Arens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  	DEB-1-0104975
PI:		N. C. Arens & C. Stromberg

Dissertation
              Research:  The origin and spread of grass-dominated ecosystems during the late
              Tertiary of North America and how it relates to the evolution of hypsodonty in
              ungulates.

During the Miocene (18-15 million years ago), animals such as
              horses, camels, and rhinos independently evolved traits interpreted as
              adaptations to grasslands.  These traits included high-crowned cheek teeth for
              processing coarse food and long legs for running.  If these traits are truely
              adaptations, one must show that the traits arose at the same time or soon after
              grasslands appeared.  This problem is difficult because plant fossils are
              absent in most places in North America where fossil animals are preserved.  In
              conjunction with other evidence, such as those derived from pollen or
              paleosols, the use of a new type of plant fossil - phytoliths - will allow this
              problem to be circumvented.  Phytoliths are microscopic silica bodies produced
              within the tissue of plants that allow the determination of life form (e.g.,
              grasses versus shrubs versus tree).  The proposed research will provide answers
              to three general questions.  First, does a detailed record of phytoliths exist
              in North America that can be used to reconstruct vegetation type associated
              with animal fossils?  Second, when and where do grasslands first appear in the
              Great Plains and how do they spread?  Third, does the change to grass-dominated
              ecosystems happen before, coincident with, or after the evolution of animal
              traits associated with life in grasslands?

