Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Systematics and Biogeography of Hawaiian
               Dryopteris (Dryopteridaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0104962

Award Number: 0104962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9814               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Ranker Thomas.Ranker@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Species boundaries, evolutionary relationships, and the historical biogeography
              of Hawaiian members of the fern genus Dryopteris (Dryopteridaceae) will be
              explored using both DNA sequence data and morphological data.  Dryopteris is a
              cosmopolitan genus comprised of approximately 250 species. Nine to 16 endemic
              species and one non-endemic species of  Dryopteris occur in the Hawaiian
              Islands.   Species boundaries, as delimited by past morphological studies, are
              unclear.  This research will use both molecules and morphology to address
              objectively the issue of species delimitations.  Although confusion about
              numbers of species exist, it appears that the species diversity observed in
              Hawaii was a result of multiple, successful colonization events to the Hawaiian
              Islands.  This study aims to determine the number of Dryopteris species present
              in Hawaii, the evolutionary relationships among those species, and
              biogeographical origins of Hawaiian Dryopteris.  
	Although several
              phylogenetic and biogeographical studies have been performed for flowering
              plants in Hawaii, to date there are no published phylogenies for any
              pteridophyte group occurring in Hawaii.  Pteridophytes make up about 1/5 of the
              native vascular plant species in Hawaii and this lack of phylogenetic
              information about pteridophytes represents a large gap in our understanding of
              the evolution of the Hawaiian flora.  Additionally, the proposed research is of
              critical importance to the study of evolution on islands in general, and on the
              Hawaiian Islands in particular, because we will elucidate the phylogenetic and
              biogeographical history of a group of endemic species that probably represents
              multiple independent colonizations of the archipelago.  Our results will help
              elucidate biogeographical processes that may contribute significantly to the
              biological diversity of islands.

