Title       : Determination of the electron neutrino rest mass via tritium decay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0104100

Award Number: 0104100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manfred Fink fink@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The experimental determination of the mass of the neutrinos (orantineutrinos) is
              a slow and increasingly more complex process. The electron antineutrinos are
              the favored object. They are produced during beta-decay, and electrons are
              ejected at the same time. Their properties link directly to the spin and mass
              of the escaping neutrino through fundamental conservation laws. The preferred
              beta decay source is tritium since the electrons have only 18.56 KeV energy at
              the endpoint of the beta spectrum. This is a value, which is technologically
              achievable even with meV resolution. However one is dealing with the endpoint
              of the beta spectrum, where the intensities of the electron fluxes per eV
              energy interval are down by 10 order of magnitudes. This is the quintessential
              problem for all experiments aimed at the direct determination of the neutrino
              mass. All neutrino rest mass experiments must include electron spectrometers
              with high resolution; ultralow dark count detectors, excellent calibration
              procedures, and superstabilities for all experimental parameters to collect
              data for very long times to cope with the statistical uncertainties.  A new
              effort is under way at the Physics Department of The University of Texas at
              Austin, in cooperation with the University of Nebraska, Brandeis University,
              Michigan Tech University, Pomona
College, and The University of Texas at
              Arlington. Our approach is based on a series of electrostatic electron
              analyzers, which are designed to record the beta electron energies with about 1
              eV resolution. The source is gaseous, molecular tritium at 30K. The detectors
              are easily accessible and can be shielded from unwanted cosmic radiation to 1
              dark count per day.  There is no magnetic field inside the whole apparatus.
              Furthermore we will use the gas cell as a target for electron diffraction in
              order to calibrate the voltages at the spectrometers with the de Broglie
              wavelenghts of electrons produced by a telefocus electron gun. This is possible
              since the bond length of T2 is very well known from Raman spectroscopy. The
              beam electrons will also give us laso the spectrometer function to about .2 eV
              resolution.  In summary, when all units work as designed our experiment will
              lead to a determination of the mass of the elctron antineutrino at the .5 eV
              level.


