Title       : Dissertation Research: Sexual Selection: Female Preference in the wild
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0104518

Award Number: 0104518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9840               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry R. Sinervo sinervo@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Studies of female preference in the wild. 
Barry R. Sinervo and Ryan
              Calsbeek

Females should be selective in their choice of mate, since females
              typically invest more in the production and/or care of offspring than do males.
              When there are a limited number of females available for mating, males should
              vie for access to females. Though abundant evidence supports the notion that
              female choice can profoundly affect the evolution of natural populations, there
              is little agreement regarding the mechanisms by which females benefit from
              mating selectively. Females may choose mates for direct benefits (territory
              quality, parental care, nuptial gifts), and/or indirect benefits (the
              contribution of good genes by the male). 
The relative importance of direct
              and indirect benefits will be tested in the side-blotched lizard, Uta
              stansburiana. In this lizard, males set up territories that vary greatly in the
              availability of thermal resources. Normally, males that control the best
              territory also are of large size for the following reason. Thermal resources
              are crucial for lizards, which obtain heat for maintaining high body
              temperature from the sun. High body temperature and activity promote high
              growth rate and body size. The thermal resources on a males territory are
              correlated with the amount of rock in the habitat. The mates vary in territory
              quality and in other physical attributes such as body size. To understand the
              importance of direct and indirect benefits, territory quality and body size
              will be experimentally uncoupled. 
Direct Benefits: Experimental manipulations
              of territory quality will be performed between pairs of neighboring males.
              After all territories are mapped in early spring, rock will be removed from the
              territories of large males and deposited on adjacent territories of their
              smaller male neighbors. This manipulation will effectively reverse the
              correlation of large male body-size and high-quality territories that is
              normally present in nature. Changes in the location of female territories will
              be measured as a function of changes in territory quality, which measures
              female preference for direct benefits of territory quality. Measuring female's
              reproductive success will test for the direct benefits accrued by females on
              high quality territories. Aspects of female reproductive success will include:
              the condition and survival of the female parent, numbers of offspring produced,
              size and condition of offpsring, subsequent growth and survival of offspring,
              The thermal properties nest sites where females lay eggs will also be
              measured.
Indirect Benefits: The indirect benefits of mate choice are
              associated with genes that a high quality mate passes on to the female's
              progeny. In this case, females would be expected to select large males which
              are likely to carry genes that might enhance progeny growth rate to maturity or
              perhaps survival. In this species, the female mates with many mates which can
              vary in male body size. In nature, DNA paternity methods will be used to
              determine the father of each progeny in the female's clutch. The performance of
              progeny from large and small males will be measured. In addition, females will
              be mated in the laboratory to large and small males and the performance of
              individual progeny will be followed after the progeny are released onto
              experimental plots in nature. Finally, mate choice trials will be carried out
              to assess whether females exhibit a strong preference for male body size.
The
              combination field experiments of territory quality and laboratory experiments
              will provide a strong test of the relative contribution of direct benefits of
              territory quality and indirect benefits of good genes for the growth and
              survival of the female's progeny. 

