Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Starburst Galaxies from the Local
               Group to the Hubble Deep Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0104349

Award Number: 0104349
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Zucker zucker@astro.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D, Zucker
	      Physics-Astronomy Building C-326
	      Seattle, WA  981951580    206/543-2922

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0104349
Zucker

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide twenty-four months of support to
              Dr. Daniel B. Zucker to do research with Dr. Eva Grebel at Max-Planck-Institut
              fur Astronomie in Heidelberg (MPIA), Germany on starburst galaxies from the
              local group to the Hubble Deep Field.  Support for this project is provided by
              NSF's Math and Physical Science Directorate's Office of Multipdisciplinary
              Activities.
Starburts - intense episodes of star formation - have been
              observed within our own galaxy and in other nearby galaxies.  Observations of
              high-redshift galaxies suggest that local starbursts are reasonable analogs of
              the star formation modes in their more distant cousins.  An understanding of
              the physical properties of nearby starbursts, covering a range of
              metallicities, is therefore essential for interpreting data from galaxies at
              earlier epochs.  During this project, the PI will work to construct a coherent
              database of the observational and derived physical parameters of nearby dwarf
              starburst galaxies, including existing data as well as new observations, and to
              apply this database to a study of starburst galaxies at moderate to high
              redshift.
At MPIA, the PI will have access to ground-based telescopes with
              state-of-the-art optical and infrared instruments which are critical to this
              research.  Dr. Grebel has extensive experience working on stellar populations
              and the dynamics of nearby galaxies.

