Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution and Development of Left-Right Asymmetry in
               Echinoderms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0104864

Award Number: 0104864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9724               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Wray gwray@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dissertation Research: Evolution and Development of Left-Right Asymmetry in
              Echinoderms

Gregory Wray and Margaret Pizer

One of the most active areas
              of research in evolutionary biology today concerns the origin of the unique
              morphological features seen in the different animal phyla. The members of the
              phylum Echinodermata (sea urchins, sea stars, sea cucumbers and their
              relatives) exhibit a number of features whose evolutionary origin has been the
              topic of extensive speculation among biologists for over a century. Perhaps the
              most striking of these characteristics involve echinoderm body symmetry.
              Echinoderm larvae are bilaterally symmetrical, while the adults show five-fold
              radial symmetry. The transition between these very different body symmetries
              occurs when adult structures develop on the left side of the larva, producing a
              left-right asymmetrical intermediate stage. Several scenarios have been
              proposed to explain the developmental transitions from bilateral symmetry to
              left-right asymmetry to pentaradial symmetry that occur during the echinoderm
              life cycle, but little testing of the predictions of these theories has been
              done using developmental data. 

This project involves a systematic study of
              the development of adult structures in echinoderms. The goals of this study are
              to investigate 1) the evolution of left-right asymmetry within echinoderms and
              2) the developmental mechanism of left-right asymmetry in echinoderms and the
              evolutionary origin of this mechanism. To achieve these goals a variety of
              embryological techniques will be used, and results will be compared between
              different groups of echinoderms and between echinoderms and their relatives. A
              detailed study of the evolution and development of left-right asymmetry will
              result in a better understanding of the origin and evolution of echinoderm
              morphology. In addition, this study will provide insights into the evolution
              and development of left-right asymmetry in other phyla of animals and the
              evolution of metamorphosis in other marine invertebrates. 

