Title       : A UV-LIGA Microfabricated Electromagnetic Power Relay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a0104327

Award Number: 0104327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wanjun Wang wang@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
Most micro-sized relays (switches) currently on the market or reported in the
              literature
are solid-state devices made using semiconductor technology, with
              silicon the predominant
material. Such devices are not best suited for
              applications that require large power
capability because they typically have
              low current capacity, low off-resistance, high
on-resistance, high power
              consumption, and low dielectric strength. In recent years, the
fast-evolving
              technology of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) has opened up
              new
opportunities for microfabricating microelectromechanical switches.
              However, most of the
MEMS relays are based on silicon fabrication and can not
              be used for power applications.

We propose to design, analyze (model and
              simulate), microfabricate, and test a new type
of micro-relays using
              electromagnetic actuation. These relays should have the
              following
characteristics: fast switching speed, high power capacity, high
              off-resistance
(completely disconnected), lower on-resistance, and low power
              consumption and heat
generation. Some preliminary study has been conducted and
              promising results have been
obtained on the proposed research work.

The
              proposed micro-relays will be fabricated with UV-LIGA (based on UV
              lithography)
microfabrication technologies. UV-LIGA is based on thick resist
              (SU-8) and optical
lithography, provides slightly lower quality, much shorter
              time span for development and
fabrication, and therefore much lower cost. The
              LIGA processes provide great potential for
building microstructures from a
              broad selection of materials. Any metals or alloys that
can be electroplated
              could be used as a potential candidate material for three-dimensional
MEMS
              structural components. The combination of a broad material selection and
              the
capability of making high aspect ratio microstructures make the technology
              best suited for
fabricating microelectromechanical relays that can be used in,
              but not limited to, the
applications of high power capacity. For example, good
              spring materials like
beryllium-copper, and good electrically conducting
              materials including copper and gold can
all be electroplated. With improved
              switching time, the relays may also be used for series
sampling with low
              feedthroughs. Compared with the commonly used electrostatic actuation,
the
              proposed electromagnetic actuation has several advantages: stronger actuation
              force
and potentially higher power capacity, lower possibility of
              electrostatic sparks

