Title       : Covalently Cross-Linked Coordination Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0104267

Award Number: 0104267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Lee sl137@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to adapt recent advances in crystal engineering for
              the preparation of covalently cross-linked coordination crystals, materials
              potentially useful in separations and ion conduction. We use a template
              methodology. We synthesize rigid nanoscale organic molecules which are then
              initially assembled in the solid state via labile organic-ligand-to-metal
              coordination-bonds. In the second step we introduce guest molecules without
              altering the host crystal structure. These guest molecules cross-link the
              original organic molecules to each other. In this way, we are able to access a
              new regime of organic solids viz., crystalline multi-dimensional covalently
              bonded organic solids. Such materials will be chemically and physically more
              robust than existing organic materials. This research program is carried out
              together with graduate and undergraduate students who receive state-of-the-art
              training in crystal engineering. The fundamentals of two different fields,
              organic reaction methodology and solid state chemistry, are applied in the
              design of useful crystalline materials. 

The next generation of solid state
              devices will require materials that combine both the functional specificity of
              typical organic compounds plus the global architecture of traditional inorganic
              solids. In this project methodologies are developed for designing routes to
              these materials in which the organic and inorganic portions are joined together
              at a molecular scale. An important synergism is needed here between organic,
              inorganic and solid state chemistry, a synergism which is vital to the
              successful design of useful devices. 

