Title       : Some Theoretical and Applied Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0104029

Award Number: 0104029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor M. Isakov isakov@twsuvm.uc.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project is dedicated to the study of uniqueness and stability in
some
              important inverse problems, in particular to identification of diffusion
              coefficients
and the speed of propagation for scalar partial differential
              equations and (Maxwell and
elasticity)systems.  Tools will be new Carleman
              type estimates and
interaction between control theory and inverse problems. 
              Also potential
theory is to be utilized in the further study of inverse
              gravimetry and
vorticity problems.  In case of many boundary measurements the
              effort will be
made to resolve the fundamental uniqueness question in the
              inverse
conductivity problem with the data on a part of the boundary by
              using
localized solutions of elliptic equations recently constructed by
              Greenleaf
and Uhlmann.  The PI will try to find cases of increased stability
              in inverse
problems, in particular obtaining Lipschitz conditional stability
              estimates for
recovery of nonlinear (space independent) elliptic and parabolic
              equations
from boundary measurements and quantifying increased stability
              in
prospecting by stationary waves with higher frequency.
	Applications of
              theoretical results will be in identification of volatility in options markets.
               We expect to develop a very efficient and reliable algorithm based on the
              modeling of volatility.  This problem is of fundamental importance for
              prediction of options markets and evaluation of economical stability from
              current market data.  Another expected application is recovery of the
              fundamental physical relations (in chemical equations, heat conduction) from
              experimental data.  This problem is of growing importance for contemporary
              engineering due to the discovery of new materials and the use of high
              temperatures.
The theory of inverse gravimetry combined with available models
              of vorticity is expected to achieve progress in evaluation of turbulence (e.g.
              past aircrafts) from distant measurements of pressure.  This problem has
              important implications for increasing capability of large airports.  The
              project will involve graduate students and stimulate their interest in
              mathematical problems of practical importance.

