Title       : Dissertation Research: Evaluating Habitat Change and its Influence on the
               Decline of Middle Eocene primate Communities in North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0104244

Award Number: 0104244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: D T. Rasmussen dtrasmus@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The North American Eocene primates have been the subjects of numerous
              scholarly studies regarding their adaptive diversity and phylogenetic
              relationships.  However, these primates show a distinctive pattern of community
              evolution during the Eocene epoch. During the early Eocene intervals,
              morphological diversity and species richness increased rapidly and by the
              middle Eocene, primate diversity was at its peak.  Yet, during the latter half
              of the middle Eocene, species numbers began to decrease, it seems, quite
              rapidly.  This decline of primate diversity in North America has been
              attributed to changes in climate and habitat.  While these hypotheses of
              climate and habitat change have been put forth, they have never been rigorously
              tested. The purpose of this research is to explore the factors that led to the
              decline in primate diversity during the later intervals of the middle Eocene. 
              Specifically, the researchers will evaluate the effects of habitat change on
              the decline of primate species during the latter intervals of the middle Eocene
              using a case study of North American western interior fossil localities.

The
              researchers will combine methods of habitat reconstruction with the assessment
              of changing primate community structure in order to investigate how local
              habitats have influenced the decline of primate communities in the western
              interior during the middle Eocene.  Analyses of North American Middle Eocene
              mammalian faunas and extant Neotropical mammalian faunas will be used to
              determine: 1) the habitat characterizations for middle Eocene western interior
              localities using ecological diversity analysis, 2) the structure of mammalian
              communities containing primates from the middle Eocene, in terms of these
              functional variables: diet, body size and locomotion (or substrate preference),
              and 3) the ecomorphological variation over time in primate and co-occurring
              arboreal mammal communities in relationship to the habitats in which they are
              found.

