Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Worker Nepotism During Queen Combat in Honey Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0104929

Award Number: 0104929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Seeley tds5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Gilley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Worker nepotism during queen combat in honey
              bees

Principal Investigator (thesis advisor):  Thomas D. Seeley
Doctoral
              Studies Graduate Student:  David C. Gilley


Nepotism is a widespread
              phenomenon in social animals, yet there is little evidence of it within the
              highly cooperative societies of insects, such as honey bees.  Evolutionary
              theory predicts that the workers in honey bee colonies should show nepotism
              when there are multiple queens in a colony and they are fighting to the death
              to determine who will be the colony's next queen.  Each worker has the
              opportunity to help a full-sister queen (with whom the worker shares three
              quarters of her genes) kill half-sister queens (with whom the worker shares
              only one quarter of her genes).  The graduate student will determine if honey
              bee workers behave nepotistically during queen fighting.  He will accomplish
              this goal in three steps (steps 1 and 2 have been completed).

1. He has
              observed queen fighting in a natural context and has determined that two worker
              behaviors, worker-queen aggression and queen-cell guarding, are most likely to
              be nepotistic.
2. He has labeled for individual identification the workers in
              five colonies and has recorded their worker-queen aggression and queen-cell
              guarding during subsequent queen fighting.
3. He will use DNA microsatellites
              to determine if the workers from step 2 more often aggressed half-sister queens
              and more often guarded full-sister cells.

Evidence of nepotism in honey bee
              colonies will show that even in highly cooperative societies nepotism will
              occur when the benefit of nepotism (a greater share of the colony's
              reproductive output) exceeds the cost of nepotism (a smaller total colony
              reproductive output).  

