Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Putting the Relationship Between Species Diversity and
               Ecosystem Functioning into Context.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0104768

Award Number: 0104768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9225               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Denno rd12@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1182,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With the rate of global species extinction rapidly increasing, there is an
              intensifying debate among scientists as to whether or not a high diversity of
              species is required to maintain ecological processes that are important for the
              functioning of ecosystems (processes like primary productivity, decomposition,
              and the cycling of nutrients). Limited evidence suggests that the certain types
              of ecosystems may require more species than others. For example, recent
              experimental work has led to the hypothesis that decreasing species diversity
              in ecosystems characterized by periodic disturbances leads to greater changes
              in ecological processes than decreasing species diversity in ecosystems less
              characterized by disturbance. The current research will test this hypothesis by
              relating species diversity to the rates of 3 ecological processes in stream
              ecosystems that differ in flooding regime (=disturbance metric). Using records
              from the US Geological Survey, 200 randomly selected streams from the eastern
              United States will be ranked according to their frequency and predictability of
              bank-full flooding. The 25 streams most characterized by flooding and 25
              streams least characterized by flooding will be sampled to determine the rates
              of three ecological processes (primary productivity, leaf decomposition, and
              removal of suspended particles from the water), and the diversity of species
              that influence these processes (primary producers, invertebrate detritivores,
              and invertebrate filter feeders). To test the hypothesis, the relationships
              between (1) algal diversity and primary productivity, (2) invertebrate
              detritivore diversity and leaf decomposition, and (3) invertebrate
              filter-feeder diversity and retention of suspended particulate matter, will be
              statistically compared between streams most and least characterized by
              flooding. The results will help determine whether species diversity is more or
              less important for conserving biological processes in ecosystems that are
              naturally or anthropogenically disturbed. This study will also provide much
              needed, basic information about the factors that potentially regulate the
              contribution of species diversity to ecosystem-level processes.  
