Title       : Flexible and Robust Coding of Images and Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0104800

Award Number: 0104800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve A. Riskin riskin@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Ladner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # 0104800
PI:  Eve Riskin
U of Washington

In the not-too-distant
              future, downloading images and video to a handheld device will be as
              commonplace as viewing an image on a Web page is today.  To enable this, high
              quality, flexible, and robust image and video compression algorithms will be
              required.  Recently, Group Testing for Wavelets (GTW), a new type of wavelet
              coder based on group testing was developed.  It offers competitive performance
              to the best compression coders available today and with further development,
              GTW could outperform them significantly.

This research involves developing
              new algorithms for robust and flexible coding of images and video. 
              Whereas
GTW is used as a motivating example, the research is applicable to
              many  compression algorithms and in many scenarios.  First, a set of problems
              related to GTW will be explored.  This includes applying GTW to wavelet packet
              decompositions and reduced complexity transforms; extending it to video and the
              new area of progressive geometry compression; and developing a theory for its
              strong performance.
Next, methods for applying forward error correction to
              compressed data in a progressive manner will be investigated.  Finally, 
              unequal frame expansions will be used to recover from packet loss.  The
              research will have practical use in many arenas including the Internet and
              wireless communications and will be included
in a new undergraduate course on
              data compression, to be taught jointly by the two principal
              investigators.



