Title       : Superconductivity and Nonequilibrium Transport in Mesoscopic Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0104178

Award Number: 0104178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman O. Birge birge@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0104178
Birge

This individual investigator award funds research in electron
              physics in mesoscopic metallic wires.  It exploits microfabrication tools to
              study processes in solids that occur on submicron length scales.  Four topics
              form the focus of the research;  1) the dephasing and energy exchange between
              electrons in small metallic wires below 1K; 2) spin-polarized transport in
              hybrid magnetic/non-magnetic systems; 3) electron transport in
              superconductor/non-superconductor (normal and magnetic) structures; and 4)
              growth of and electron transport in self-assembled rare-earth silicide
              nanowires.  In each case the planned experiments are aimed at increasing our
              understanding of observed phenomena, as well as searching for potential device
              applications.  The graduate students and post-docs working on all four of these
              projects learn a wide variety of technical skills associated with
              microfabrication.  Their research experience prepares them for jobs in
              academia, national labs, or industry.
%%%
A vast array of microfabrication
              tools has been developed to enable the semiconductor industry to fabricate
              integrated circuits with millions of transistors on a single chip.  Those same
              tools allow researchers to study the behavior of metals on length scales well
              below one micrometer, where many new strange phenomena occur.  For example,
              electrons in macroscopic metals at room temperature behave essentially like
              tennis balls, i.e. they obey the rules of classical physics.  In contrast,
              electrons in sub-micrometer samples at low temperature behave more like waves,
              i.e. they obey the rules of quantum mechanics.  This leads to many interesting
              properties, such as the fact that some metals become superconducting at low
              temperature, others are magnetic, and still others remain normal metals.  When
              different kinds of metals are put together, such as superconductors and normal
              metals, or ferromagnetic and nonmagnetic metals, new things happen.  This
              individual investigator award will fund research into the properties of such
              very small samples in order to unravel the sometimes-mysterious new behavior,
              as well as to search for possible new kinds of useful devices.  Students and
              post-doctoral research associates working in this area become familiar with the
              microfabrication tools used in industry, and they also learn how to think about
              the physics of very small devices.  Former students and post-docs from this
              research program now work in industry, government labs, and
              academia.
***




