Title       : Topics in Percolation and Particle Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0104278

Award Number: 0104278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Newman newman@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work under this grant is in the general area of Probability Theory with
              special emphasis on a number of stochastic models with interesting spatial
              structure.  One project, with C.D. Howard, concerns Euclidean first-passage
              percolation and aims to prove the nonexistence of doubly infinite geodesics and
              derive the values of two-dimensional fluctuation exponents that to date have
              only been proved using exact solution methods for models with special
              combinatorial structure.  Other collaborative projects are on interacting
              particle systems.  One is with L.R. Fontes, M. Isopi and K. Ravishankar and
              concerns aging, scaling limits and chaotic time dependence in such systems as
              voter models with random rates.  Another is with F. Camia, E. De Santis and
              others and concerns local transience, recurrence and absorption issues for
              zero-temperature stochastic Ising models, including those with random
              environments.

In the general area of probability theory, an increasingly
              important role is played by systems in which random effects are observed in the
              spatial structure rather than in, or in addition to, the behavior as a function
              of time (as in models of equity prices).  Some of these models, such as
              first-passage percolation, have arisen separately in multiple contexts, such as
              fluid flow in porous media (which is relevant for example to modelling of
              pollutant dispersion in aquifers), polymer structure and other parts of
              materials science.  The research under this grant concerns the mathematical
              phenomena that occur in several representative examples of such stochastic
              systems with interesting spatial structure.  Although the main focus is on
              rigorous mathematical results for simplified models, the long term goal is to
              provide new understanding and tools that will be useful for the more complex
              models used in applications. 

