Title       : Analysis and numerical computations of moving boundaries in fluid dynamics and
               materials science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0104350

Award Number: 0104350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Siegel misieg@impulse.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0104350
Siegel

This proposal is concerned with the analysis and numerical
              computation of 
moving boundaries in problems from fluid dynamics and
              materials 
science. The proposed problems are motivated by different
              applications 
but are remarkably similar from a mathematical point of view.
              One class 
of problems concerns the deformation and breakup via tip streaming
              of 
drops and bubbles in extensional flows.  Tip streaming refers to the
              
phenomenon where a bubble develops a deformed shape featuring 
cusplike
              ends, from which fine filaments or small bubbles are emitted into 
the
              exterior fluid. Experiments suggest that interfacial tension gradients 
such
              as those produced by surfactants are important for the onset of this
              
instability. The PI shall continue his development of an analytical theory
              
for the deformation and evolution of slender bubbles with surfactant,
              
focusing on the effects of soluble surfactant and its influence in tip
              
streaming. Mathematical difficulties in the analysis are associated with a
              
jump in boundary conditions at "stagnant caps" of surfactant on the free
              
surface.  Techniques employed to address these difficulties include
              
singular perturbation theory, theory of singular integral equations and
              
Riemann-Hilbert problems, and complex variable theory in moving 
boundary
              problems. The theory will be complemented by accurate 
numerical computations.
              The PI also proposes to investigate tip streaming 
and air entrainment in
              simple models of fiber coating, as well as cusp 
formation and a possible
              analogue of tip streaming which may occur 
during the diffusion controlled
              evolution of voids in a stressed solid. The 
mathematical statements of these
              free boundary problems are similar, and 
the PI expects that there will be a
              certain synergism between them.

Moving boundary problems, such as the
              evolution of waves on water, the 
propagation of flame fronts, or the growth
              of crystals, continue to 
challenge applied scientists and engineers. The PI
              proposes to study a 
class of fundamental moving boundary problems that are
              important in 
technological applications.  A common feature among the proposed
              
problems is that the moving interface develops very small-scale features,
              
such as cusps or very fine filaments, which can then greatly influence the
              
properties of the material or fluid. One application of the proposed work is
              
in the coating of materials (such as optical fibers) by pulling at high speed
              
through a liquid bath. Air filaments produced during the coating process
              
can snap off, leaving voids or other blemishes that adulterate the coating.
              
A second application is in the failure of materials.  Small pores present in
              
materials evolve (via atomic diffusion) when the material is stressed. Cusp
              
development in the pores can initiate cracks or dislocations (misalignment
              
of atoms); this has been implicated as a prominent cause of failure in
              
microelectronic circuits. Other applications include emulsion formation 
and
              mixing in multi-component fluid systems.

