Title       : Regularity and Singularity in Geometric Variational Problems and in Geometric
               Flow Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0104049

Award Number: 0104049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Simon lms@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
 Abstract for NSF proposal DMS 0104049 
         (Leon Simon \& Brian White
              joint P.I.'s)

Leon Simon plans to pursue various questions related to the
              structure
of the singular sets of minimal submanifolds and energy
              minimizing
maps, including the extension of his recent work on construction
              of
singular examples of minimal hypersurfaces.  A current aim is to
construct
              examples of minimal submanifolds with singular sets which
include ``gaps'' and
              other phenomena, the possibility of which is left
open by his previous general
              work on the structure of the singular
set.  He is also proposing to complete
              work on the singular set of
mod-2 currents to show that, in all dimensions,
              the top-dimensional
part of the singular set locally lies in a finite union
              of
continuously differentiable submanifolds.  Simon also proposes to
pursue
              several questions related to asymptotics on approach to
singularities.  Brian
              White plans to study how regularity properties
and singular structure for
              minimizing chains with coefficients in a
metric group depend on the group and
              its metric. This includes study
of immiscible fluid interfaces as a special
              case.  He also plans to
investigate singularities in the mean-curvature flow. 
              He will
continue his investigations of 2-dimensional minimal surfaces,
              in
particular concerning branch points and concerning total
              boundary
curvature.

An understanding of singularities, and how
              singularities are formed,
is a fundamental element in our overall
              understanding of many physical
and geometric phenomena.  For example, in
              cosmology singularities of
space-time (e.g. ``black holes'') play a
              fundamental role.  Likewise
in the study of the ``canonical'' objects which
              arise naturally in
topology and geometry, singularities arise in a very
              natural and
unavoidable manner, and the understanding of these singularities
              is an
absolutely fundamental problem.  As with most non-linear
              phenomena,
there is not a single general theory which applies in a wide range
              of
different contexts. Rather, each different context has its own
collection
              of effective techniques, and it is the development and
application of such
              techniques in the context of the geometric
calculus of variations which is the
              focus of the present research
proposal. Specifically, Simon and White propose
              to continue their
efforts toward a complete understanding of singularities,
              and how they
are formed, in the context of area minimizing submanifolds and
              energy
minimizing maps.  Such techniques are likely to be applicable to
              the
study of other objects of geometric and physical
              significance---for
example to the study of immiscible fluid interfaces,
              soap-films, and
the equilibrium free surfaces of fluids.


