Title       : Mechanisms for the Northward Displacement of the Pacific Intertropical
               Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0104468

Award Number: 0104468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shang-Ping Xie xie@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tim Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will investigate the causes for the off-equatorial location of the
              Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). The confluence of northeast and
              southeast trade winds generates the moisture flux convergence that feeds deep
              tropical convection. The convection shows up as a bright cloud band in
              satellite pictures, and helps identify the ITCZ. Although solar forcing is
              nearly symmetric in the annual-mean, the ITCZ in the central/eastern Pacific
              remains northward of the equator throughout much of the year. Recent studies
              have revealed the role of ocean-atmosphere interactions in equatorial and
              coastal zones, and of geographical asymmetries of continents (e.g., the
              Americas) in producing the Northern hemisphere location of the ITCZ, but many
              key questions remain unanswered. Not surprisingly, the ITCZ remains a poorly
              simulated feature in current climate models. Drs. Shang-Ping Xie and Tim Li
              will identify the key climate interactions that control ITCZ location from
              modeling analysis, using a pair of coupled climate models. The PIs will
              decompose the geographical asymmetries of the Americas into several elements
              and investigate their "symmetry-breaking" potential in context of ITCZ's
              meridional position. They will also investigate the interaction of the eastern
              Pacific ITCZ and the North American monsoon. This research will advance the
              understanding of how ocean, land, and the atmosphere interact to shape the
              eastern Pacific climate. In so doing, it will provide the large-scale
              interpretive framework for NSF's Eastern Pacific Investigation of Climate
              (EPIC) field program, and also contribute to the Pan American/Pacific research
              goals of the U.S. CLIVAR program.

