Title       : Stochastic Analysis in Differential Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0104079

Award Number: 0104079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elton Pei Hsu elton@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The investigator will study various analytic and probabilistic problems related
              to finite and infinite differential geometry, especially Riemannian manifolds
              with boundary and path and loop spaces over such manifolds. In the case of
              Riemannian manifold with boundary, he will try to obtain a useful formulation
              of the Feynman-Kac formula for vector bundles (mainly differential forms) which
              can be used effectively in a number of problems. A formula of this type was
              obtained before but is not easy to be applied to the problems. He will prove
              that the derivatives of the heat semigroup can be bounded explicitly in terms
              of the Ricci curvature and the second fundamental form of the boundary. The
              approach he will adopt for the finite dimensional problems is intimately
              related to stochastic analysis on path spaces over Riemannian manifolds. In the
              infinite dimensional setting, he hopes to break new ground in path and loop
              space analysis by studying the case when the manifold has a boundary, thus
              breaking new ground. Specifically he will try to prove an integration by parts
              formula in the path space for this case. This is a reasonable starting point
              for investigating manifolds with boundary, for as it is well known that
              integration by parts formula lies at the center of many interesting problems in
              path and loop spaces. 
	Stochastic analysis in geometry is an active research
              area in probability theory. Its goal is to use stochastic methods (as opposed
              to analytic methods) to investigate models with well defined geometric
              structures. Many models studied in this area (e.g., path and loop spaces) are
              mathematical abstractions of concrete models in physics and other related areas
              of science and engineering (especially high energy physics and space
              technology). An understanding of the mathematical structure of these models is
              usually the first step towards their practical applications. 
