Title       : Dynamics of High-Speed Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0104818

Award Number: 0104818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily F. Stone stone@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ebrahim Askari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0104818 

Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics of
              High-Speed Machining  


Abstract DMS-0104818 
Stone 

 

This grant
              supports collaboration between a mathematician at Utah State University and an
              engineer at The Boeing Company to investigate chatter instability in drilling. 
              Chatter is a self-excited oscillation between the machining tool and the work
              piece that limits productivity of machining operations, reduces the quality of
              the product, and shortens machine tool life.  Drilling itself is one of the
              least well understood machining processes due to the complex geometry of the
              cutting surface, and simple linear models of drilling have had limited success.
               We are developing nonlinear models that incorporate information from finite
              element models for metal cutting as well as information about vibrational modes
              of the drill.  The resulting models take the form of delay differential
              equations.  We use a combination of conventional engineering techniques and
              techniques from nonlinear dynamics (e.g. center manifold reduction) to analyze
              these systems.  We will utilize new capabilities in large-scale simulation
              software and build on previous theoretical work done at Boeing to perform
              dynamic stability analysis. The award is co-funded by the Dynamic Systems and
              Control Program and Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) Program in the Directorate for Engineering and by the GOALI program
              through the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical &
              Physical Sciences Directorate.

Drilling is a crucial machining process in
              aircraft manufacture: over a million holes may be drilled during the
              construction of a commercial airplane, and production errors resulting in
              out-of-tolerance holes can be extremely costly.  Improving the precision with
              which holes may be drilled depends on a detailed understanding of instabilities
              such as chatter.  Beyond the technological importance of this work is the
              synergy it promotes by supporting collaboration between academic mathematicians
              and industry engineers.  The connection with The Boeing Company is a central
              part of Utah State University's industrial mathematics program, which provides
              mathematics students with enhanced training by exposing them to real
              applications, encouraging group work, and honing communication skills.  Another
              aspect of this project is the development of an active collaboration between
              researchers at Boeing-Seattle and Dr. Stone and those at Boeing-St. Louis and
              Dr. Philip Bayly of Washington University.  The capabilities of these two
              groups mesh in a unique way, providing a strong research environment with
              interlacing thrusts of theory, experiment, and direct numerical simulation. 
              The projects supported by this grant are part of this collaboration, which
              combines the expertise and facilities of both groups, and will lead to
              state-of-the-art results capable of enhancing high-speed drilling practices.  
              

