Title       : Dissertation Research: The Roles of Disturbance in the Persitence of Two Rare
               Plants in the Sandhills Community, Central Coastal California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0104786

Award Number: 0104786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9987               (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne P. Sousa wpsousa@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Disturbance often enhances diversity by creating a refuge allowing the
              persistence of fugitive native plants.  Many exotic species are also successful
              colonizers of disturbances and may compete with native taxa.  Thus, the effects
              of disturbance on native species in invaded communities are difficult to
              predict without an understanding of the differential responses of natives and
              exotics to disturbance. Within this context, the proposed research focuses on
              the effects of three soil disturbances (mounds, trails, and slides) on native
              plant species.  Previous research indicates that fire facilitates rare native
              plants by removing accumulated leaf litter and exotic plants. Similarly, soil
              disturbances are hypothesized to facilitate natives, although exotic species
              may mitigate this beneficial effect.  The response of native plants to
              disturbance, the presence of exotic species, and their interaction will be
              quantified through a series of manipulative experiments.  The proposed research
              will document how plant life history traits and population dynamics interact
              with disturbance characteristics to determine temporal patterns within invaded
              communities.



