Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolutionary Genetics of Sexual Dimorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0104948

Award Number: 0104948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Mousseau mousseau@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the great mysteries of the natural world concerns why males and females
              of the same species often differ in many morphological characters. Sexual size
              dimorphism (SSD), or the difference in mean body size between the sexes, is of
              particular interest since body size plays a central role in the fitness of an
              individual. With the advent of new statistical tools and conceptual advances,
              investigations into the evolution of SSD have moved from the traditional
              temporally static, single pressure, single sex perspective, to the more robust
              view of multiple selective forces interacting in both sexes across many
              generations. However, to fully interpret the evolutionary implications of these
              selective pressures, one must also know the underlying genetic architecture of
              male and female body size. This is true since genetic architecture may alter or
              constrain a dimorphic response to selection. Unfortunately, few studies have
              expanded their investigation of SSD beyond the scope of the selective pressures
              involved, creating a dearth of information regarding the evolutionary genetics
              of dimorphism. The objectives set forth in this proposal will investigate the
              underlying genetic structure of a sexually dimorphic trait that is known to be
              under selection from multiple sources. This study will employ an empirical
              quantitative genetic approach to generate for both sexes the variance
              covariance matrices (G-matrices) for body size and two other important
              correlated traits under selection. This will permit comparison between the
              sexes for differences in genetic architecture and tests for significant
              correlations between the sexes for homologous traits that may constrain
              dimorphic evolution. In addition, when G-matrices are coupled with selection
              gradients that describe the direction and intensity of selection, one can
              predict if genetic covariances will have a significant effect on trait
              evolution, if this effect constrains or reinforces trait evolution, and if
              dimorphism is still evolving. The results of this study will be of general
              interest as they will likely have bearing on gender-based differences for many
              other traits in many other systems.


