Title       : QEIB: Statistical Issues in Combining Data for Phylogenetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0104290

Award Number: 0104290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Salter salter@stat.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1649,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the development of methods for combining data sets from
              different sources with the goal of obtaining robust estimates of phylogenetic
              relationships.  As an example, consider the case in which evolutionary
              information in the form of DNA sequence data is available from several distinct
              genes sampled throughout the genome.  Phylogenetic trees estimated individually
              from each of these genes will yield estimated gene trees, trees which
              illustrate the evolutionary history of that particular gene.  What is often of
              most interest is the estimation of the species history, which may be different
              from the gene history.  Thus, the genetic information must be combined
              appropriately so that species relationships can be estimated. This research
              will address three main issues associated with this problem.  The first is the
              study of currently available tests for assessing combinability of the
              individual data sets, and the improvement of these existing tests.  The second
              component of this research involves the development of new procedures for
              testing for similarity in underlying evolutionary history in the datasets, and
              for development of methods for testing which evolutionary mechanisms (i.e.,
              hybridization, horizontal gene transfer, etc.) might be responsible for
              differing underlying histories.  These newly developed tests are based on
              likelihood ratio statistics which compare the likelihood of a tree-like
              structure estimated under the assumption of a particular evolutionary force to
              an unrestricted likelihood.  The final component of this research is the
              development of appropriate methods for combining data from different sources in
              order to estimate the species tree.  This is achieved by modeling the
              probability that a set of observed gene trees would have arisen from a given
              species trees.  The estimated species tree is then that tree which maximizes
              this probability.

The inference of the evolutionary history of a collection
              of organisms based on the information contained in their DNA sequences is a
              problem of fundamental importance in evolutionary biology.  The abundance of
              DNA sequence data arising from genome sequencing projects has led to
              significant challenges in the inference of these phylogenetic relationships.
              Among these challenges is the inference of the evolutionary history of a
              collection of species based on DNA sequence information from several distinct
              genes sampled throughout the genome.  This research will address numerous
              aspects of this problem, including (1) the assessment of existing procedures
              for combining data from different genes, and the improvement of such
              procedures; (2) the development of methods for testing for the cause of
              differences in the evolutionary histories of distinct genes; and (3) the
              development of new procedures for combining DNA information from distinct genes
              with the goal of inferring species relationships.  This work has applications
              in the understanding of much-debated species relationships, such as the
              evolutionary relationships between placental mammals, marsupials, and
              monotremes.
