Title       : Studies in Perfect Simulation and Combinatorial Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0104167

Award Number: 0104167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Fill jimfill@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One focus of the research is perfect simulation.  Markov chain Monte Carlo
              (MCMC) approximate sampling methods have become extremely popular for Bayesian
              inference problems and for problems in other areas, such as spatial statistics,
              statistical physics, and computer science as a way of sampling approximately
              from a complicated probability distribution.  For some problems, it is now
              possible to use more sophisticated MCMC techniques to sample perfectly (that
              is, without error) from the distribution of interest.  The investigator and his
              colleagues work on creating, improving, analyzing, and applying efficient
              perfect simulation algorithms; these algorithms include the
              Fill-Machida-Murdoch-Rosenthal algorithm and the new Randomness Recycler
              technique pioneered by the investigator and his colleague Mark Huber.  The
              second focus concerns probability and combinatorial structures, especially
              trees.  The investigator and his colleagues study such problems as
              characterizing the "shape" of random multiway search trees (via fundamental
              research in the area of analytic combinatorics known as singularity analysis);
              generalizing the analyses of the height of a random incomplete digital search
              tree, of the move-to-front rule for self- organizing lists, and of recursive
              trees; and extending the so-called generalized smoothing transformation to
              distributions on the entire real line.

One focus of the investigator's
              research is perfect simulation from probability distributions.  Standard
              "Markov chain Monte Carlo" (MCMC) methods for approximate simulation from
              complicated probability distributions have proved extremely useful for problems
              in statistics (including image analysis), physics (including models for
              magnetism and for phase changes), and computer science as a way of sampling
              approximately from a complicated probability distribution.  But there are
              problems with the MCMC approach -- most notably that for many problems it is
              unknown for how long the simulations must be run in order to come close to the
              distribution of interest.  For some problems, it is now possible to use more
              sophisticated MCMC techniques to sample perfectly (that is, without error) from
              the distribution of interest.  The investigator and his colleagues work on
              creating, improving, analyzing, and applying efficient perfect simulation
              algorithms, including two different algorithms pioneered by the investigator. 
              The second focus concerns interplays between probability and combinatorial
              structures, especially trees, which are fundamental structures for the storage
              of computer data.  This second focus of research has applications to the
              modeling of epidemics, family trees of ancient manuscripts, and pyramid schemes
              and to the election of multiple leaders in a multiprocessor computer network.

