Title       : Workshop on Topic, Focus and Intonation, Santa Barbara, CA, July 20-21, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0104212

Award Number: 0104212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Gordon mgordon@linguistics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent work in syntax and semantics has yielded dramatic developments in the
              depth and cross-linguistic breadth of our understanding of the role of topic
              and focus in language. At the same time, there has been increased interest
              among phoneticians and phonologists in the cross-linguistic study of
              intonation. One area of intonation which has proven to be a rich yet relatively
              understudied area of research is focus and topic. Studies of various languages
              have indicated that utterances involving a focused or topicalized element are
              typically associated with intonational properties different from utterances
              without any focused or topicalized elements, e.g. increased pitch range,
              specialized tonal configurations, different durational characteristics. These
              studies suggest a close link between differences in prosody and the kinds of
              differences in meaning associated with various kinds of topicalization and
              focus.

Nevertheless despite recent advances in the study of intonational
              properties of topic and focus, there is ample room for further advancing our
              cross-linguistic knowledge of the interaction between the phonetics and
              phonology of intonation and the syntax and semantics of topicalization and
              focus. In particular, increased interaction between syntacticians,
              semanticists, phonologists and phoneticians promises to yield important
              progress in the study of intonational correlates of the meanings associated
              with topicalization and focus. 

A workshop on Topic, Focus and Intonation
              will be held at the 2001 Linguistic Society of America Summer Institute in
              Santa Barbara, CA. In this workshop, we hope to explore further the effects of
              various kinds of topicalization and focus on intonation. It is especially hoped
              that the workshop will lay the groundwork for future collaborative efforts
              between linguists devoted to the study meaning and linguistics engaged in the
              quantitative study of intonation. Both descriptive and theoretical papers on
              any aspects of the relationship between intonation, on the one hand, and topic
              and/or focus, on the other hand, are welcome. Papers may deal with intonational
              aspects of topic and/or focus in any language, whether relatively well-studied
              or relatively underdocumented.
