Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing Behavioral Evolution in Response to Ecological
               Change in the Village Weaverbird (Ploceus Cucullatus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0104394

Award Number: 0104394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10015              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Payne rbpayne@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Testing behavioral evolution in response to ecological change in the village
              weaverbird (Ploceus cucullatus).
PI: Prof. Robert B. Payne
Co-PI: David C.
              Lahti

Behavior can evolve by natural selection, but testing this in wild
              populations is often difficult or impossible.  The village weaverbird Ploceus
              cucullatus is a choice candidate for such a test, because historical events
              have fortuitously set the stage for an effective experiment.  In the village
              weaverbird's home range in Africa, the diederik cuckoo Chrysococcyx caprius
              lays its eggs in weaverbirds' nests ("brood parasitism").  A hatched cuckoo
              promptly removes the weaverbird eggs or young from the nest.  In 1999 and 2000,
              Lahti found that village weaverbirds throughout Africa eject from their nests
              eggs that are dissimilar from their own in color and spotting pattern, a
              behavior which is an effective defense against cuckoo parasitism.  Their
              discrimination ability is finely tuned, which is necessary because the diederik
              cuckoo eggs mimic the appearance of weaverbird eggs.  

Humans introduced the
              village weaverbird from Africa into two islands where parasitic cuckoos do not
              exist:  Mauritius, in the Indian Ocean, a century ago, and Hispaniola, in the
              Caribbean, about two centuries ago.  Today there are large populations of the
              weaverbird in both places.  Lahti will test quantitatively whether the
              weaverbirds' ability to discriminate against dissimilar eggs has declined in
              these two populations by "playing the cuckoo" and experimentally placing eggs
              into their nests.  This experiment effectively imitates the environmental
              dangers of the weaverbirds' home range in a place where those dangers don't
              exist anymore.  In this way the researchers can determine whether and to what
              extent the behaviors that evolved as a defense against those dangers have
              declined, since they are no longer needed.


