Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Supply-Side Regulation of Herbivore-Induced Phenolics in
               Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0104820

Award Number: 0104820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack C. Schultz ujq@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Toni M. Schaeffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Supply-side Regulation of Herbivore-Induced Phenolics in
              Plants

Jack Schultz and Toni Schaeffer

Phenolics are carbon-based
              chemicals synthesized within all plants.  Lignin, the major component of wood,
              is a phenolic.  In addition to the structural role of lignin, many other
              phenolics play diverse roles in the lives of all plants as both structural and
              defensive elements.  Changes in phenolic production comprise the most-studied
              class of "defenses" in research on plant pests.  Much ecological theory on how
              plants allocate their carbon and nutrient resources presumes that plants, in
              response to changes in their environment, are able to vary the proportion of
              their resources that they use to synthesize phenolics.  The majority of the
              world's carbon passes through the biosynthetic pathways leading to phenolic
              synthesis (once it is taken from the atmosphere by the plant during
              photosynthesis).  Hence, these pathways are critical components of global
              carbon cycling.  All evidence to date suggests that global change will enhance
              the importance of these biosynthetic pathways.  However, plant regulation of
              phenolic production is still poorly understood.  This may be partly because the
              two biosynthetic pathways that plants use to synthesize phenolics have
              traditionally been studied separately.  The shikimate pathway (SP) has been
              studied as the source of aromatic amino acids, and the phenylpropanoid pathway
              (PP) as the source of defenses and lignin. 

Most plant scientists have
              focused on the detailed regulation of the PP, the second pathway in this
              pipeline, ignoring earlier steps in these pathways.   The core hypothesis of
              the proposed research is that regulation of phenolics is accomplished at the
              "supply-side" of synthesis within the SP, the first pathway, as well as
              downstream within the PP.  Using a series of greenhouse experiments, this
              research aims to determine how plants coordinately regulate the "top" and
              "bottom" of this synthetic pipeline, namely two regulatory enzymes (DAHPS and
              PAL).  Also being explored is the idea that plants are able to exploit stored
              pools of carbon-based pathway intermediates when they change their phenolic
              production.  By comparing the phenolic regulation strategy of a model
              herbaceous plant, tobacco, to a model woody plant, poplar, this research will
              help explain how carbon resources are allocated to these important pathways and
              products in very different plants.  The results will clarify the regulation and
              evolution of carbon allocation patterns in plants.  This information will point
              to ways in which plants may be bred or engineered to maximize carbon allocation
              for various purposes, and will facilitate better understanding of plant growth,
              defense, and productivity.  




