Title       : Solving polynomial systems by polyhedral homotopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0104009

Award Number: 0104009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tien-Yien Li li@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the last two decades, the homotopy continuation method for
solving
              polynomial systems has been established and proved to
be reliable and
              efficient. Resulting from a previous project,
supported by NSF Grant
              DMS-9804846, a source code, HOM4PS, was
produced. Excellent performance of
              this code on a large collection
of polynomial systems in a wide variety of
              applications provides
practical evidence that the newly developed methods
              constitute a
powerful general purpose solver. Nontheless, there are
              still
numerous models of polynomial systems in applications which do
not have
              a satisfactory line of attack. Those models provide a rich
source of
              interesting and challenging problems with strong mathematical
content. The
              essence of the proposed project is the advance development
of the solver based
              on the conduct of further research
to greatly enlarge the scope of its
              applications. The ultimate goal
is a more complete high-quality block-box
              solfware which will
incorporate the best state of the art to provide the
              general scientific
community a reliable source for solving polynomial systems
              in practice.

The problem of solving polynomial systems has been, and will
              continue
to be, one of the most important subjects in both pure and
              applied
mathematics.  The need to solve systems of polynomial equations
              arises
very frequently in various fields of science and engineering, such
              as,
formula construction, geometric intersection, inverse
              kinematics,
robotics, vision and the computation of equilibrium states of
              chemical
reaction equations, etc. In recent years (1993-1999), a
              considerable
research effort in Europe had been directed to this problem in
              two
consecutive major projects, PoSSo (Polynomial System Solving) and
              FRISCO
(FRamework for Integrated Symbolic/numerical COmputation), supported
              by
European Commission with thirteen university teams in seven
              European
countries involved. Those research projects focused on the
              development
of the already well-established Groebner basis methods within
              the
framework of computer algebra.  Their reliance on symbolic
              manipulation
makes those methods seem somewhat limited to relatively small
              problems.
In contrast, the approch by the homotopy continuation method in
              this
project is numerical and exhibits much powerful application results.
