Title       : Local Regularization Methods for Ill-Posed Inverse Problems: Fast Algorithms and
               Adaptive Parameter Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0104003

Award Number: 0104003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia K. Lamm lamm@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Local regularization methods show great promise for the solution of a number of
              different classes of inverse problems, often retaining the special structure of
              the original problem as well as leading to very fast algorithms (especially in
              the case of Volterra problems).  In addition, numerical tests show that local
              regularization methods can work well to resolve sharp features of solutions
              without having to rely on nondifferentiable or nonquadratic optimization
              schemes.  To date, the convergence theory for the local regularization of
              Volterra problems has been limited to only mildly ill-posed inverse problems. 
              In the case of more severely ill-posed problems, there is numerical evidence
              that certain local methods may suffer from lack of stability and/or
              convergence.  Because of the cost efficiencies of local regularization methods,
              an important question is therefore whether new variations of these methods can
              be developed for which stability/convergence can be proven in the general case.
               The PI proposes to develop two new variations of local regularization methods
              which show promise in numerical tests and for which there is hope of
              establishing a general stability/convergence theory.  The PI also proposes to
              develop adaptive schemes for the selection of variable regularization
              parameters in local regularization methods.  Variable parameters are of use in
              applying more smoothing in some parts of the domain and less in others.  In
              numerical tests adaptive local regularization techniques have been shown to be
              effective in determining the variable regularization parameter at the same time
              that local parts of the solution are recovered.  Because no convergence theory
              exists at the present time for such an approach, the PI proposes to study such
              adaptive schemes and develop a theory which will be useful in making
              recommendations for adaptive parameter selection methods.  The PI also proposes
              to extend these ideas to nonlinear Volterra problems and to linear non-Volterra
              problems.

Inverse problems occur widely in many applications, including
              problems of biomedical imaging (CT scans and X-rays), image reconstruction
              (from satellites or other sources), and geophysical exploration.  The Volterra
              class of inverse problems arises in the determination of the surface
              temperature of a space vehicle as it re-enters the earth's atmosphere;
              additionally, Volterra inverse problems appear as models for remote sensing
              problems.  While classical methods exist for for solving such problems,
              classical methods are often very inefficient and lead to overly expensive
              solution techniques.  A second disadvantage of classical solution methods is
              readily seen in imaging applications where reconstructed images may have
              blurred edges and inadequately detailed features.  The PI proposes to address
              both of these difficulties with the development of new solution methods based
              on the ideas of local regularization.  The use of these newer methods can lead
              to a significant decrease in cost for the solution of a wide class of practical
              inverse problems, with improved resolution of detailed features of solutions.
