Title       : Dissertation Research: An Analysis of Diversification in Neritopsine Gastropods:
               Evidence from Phylogeography and Paleontology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0104788

Award Number: 0104788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10272              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Lindberg drl@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the processes that shape biodiversity requires multiple lines of
              evidence, including those from paleobiology, ecology, population genetics,
              biogeography, and phylogenetics.  I will use a powerful technique, known as
              phylogeography, that employs many of these lines to investigate which processes
              have been most important in generating diversity in a group of gastropods known
              as the Neritopsina.  I will be testing whether or not species that are
              distributed in space with geographic barriers separating them show more genetic
              divergence between populations than species that have no barriers between
              populations.  I will then combine this information with data from their
              evolutionary relationships and fossil record to test whether or not this
              divergence at the population level is manifested as significant diversity at
              the species level.
As biodiversity is a dynamic process, with populations and
              species in a constant state of flux, it is necessary to understand how
              diversity is generated in order to make informed conservation decisions.  By
              understanding how geographic distribution has affected the evolutionary history
              of these gastropods, we may better understand which processes need to be
              conserved in order to ensure that diversity remains relatively stable through
              time.  Instead of focusing solely on the current state of these gastropod
              species, I will be examining how we might better ensure that they are allowed
              to continue to maintain and generate diversity in the millennia to come. 


