Title       : Block Designs: Advances in Theory and Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a0104195

Award Number: 0104195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Morgan jpmorgan@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A problem common to many disparate fields of scientific and industrial enquiry
              is
that of comparing a set of experimental conditions, or `treatments', when
              faced with
heterogeneity in the units of material on which the experiment is
              to be performed. The
technique of blocking specifically addresses this
              problem. Typically using values of some
identifiable nuisance factor, the
              experimental units are partitioned into homogeneous
subsets called blocks.
              Inferences can then be based on the more precise comparisons of
measurements
              from the same block. The design problem is to determine which treat-
ments are
              assigned to which units in which blocks, said assignment being driven by
the
              desire to maximize the quality of information that will ultimately be
              produced.
The problem becomes more complicated as more nuisance factors, with
              various inter-
relationships, are introduced or identified. This project
              addresses the design problem
for a variety of commonly encountered
              experimental settings, with two broad goals:
(i) to extend the known theory
              for determining optimal designs for a wider range of
settings than is now
              known or available; and (ii) to produce a comprehensive catalog
of designs to
              be incorporated into a larger, web-based resource that will include a
              vari-
ety of downloadable combinatorial designs useful for statisticians,
              mathematicians, and
other scientists in academia and industry. By collecting
              optimal designs in a single,
easily accessible resource, the use of good
              designs can be increased and the practice of
experimental science consequently
              sharpened.

When comparing v treatments, the most commonly encountered
              situation across a
range of scientific endeavors is that of a single blocking
              variable partitioning bk experi-
mental units into b blocks of k units each.
              This project will examine optimality problems
for these simple block designs,
              and the attendant combinatorial issues, augmenting the-
ory by computation
              where needed, to produce designs for a practical range of
              parameter
combinations (v; b; k), including settings where equireplication is
              not possible. The most
frequently used designs with two blocking factors are
              row-column designs, in which two
blocking factors can be visualized as row and
              columns in a rectangular array, and re-
solvable designs, in which a second
              blocking factor partitions a simple block design into
subsets of blocks each
              consisting of a single replicate. This project will also address
problems in
              optimality and construction of designs in both these classes, with
              special
emphasis on plans most demanded in practice: those with few
              replicates.
