Title       : Spin Systems on Graphs, Critical Percolation and Scaling Limits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0104073

Award Number: 0104073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $533738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuval Peres peres@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The Principal Investigator will study several problems in Probability Theory
              concerning random processes on general graphs and networks, in particular
              certain Markov processes (Glauber dynamics) that have natural Gibbs measures as
              stationary distributions. The investigator and his collaborators have shown
              that for the Ising model on trees, (and on other "hyperbolic" graphs), the
              mixing time for Glauber dynamics is polynomial in the volume, at any
              temperature. Moreover, on a finite regular tree, the critical temperature for
              rapid mixing is lower than the critical temperature for uniqueness of Gibbs
              states on the corresponding infinite tree. The investigator intends to study
              precisely which aspects of the geometry of a graph (e.g. spectra, Cheeger
              constants) are most relevant to the mixing rate of Glauber dynamics. Modern
              approximation schemes for "hard" combinatorial problems (e.g., counting
              matchings in a graph) use processes related to Glauber dynamics, so new
              insights on these dynamics will have an impact on randomized approximation
              algorithms.
	Large networks of interacting particles have been studied for
              decades in statistical physics, as models of magnetism, freezing, and other
              physical processes. In these models, each particle interacts only with its
              immediate neighbors, yet from this local interaction, global structure can
              emerge. The evolution of these systems over time is called "Glauber dynamics".
              In the last twenty years, these dynamics have been used in image analysis,
              approximate counting algorithms, and communication networks. While most of the
              mathematical results and physical predictions available are restricted to quite
              special networks (where the particles are arranged in a regular lattice), they
              have motivated applications where the underlying network has completely
              different structure. The investigator intends to analyze Glauber dynamics on a
              variety of networks, with attention focussed on the effect of the network
              geometry on the dynamics. He is collaborating with several computer scientists
              on the algorithmic aspects of Glauber dynamics. 
