Title       : Dissertation Research: Visual Factors Affecting Mate Choice in Lake Malawi
               Cichlids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0104872

Award Number: 0104872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis Juanes juanes@forwild.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Title: Visual factors affecting mate choice in Lake Malawi cichlids

PI:
              Francis Juanes

Doctoral student: Rebecca Jordan

The cichlid fishes of
              Lake Malawi are an excellent example of rapid species diversification over a
              relatively short period of evolutionary time.  There are numerous theories to
              explain this diversity that are often linked to sexual selection through female
              choice.  Given that males are brightly colored, females, presumably by using
              visual cues, choose among the males.  In being selective of certain males,
              females drive the reproductive isolation that lead to species differences. 
              Little, however, has been done to investigate the visual factors used by female
              Lake Malawi cichlids.  In fact very little has been done to discern what type
              of visual system these fish have, which is particularly surprising given their
              reliance on visually guided behaviors.  The primary objective of this work is
              to ask four main visual questions with a group of rock dwelling Lake Malawi
              cichlids (mbuna): (I.) what spectral abilities exist across several groups?
              (II.) what is the role of visual cues in among species mate choice? (III.) what
              is the role of ultraviolet radiation in mate choice and feeding, and (IV.) what
              variation in physical characteristics occur with attenuating light?  A critical
              understanding of the visual factors affecting the Lake Malawi mbuna is a
              necessary step in understanding of the reproductive isolation see in these
              fish.  This understanding can aid in explaining the extreme diversity seen in
              these mbuna, and comes at pivotal time because of the anthropogenic stressors
              that currently threaten the integrity of the East African cichlid fish.

