Title       : Microscopic Properties and Physical Behavior of Materials and Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a0104531

Award Number: 0104531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217546             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar P. Bruno bruno@ama.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0104531
PI: 			Bruno, Oscar
Institution:
              		California Institute of Technology
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program
              Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Microscopic Properties and Physical
              Behavior of Materials and Media

The present text proposes research in two
              distinct areas, namely 1) estimation of the overall (homogenized) behavior of
              inhomogeneous materials containing microscopic misfits, and, 2) evaluation of
              wave propagation and scattering by inhomogeneous media. Microscopic misfits are
              certain types of deformations and electrical/magnetic polarizations that are
              experienced by the microscopic components of a composite material.  In a
              ceramic-metal composite (cermet), for example, the two basic components of the
              mixture have different coefficients of thermal expansion; heating, therefore,
              gives rise to misfits - i.e., microscopic deformations which would be
              mismatched, were it not for constraints of continuity of elastic displacements
              at the boundaries between ceramic and metal.  Misfits thus produce microscopic
              stresses that determine, to a substantial extent, the macroscopic composite
              behavior.  The proposed efforts in these regards will seek to provide a
              theoretical understanding of misfits, so that materials with improved
              properties can be designed. One of our goals, for example, seeks to design
              ceramics that do not shatter at elevated temperatures, and are thus appropriate
              for use in turbine blades at high temperatures.  Problems of scattering by
              inhomogeneous media, on the other hand, play central roles in a wide variety of
              applications, including radar, sonar and remote sensing, medical microscopy,
              optical communications and non-invasive evaluation.  The work proposed here
              will seek to develop fast high-order solvers for a variety of configurations
              arising in engineering practice. In view of recent results, it is envisioned
              that the proposed techniques will significantly enhance our prediction
              capabilities in both materials science and computational wave
              propagation.

The proposed work impacts a number of areas of federal
              strategic interest, including high-performance computing, materials research,
              medicine, biology and national security. The specific research is in two
              distinct areas, namely 1) estimation of the overall behavior of inhomogeneous
              materials containing microscopic misfits, and, 2) evaluation of wave
              propagation and scattering by inhomogeneous media. These efforts seek to
              produce highly efficient computational methods for engineering of materials
              with specified properties, for the solution of problems in optics and
              microscopy, and for remote sensing problems related to radar and sonar.
              

Date: June 18, 2001

