Title       : Complex Statistical Models: Theory and Methodology for Scientific Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0104016

Award Number: 0104016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Wasserman larry@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Roeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Genovese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Complex Statistical Models: Theory and Methodology
for Scientific
              Applications

Larry Wasserman, Christopher Genovese, Robert E. Kass
and
              Kathryn Roeder

ABSTRACT

This project is aimed at developing statistical
              theory and methodology for highly complex, possibly infinite dimensional
              models.  Although the methodology and theory will be quite general, we will
              conduct the research
in the context of three scientific collaborations.  The
              first is  ``Characterizing Large-Scale Structure in the Universe,''  a joint
              project with astrophysicists and computer scientists.  The main statistical
              challenges are nonparametric density estimation and clustering, subject to
              highly non-linear constraints. The second project is ``Locating Disease Genes
              with Genomic Control.''  We aim to locate regions of the genome with more
              genetic similarity among cases (subjects with disease) than controls. These
              regions are candidates for containing disease genes. Finding these regions ina
              statistically rigorous fashion requires testing a vast number of hypotheses. 
              We will extend and develop recent techniques for multiple hypothesis
              testing.
The third projects is ``Modeling Neuron Firing Patterns.'' The goal
              is to construct and fit models for neuron firing patterns, called spike trains.
              The data consist of simultaneous voltage recordings of numerous neurons which
              have been subjected to time-varying stimuli. The data are correlated over time
              and a major effort is to develop a class of models, called inhomogeneous Markov
              interval (IMI) process models, which can adequately represent the
              data.

Statistical methods for simple statistical models with a small number
              of parameters are well established.
These models often do not provide an
              adequate representation of the phenomenon under investigation.
Currently,
              scientists are deluged with huge volumes of high quality data. These data
              afford scientists the opportunity to use very complex models that more
              faithfully reflect reality. The researchers involved in this proposal are
              developing methodology and theory for analyzing data from these complex models.
              The methods are very general but they are being developed for applications in
              Astrophysics, Genetics and Neuroscience.
