Title       : Dissertation Research: Austral Biogeography: The Evolution of Subalpine Ourisia
               (Scrophulariaceae) in a Phylogenetic Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0104897

Award Number: 0104897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beryl B. Simpson beryl@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Summary (word count: 223) 

Ever since naturalist Joseph Dalton Hooker
              explored the southern continents over 150 years ago, biologists have been
              interested in understanding the current distributions of related organisms in
              southern South America, Australasia, and/or Africa.  It has been argued that
              this austral biogeographic pattern is associated with the vicariant breakup of
              Gondwana that began over 80 million years ago, but a competing hypothesis
              suggests that the same pattern might have arisen more recently via
              long-distance dispersal.  Fossil evidence and results from phylogenetic studies
              corroborate the vicariance paradigm for some woody forest groups, but few
              studies have focused on higher elevation herbaceous genera in southern regions.
               It has been suggested that these alpine herbs may not be relics of a
              widespread Gondwana flora, but rather the result of more recent events. 
              Recentness is likely in alpine groups because these herbs occur in habitats
              that have existed only since the final Quaternary uplift of high-elevation
              mountains in New Zealand and South America.  The subalpine, herbaceous genus
              Ourisia (Scrophulariaceae) comprises about 35 different species that are
              distributed throughout the South American Andes from Venezuela to Tierra del
              Fuego, the mountains of New Zealand, and high-elevation regions of Tasmania. We
              will reconstruct the evolutionary history of Ourisia using DNA sequence data
              and morphology to investigate vicariance and dispersal hypotheses as potential
              explanations for the austral biogeography of the genus.   

Significance
              (word count: 235) 

Our comprehensive phylogenetic study of Ourisia
              (Scrophulariaceae) presents a valuable opportunity to expand our understanding
              of the austral biogeographic pattern.  Most biogeographic studies of plant
              groups that exhibit this southern distribution have focused on woody forest
              groups such as Nothofagus (Nothofagaceae), Araucaria (Araucariaceae), and
              closely related genera in Atherospermataceae.  Although Gondwanan vicariance is
              a good model for these ancient groups, it may not apply to high-elevation
              herbaceous plants such as Ourisia that occupy habitats that are of more recent
              Quaternary origin.  In addition to its biogeographical significance, our study
              will also allow us to examine some evolutionary patterns within Ourisia. 
              Because Ourisia exhibits ample variation in floral morphology, chromosome
              number, habit, and vegetative characters, a comprehensive morphological study
              will provide new insights into character evolution in the genus.  We will also
              examine radiation patterns of species in the mountains of New Zealand and South
              America, and discuss the general implications of areas where the phylogenetic
              pattern of Ourisia is congruent with current or historical barriers, geology,
              and climate.  Our study will thus provide a reconstruction of the evolutionary
              history of Ourisia that we can use to: 1) provide a better understanding of the
              relationships of species within the genus, and between Ourisia and its closest
              relatives, 2) examine the biogeography of Ourisia and assess patterns of
              radiation within each geographical region, and 3) investigate evolution of
              chromosome number and morphological characters in the genus. 

