Title       : Spreading Problems in Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0104935

Award Number: 0104935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Miksis miksis@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0104935
Miksis

In this proposal, it is planned to investigate both the
              problem of the 
spreading of a liquid along a solid substrate and the
              spreading of a liquid 
along a liquid interface. The Navier-Stokes equations
              will govern the 
motion of the fluids.  The investigation of the spreading of
              a liquid along a 
solid substrate is interesting and difficult because of the
              singularities that 
can occur at the contact line. Spreading along a liquid
              interface is a 
challenging problem where multiple free boundaries can exist. 
              Here, in 
addition to the liquid/liquid and liquid/gas boundaries, a triple
              junction can 
exist at the liquid/liquid/gas line of intersection.  Predicting
              the dynamics 
of these three phase lines is one of the aims of this proposal. 
               We will be 
interested in situations where the interfaces are clean and
              situations where 
surfactants are present. Mathematically we are faced with
              problems having 
coupled moving interfaces along which singularities can
              exits.  Both 
asymptotic and numerical methods will be used to study these
              complex 
free boundary problems.  For example, we will consider the thin film
              limit 
where the complete three-dimensional system of equations can be reduced
              
to a coupled system of nonlinear evolution equations.  We will also apply
              
the level-set numerical method to solve the complete nonlinear system of
              
equations.

When a liquid drop is resting on a solid surface, the free
              boundary of the 
drop is characterized by the gas/liquid interface, and the
              line of contact 
between the liquid/gas/solid phases.  This three-phase line
              is usually 
referred to as the contact line.  It occurs whenever three phases
              come into 
contact.  It is a familiar phenomena of everyday life, and can be
              observed 
when one pours oil into a frying pan or in a partially filled wine
              glass. It 
also occurs in many areas of practical interest.  Examples are
              industrial 
coating processes, the transport of gas/liquid mixtures in pipes,
              the 
spreading of droplets of medication in the lungs and the spreading of
              
liquid wastes (e.g. oil or chemicals) on the sea.  The latter problem is an
              
example of a situation where the contact line (refereed to as the triple
              
junction in this case) occurs at the intersection of a liquid/liquid/gas
              
interface.  Even though the contact line occurs in these many areas, our
              
understanding of it is very limited. Models are still being developed and
              
because of the mathematical singularities associated with the behavior of
              
the solutions in the neighborhood of the contact line, solution techniques,
              
both analytical and numerical, need to be identified.

