Title       : Locally Hermitian symmetric spaces, non-positive curvature and complex
               hyperbolicity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a0104089

Award Number: 0104089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sai Kee Yeung yeung@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0104089

The focus of the proposal is on the research of
              locally Hermitian symmetric
spaces of non-compact type, considered as special
              complex manifolds of 
non-positive sectional curvature.  Complex hyperbolicity
              can be considered as 
a weak notion of negative curvature.  From analytic
              point of view, the 
principal investigator proposes to work on the rigidity of
              tangent bundles 
among the moduli space of vector bundles of locally Hermitian
              symmetric spaces.
From the uniformization point of view, he proposes to work
              on characterization of 
arithmetic lattices in complex two balls.  He proposes
              to investigate the analogue
of Fijita's conjectures concerning very ampleness
              of pluricanonical line bundles 
on such manifolds, relating to algebraic
              geometry.  He proposes to understand and 
estimate the growth of Betti numbers
              on a tower of coverings naturally associated 
with the manifolds, relating
              topology to geometry.  In the direction of number 
theory, he proposes to
              study the question on finiteness of rational points on 
models of two ball
              quotients defined over an algebraic number field.  He also 
proposes to work
              on several other problems in the area of complex hyperbolicity
and  Kaehler
              geometry, relating to his earlier research directions.

In mathematics,
              people are interested in models which on one hand are elegant 
and relatively
              simple to describe and on the other hand display rich mathematical
structures.
               Locally Hermitian symmetric spaces are such nice geometric models for
which
              different disciplines of mathematics meet.  The main purpose of this 
proposal
              is to understand several geometric and arithmetic aspects of such models
and
              explain their interrelationships.  Understanding of the various properties
and
              problems proposed will enhance the knowledge of the subject and other
              
disciplines of mathematics involved.

