Title       : Dissertation Research: Ecological Causes of the Evolution of Self-Pollination in
               Clarkia xantiana: The Role of Geographic Variation in Biotic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0104582

Award Number: 0104582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Geber mag9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work tests hypotheses on the causes of the evolution of
              self-pollination in Clarkia xantiana, a native annual plant composed of an
              outcrossing and a self-pollinating subspecies.  Previous work shows that the
              two subspecies differ in geographic range, plant community associations, and
              population size.  This project examines the role of plant population size and
              plant community interactions in determining the abundance of pollinating bees
              and whether an outcrossing versus self-pollinating mating system is
              advantageous.  The proposed work investigates (1) the distribution and
              abundance of specialist bee pollinators with respect to the mating system and
              population attributes of C. xantiana, (2) the factors affecting whether
              reproductive output is limited by the abundance of pollinators, and (3) the
              effects of population size and the plant community on the relative success of
              C. xantiana individuals that vary in mating system.  A combination of field
              observations, field experiments, and molecular genetic analyses will be
              employed to address these problems.

The evolution of self-pollination is
              among the most common events in the evolutionary history of flowering plants. 
              While the biological consequences of self-pollination (e.g. inbreeding) are
              well known, the ecological causes of this evolutionary transition have rarely
              been considered.  This project will also provide new information on the
              importance of native bee communities and plant communities in the viability of
              plant populations.

