Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ecological and Evolutionary Significance of
               Interaction Modification in Ant-phorid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0104946

Award Number: 0104946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Feener feener@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1182,1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0104946 - D. Feener and Edward LeBrun
The factors that determine which species
              live in a particular area and the relative abundance of those species are only
              partially understood.  Much of our knowledge is derived from studying pairs of
              species interacting.  Indirect effects, a second category of species
              interactions in which one species affects a second via its interactions with a
              third, can also influence community structure.  Parasitism of worker ants by
              phorid flies changes the outcome of competitive interactions between the ant
              species attacked by the fly and other ant species.  The result of parasitism is
              that the species that would normally lose to the parasitized species wins. 
              This change in the outcome of competitive interactions constitutes an indirect
              effect that potentially has a strong influence on the structure of the
              community of competing ants. Preliminary investigation has already revealed
              additional indirect effects relevant to this process.  The proposed research,
              to be conducted in Southeastern Arizona, will quantify the indirect effects
              that parasitism by phorid flies has on the host ant and determine how the
              indirect effects change the outcome of interactions between competing ants. 
              The goals are to: 1) quantify the effect of parasitism on the ability of the
              host ant to compete with non-parasitized species; 2) determine whether
              competitors benefit from food resources lost by the host as a result of
              parasitism; 3) test the validity of a theory predicting how strongly the
              outcome of competitive interactions will be modified by parasitism.  This
              effort is important because it will provide the first detailed investigation
              into how strongly indirect effects that modify interactions between species
              effect the identity and abundance of competing groups of species.  It will
              directly address the predictability of this impact.  It will expand our
              understanding of how locally co-existing groups of ant species, an extremely
              ecologically important group, are assembled and how phorid parasitoids impact
              this process. Finally, it will increase our ability to predict the efficacy of
              using phorid flies in efforts to biologically control invasive species of ants.
               

