Title       : Dissertation Research: Behavioral and Genetic Investigations of Reproductive
               Isolation between Two Electric Fish Signal Morphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0104886

Award Number: 0104886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Hopkins cdh8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A diverse group of mormyrid fishes has recently been discovered in Gabon.  These
              fishes produce weak electric pulses to communicate with one another.  Past
              studies indicate that they can detect differences between pulse waveforms and
              use this information for same-species recognition.  Each species emits a
              distinct electric signature, with one notable exception.  Two signal forms
              ("normal polarity" and "reversed polarity") are produced by co-occurring
              individuals that cannot be distinguished by sex, shape, or preliminary
              comparisons at five genetic markers.  These forms may be alternate morphs
              within a single interbreeding species or two nascent species caught in the
              process of divergence.  These alternatives will be investigated by (1) playing
              back signals to breeding fishes and observing their preferences during two
              field trips to Africa and (2) surveying hundreds of genetic regions for
              differences using the new Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism
              technique.

If the evidence supports reproductive isolation between forms,
              the fact that they cannot be distinguished by external measurements or
              preliminary genetic data would indicate species formation to be extremely
              recent or still in progress.  Such cases are difficult to find in nature.  They
              yield important insights into the conditions that give rise to new species.  A
              lack of reproductive isolation between forms, on the other hand, would demand a
              re-thinking of the importance of electric signals as mating barriers for all
              members of this group.  The results of this project will also be significant to
              neurobiologists studying electrosensory coding in mormyrid fishes -- a field
              that has contributed to work on other time-coding sensory systems such as
              hearing.

