Title       : A Direct Reconstruction Algorithm for the 2-D Inverse Conductivity Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0104861

Award Number: 0104861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81029              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Mueller mueller@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses a direct numerical reconstruction algorithm for the 2-D
              inverse conductivity problem.  The 2-D inverse conductivity problem is to
              determine an unknown conductivity distribution on a bounded region  from
              knowledge of the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map.  Physically, knowledge of the
              Dirichlet-to-Neumann map is tantamount to knowing the current density
              distribution on the boundary of the region resulting from any given voltage
              distribution applied on the boundary.  The problem is modeled mathematically by
              the generalized Laplace's equation with the conductivity as an unknown
              parameter.  In 1995 A. Nachman proved that knowledge of the
              Dirichlet-to-Neumann  map uniquely determines the conductivity in the interior
              of a smooth bounded  region in 2-D.  An important feature of Nachman's proof is
              that it outlines a direct method for solving for the conductivity without
              iteration.  The proof is based on techniques of inverse scattering and the
              d-bar method, which is a method of solution for scattering problems, not a
              numerical technique.  The primary goals of this proposal are to solve the
              inverse conductivity problem numerically using the d-bar method, develop a
              practical reconstruction algorithm for medical applications, and to test the
              implementation on physically relevant conductivity distributions. 

The 2-D
              inverse conductivity problem has applications in geophysics, nondestructive
              testing, and a medical imaging technique known as electrical impedance
              tomography (EIT).  One application of EIT is the imaging of heart and lung
              function in real time.  In this application, electrodes are placed around the
              circumference of the patient's torso, current is applied on the electrodes and
              the resulting voltage is measured.  The resulting 2-D inverse conductivity
              problem is then solved numerically to reconstruct how the electricity passes
              through the interior and to form a cross-sectional image of the patient's
              chest.  Other applications include the detection of breast cancer, monitoring
              for internal bleeding, and the diagnosis of pulmonary embolis (a blood clot in
              the lung).  The proposed approach represents a new class of image
              reconstruction algorithm for the EIT problem.  Work thus far has indicated that
              the algorithm yields more accurate images than the existing fast algorithms,
              since it solves the full set of equations rather than a a more simplified
              version of the problem.  This is particularly important in medical applications
              such as breast cancer detection, where the measured values distinguish between
              the presence of a tumor or a benign cyst.  The algorithm will be tested on real
              data and compared to existing algorithnms in terms of accuracy and efficiency.
