Title       : Isospectral and isotonal metrics with different local geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0104361

Award Number: 0104361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan Szabo zoltan@alpha.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract for DMS - 0104361

The main part of the project describes a new
              isospectral
construction technique (Anticommutator Technique), which
              provides
the first isospectral pairs of metrics on the most simple manifolds:
              on 
balls and spheres. The most striking examples are constructed
on suitable
              spheres, where one of the members of an isospectral pair
is a homogeneous
              metric, while the other is locally inhomogeneous. 
This demonstrates the
              surprising fact that no information about the 
isometries is encoded in the
              spectrum of the Laplacian acting on functions. 
These investigations also
              extend to the Laplacian spectrum of forms. 
Related questions are also
              considered. One of them is construction of 
Brownian-motion-equivalent spaces
              (Isothermal Metrics). 
This equivalence relation is much stronger then the
              isospectrality property,
 yet it does not determine the local geometry. The
              same statement is true 
regarding the metrics with equivalent density
              functions (Isodasyc Metrics).



The old argument between Relativity and
              Quantum Physics is easily discovered 
in the depth of these questions. In
              Relativity, the whole Physics is derived 
from a curved space. Actually,
              Physics is identified with the complete Geometry 
of this curved space.
              Einstein put his idea this way: "There is no such thing as 
Physics.
              Everything is Geometry." Contrary to Relativity, the Quantum Physics 
uses
              only particular aspects of Geometry such as the spectra of several operators
              
or the Brownian Motion defined by a metric space. Einstein suggested,
              however, 
that the Brownian Motion may determine the complete local geometry. 
              
This reflects the extent of the confusion about the
following question: "How
              much Geometry is used by the Quantum Physics?"
The proposed investigations
              demonstrate, for the first time, how little
information about Geometry is used
              by Quantum Physics. For instance,
Quantum Physics completely ignores the
              isometries of the spaces, 
which otherwise form the central piece of a theory
              developed in Geometry. 
 

