Title       : Analytical and Numerical Studies of Direct and Inverse Problems for Parabolic
               Initial-Boundary Value Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0104205

Award Number: 0104205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester F. Caudill, Jr. lcaudill@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the study of direct and inverse problems for parabolic
              partial differential equations.  The PI will utilize both analytical and
              numerical methods to address a number of challenging questions related to two
              important problems in domain identification.  The first problem involves the
              detection and identification of an inhomogeneity inside an otherwise known
              domain.  The second problem involves determination of an unknown portion of the
              boundary of a domain.  In each case, information is provided in the form of
              overly posed boundary values on a portion of the boundary of the domain. 
              Specific attention will be focused on the development of realistic models for
              cracks and inclusions inside a thermally conductive body, theoretical and
              numerical questions related to the inverse problem of crack and inclusion
              detection from thermal data, the development of stable and reliable algorithms
              for the determination of an unknown portion of the boundary of a domain from
              thermal data, and the investigation of a number of issues related to the
              mathematical modeling of corrosion.

When studying physical objects or
              processes, many properties cannot be measured directly, either because it is
              impractical to do so, or because unwanted damage to the object would result. 
              Well-known examples include the detection of tumors inside the human body, the
              detection of oil reservoirs or mineral deposits deep underground, and the
              detection of hidden damage inside an object such as an aircraft wing or
              fuselage.  The field of inverse problems focuses on determining or estimating
              these non-measurable properties by measuring other properties, then using a
              mathematical model (usually a partial differential equation) to connect these
              measurements to the desired properties.  This project investigates the use of
              thermal methods to determine properties of the inside of objects without
              damaging them.  A portion of the outer surface is heated, then the temperature
              on the surface is measured over a period of time.  The relationship between the
              measured temperature and the structure of the inside of the object can be
              modeled mathematically.  This project focuses on the analysis of this
              mathematical model, and on the development of a practical algorithm which will
              permit the extraction of information about the interior of the object from
              these temperature measurements.  This analysis will provide a theoretical
              foundation to develop stable and reliable algorithms for use in a wide variety
              of important applications, including the analysis of corrosion damage inside
              aircraft wings and fuselages, the inspection of newly manufactured objects for
              interior cracks or voids (quality control), and in medical diagnostics.
