Title       : An Efficient Algorithm for Inversion of Truncated Spiral Cone Beam Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0104033

Award Number: 0104033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Katsevich akatsevi@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A new approach for Fourier transform spectrometry (FTS) is proposed.  The
              principal advantage of FTS is the tremendous throughput improvement compared to
              dispersive or filter spectrometers.  Traditional FTS techniques, however,
              require a precision scanning mirror.  This requirement significantly increases
              the cost, and is difficult to implement for use from a moving platform or for a
              dynamic target.  A more recent technique does not require scanning. This
              provides the ability to acquire all spectral bands simultaneously, allows high
              spatial resolution from a moving platform, improves the reliability, and lowers
              the mass, volume and cost. These non-scanning FTS, however, have yet been
              unable to exploit the tremendous potential throughput advantage of FTS, since
              they require operation in a "pushbroom" mode.  In this mode, a narrow slit
              masks the field-of-view (FOV) to a narrow strip and this severely reduces the
              throughput.  The proposed approach uses deconvolution techniques to provide
              spatial resolution along-track, without the need for a narrow field mask.  This
              technique can therefore simultaneously provide both the throughput advantage of
              traditional FTS, and all the advantages of non-scanning FTS.

Imaging
              spectrometry is a powerful tool for Earth Science, particularly for
              investigation of land cover and land use change. When applied to Space Science,
              particularly exploration of the solar system, imaging spectrometry is the
              primary tool for global determination of surface mineralogy and is also useful
              for studies of atmospheric composition. In Human Exploration and Development of
              Space, spectrometry is being employed for diagnostics of reusable rocket
              engines, by observation of the exhaust plume.  The proposed technique provides
              a factor of 10 to 1000 advantage in throughput compared to current techniques
              for imaging spectrometry, allowing greatly improved radiometric resolution. The
              absence of moving parts improves the reliability and lowers the cost, mass and
              power requirements.

