Title       : Quantitative Genetics of Social Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0104937

Award Number: 0104937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333676             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope F. Kukuk pkukuk@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5946,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title:  Quantitative Genetics of Social Behavior

PI:  Penelope F. Kukuk


              Social behavior is found in all types of organisms and is a characteristic
of
              ecologically dominant species.  The study of how social evolution came
about
              has concentrated on selection. To date, theoretical and
empirical work has
              focused on how group life and social cooperation influence
survival and
              reproduction.  This work began in the nineteen sixties and
continues today. 
              The other side of the evolutionary coin, the study of the
genetic mechanisms
              underlying social cooperation, has been neglected.  Even
in the social
              Hymenoptera there is very little information concerning the
most basic issues.
               It is not known to what extent differences in social
behaviors among
              individuals in a species are based on differences in their
genetic makeup. In
              species where females all have the potential to be
competent reproductives, we
              do not know if there are enough genetic
differences between individuals
              underlying any given social behavior to
suggest that the behavior has the
              potential to evolve.  Due to this lack of
knowledge it is not possible to
              predict the evolutionary trajectory of
social behaviors or to examine how
              inheritance of a suite of socially
relevant traits may be correlated.  This
              one-sided approach to social
evolution is based on methodological constraints.
               Appropriate social
species have neither the large reproductive output nor the
              ease in
laboratory rearing needed to use the powerful methodology of
              quantitative
genetic research, a methodology that can best address these
              questions.  This
limitation is changing.  Due to new but well tested methods
              for obtaining
information rich genetic fingerprints for individuals, based on
              multiple
highly variable marker genes such as microsatellites,  in combination
              with
conceptual and statistical advances it is now possible to apply the
              methods
of quantitative genetics to social behavior in a field setting for the
              first
time.
 A collaboration between a quantitative geneticist (Allen Moore)
              and a
behavioral ecologist  (Penny Kukuk) will apply new methodologies in a
              field
based quantitative genetic study of social behaviors for a group
              living
halictine bee species Lasioglossum (Chilalictus) hemichalceum.  
              This
communal species, in which all group members reproduce, is an ideal
              species
for such a study.  In this species, individuals differ from one
              another in
social behaviors and microsatellite markers are available to
              produce precise
genetic fingerprints for individuals.    Information on
              similarities
between individuals in their microsatellite based genetic
              fingerprints
and easily observed social behaviors will be used to determine
              components of
inheritance for a suite of behavioral characteristics that are
              known to have
important effects on survival and reproduction.  The research
              will pioneer
the quantitative genetic study of social behavior and pioneer the
              use of
quantitative genetic methodology for behavioral traits in a natural
              setting.
