Title       : Research Proposal in Algebraic Geometry and String Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0104354

Award Number: 0104354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Donagi donagi@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Some profound connections have been developed, over the past few years, between
              algebraic geometry and integrable systems, on the one hand, and quantum field
              theory and string theory on the other.  The aim of this proposal is to suggest
              some new links, and to explore and expand the existing ones.  The first
              proposed project involves a conjectural extension of the Fourier-Mukai
              transform, or the spectral construction, to several new situations, including
              fibrations without sections, noncommutative geometries, and higher dimensional
              complex or special Lagrangian torus fibers.  The special Lagrangian case in
              particular casts new light on the SYZ approach to mirror symmetry and suggests
              the existence of an integrable system structure on the stringy moduli space of
              Calabi-Yaus.  The next two projects involve applications of the first to two
              central issues of quantum field theory and string theory.  Specifically, the
              second project seeks to derive a fully realistic version of the Standard Model
              of particle physics, starting from particular M-theory vacua.  This is based on
              the construction techniques for vector bundles on genus-1 fibrations discussed
              in the first project.  The third project studies several aspects of the other
              major conjectural string duality, the one between the heterotic string and
              F-theory.  Proposed work includes the rigorous establishment of the isomorphism
              on all strata of the geometric boundary in complete generality, and its
              extension to the interior in one important case where it may also be possible
              to establish the equality of the superpotentials on both sides.

String
              theory is generally considered to be the leading candidate for a unified
              physical theory which explains everything we know about the physical world,
              from the smallest sub-particle scales to the entire universe.  Our confidence
              in the power of string theory to describe the real world relies to a great
              extent on the recent discovery of string dualities and their understanding via
              geometric tools.  This proposal aims to explore and expand these recent
              applications of algebraic geometry to string theory and especially to
              dualities. It also includes a range of educational activities, including
              curriculum development, the writing of a textbook, and extensive work with
              undergraduate and graduate students, aimed at the dissemination of new
              knowledge concerning the interactions of mathematics and high energy physics.

