Title       : Olivine Geochemistry and Stable Isotope Studies of the Giant Jinchuan Ni-Cu
               Sulfide Deposit, Western China: Investigation of Ore Genesis in a Magma Conduit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0104580

Award Number: 0104580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186327             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chusi Li cli@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Ripley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Li&Ripley
EAR-0104580

The formation of large Ni-Cu sulfide deposits in mafic
              magmatic systems appears to require: 1) attainment of sulfide saturation
              through country rock contamination, 2) concentration of immiscible sulfide
              liquid in fluid dynamically favored areas within magma conduits, and 3)
              enrichment of the metal content of the coalesced sulfide by reaction with
              continued flow of magma through the conduit. The Jinchuan deposit in
              north-central China is the largest conduit-related occurrence in the world. 
              Major reserves of Ni- and Cu-sulfides are located within ultramafic rocks that
              intrude a Proterozoic metasedimentary sequence. To date the deposit has not
              been investigated with respect to the potential role of country rock
              contamination in ore genesis, nor have the physicochemical dynamics of metal
              upgrading of sulfide by fresh magma been evaluated.
We propose a detailed
              study of olivine chemical variations and stable isotopic distributions within
              the rock types present in the Jinchuan intrusion. Olivine chemistry, in
              conjunction with whole rock major and trace element data, will be used to
              determine if multiple magmas have been involved in building the Jinchuan
              intrusion, and if so, to what extent they have interacted with sulfide to
              produce enriched Ni and Cu contents.  Sulfur and oxygen isotopic data will be
              collected from country rocks and both mineralized and non-mineralized intrusive
              rocks. These data will be used to evaluate the extent of country rock
              assimilation recorded in the ore-bearing intrusive rocks, and to construct
              mixing models that will be utilized in simulating the history of sulfide
              saturation and concentration in the magmatic system. Findings from the proposed
              research will not only improve our understanding of the formation of the
              Jinchuan deposit and other deposits of similar type around the world, but will
              also improve our knowledge of dynamic petrological processes in mafic magmatic
              conduit systems.


