Title       : Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0104177

Award Number: 0104177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207104             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Davis jfdavis@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent E. Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We investigate the classification of compact topological and smooth
manifolds,
              as well as embedding problems - knot theory.  We use both new
and classical
              homological, geometric and analytic techniques such as
algebraic L-and
              K-theory, controlled topology, operator theory and Von
Neumann signatures. 
              One problem attacked, from differential geometry, is
to determine whether
              almost flat manifolds bound compact manifolds.   New
knot invariants, defined
              during the prior grant, are continuing to reveal
new and unexpected knotting
              phenomena and will be used to further
investigate the classification of
              topological four manifolds within a
fixed homology type.  These invariants
              will also be applied to further
compute the topological concordance group of
              knots, and to the rich
structure of three manifolds as seen through descending
              series of the
fundamental group.  Another problem is to compute and apply
              characteristic
classes for combinatorial vector bundles, an initial step in
              understanding
a new category of manifolds - the combinatorial differentiable
              manifolds
of Gelfand-MacPherson.  A final topic is the computation of
              algebraic K-
and L-theory using controlled topology and applying these
              computations to
manifolds with fixed fundamental group.

A n-dimensional
              manifold is a set of points which is locally modeled on an
n-dimensional
              linear space.  For instance a surface is a locally
2-dimensional linear space,
              such as a sphere, or the surface of a donut
(torus).  The principal problem of
              geometric topology is the
classification of manifolds.  In differential
              topology we also ask how
many ways we may do calculus on a given manifold,
              addressing the
uniqueness question. The fundamental group of a manifold gives
              an
algebraic structure to the collection of all loops in the manifold,
              thus
providing a pathway to algebra.   The researchers focus on both
              high
dimensional and low dimensional manifolds.  Four dimensional manifolds
              are
of particular interest as the results and techniques in this
              dimension
manifest the harmony of the algebraic techniques which have found
              success
in high dimensional manifold topology and the geometric techniques
              which
prevail in dimension three.  Investigating the foundations of manifold
              and
knot theory fundamentally underpins our understanding of
              geometry,
algebra, physics and differential equations.  Additionally, knot
              theory
plays a growing role in string theory, quantum field theory and the
              study
of DNA.


---------- Forwarded message ----------
Date: Fri, 11 May
              2001 14:27:02 -0500 (EST)
From: "James F. Davis" <jfdavis@indiana.edu>
To:
              Christopher Stark <cstark@nsf.gov>
Cc: korr@indiana.edu
Subject: Re: NSF
              proposal recommendation

Hi Chris,

     Kent and I were very happy to here
              that you plan to recommend that
our NSF proposal be granted.  However, some of
              circumstances have changed
since we wrote the proposal, so I thought I should
              discuss them with you
in case the budget is affected.  Sorry for the delay
              getting back to you,
I was visiting the University of Chicago this week.
    
              We asked for summer money to support three graduate students: Karl
Bloch,
              Diarmuid Crowley,  and Tae-Hee Kim.  Well, I am happy to report
that Diarmuid
              Crowley has been named a Clay Mathematical Institute
Lift-Off Mathematician
              

http://www.claymath.org/researchers/index.htm

and will receive some
              money from them this summer (provided some visa
problems work out.)  He is
              suggesting to Clay that they award him the
money from June 13 to July 27. 
              After Aug 1, I believe he will be
supported by Max Planck Institute in Bonn. 
              However, he could still use
NSF money, for example, he is attending the 3-week
              School on
high-dimensional manifold topology in at the ICTP in Trieste,
              Italy,
mostly at his own expense.  Please advise us if it is necessary
              to
rebudget and return the money allotted to Diarmuid.

     The second
              change is with regard to my proposed REU student, Matt
Cecil.  Matt Cecil
              worked with me as an REU student last summer (partially
supported by NSF
              funds), and continued throughout the academic year.  He
is attending UCSD as a
              math graduate student in the fall.  However, due to
mathematical reasons and
              personal reasons, he will not be an REU student
with me this summer.  So the
              question again is - what to do with the money
allotted to him?  I talked to
              our chair, Dan Maki, and he said that he
could use the money to help
              undergraduate research projects connected with
industry.  Dan has many
              industrial contacts throughout the state of
Indiana and had lead such projects
              for several years.  The money would
primarily go to student travel
              expenses.

    So, Chris, please advise on whether we should give some money
              back to
the NSF and rebudget, or just go with the modifications outlined
              above.

Jim





