Title       : Development of a Sample, Lightweight Cloud/Radiation Instrumentation Package and
               Balloon Platform for Deployment at the SHEBA Ice Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9504356

Award Number: 9504356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342693             (Estimated)
Investigator: Knut H. Stamnes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9504356  Stamnes    Research supported by this grant is under the auspices
              of the Arctic Systems Sciences (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is
              jointly sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar
              Programs.  Work to be performed represents preliminary steps towards a major
              5-year research project named SHEBA are: (1) to develop, test and implement
              models of arctic ocean-atmosphere-ice processes that demonstrably improve
              simulations of the present day arctic climate, including its variability, using
              General Circulation Models (GCMs), and (2) to improve the interpretation of
              satellite remote sensing data in the Arctic for analysis of the arctic climate
              system and provide reliable data for model input, model validation and climate
              monitoring.    This work is a collaborative effort between the University of
              Nevada, Dessert Research Institute and the University of Alaska, Geophysical
              Institute.  Several key atmospheric measurements during the SHEBA field program
              will be made from tethered balloons that will carry scientific instruments up
              to a kilometer above the ice surface.  Some of these instruments must be
              adapted and tested for Arctic conditions.      One group of measurements focus
              on cloud microphytsics and another group involve radiative heat fluz
              measurements.  The microphysics instruments will provide characterizations of
              cloud particles at different altitudes as the balloon moves vertically through
              cloud layers.  The radiative instrument package will consist of self-leveling
              up- and down- short-wave flux radiometers, cloud liquid water instruments, and
              meteorological packages for pressure, temperature, humidity, and wind.  The
              collaborative effort will provide common operational and data logging
              components.  Partial support is also being provided by Dept. of Energy.
