Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Low-Dimensional Topology and Geometric Group
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9504946

Award Number: 9504946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Mosher mosher@andromeda.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Oertel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504946  Mosher       This research project is focussed on negative curvature in
              the  sense of Gromov.  The principal investigator (working jointly with  U.
              Oertel) has proved a "Lamination Theorem" which says that for a  compact
              cell-complex X, exactly one of two alternatives holds:  either X is negatively
              curved in the sense of Gromov, or there is  a 2-dimensional lamination mapping
              to X with certain properties,  namely the lamination has a transverse measure
              of Euler  characteristic zero, and the map from the universal cover of a leaf 
              to X is least area.  The primary aim of this project is to use the  Lamination
              Theorem to investigate the "weak hyperbolization  conjecture" for a 3-manifold
              M, which says that M is negatively  curved in the sense of Gromov if and only
              if the fundamental group  of M has no Z+Z subgroup.  The strong form of this
              conjecture has  been one of the greatest challenges in 3-manifold theory.  The
              weak  conjecture should be a significant step in proving the strong 
              conjecture, in light of recent work of Cannon on characterizing  hyperbolic
              3-manifold groups, and work of Gabai on the topological  rigidity problem for
              hyperbolic manifolds; if these various  projects can be completed, then the
              hyperbolization conjecture  would be proved.  This research project is also
              concerned with  several other topics, in particular: understanding properties
              of  automatic and biautomatic groups; the geometric group theory of  mapping
              class groups; constructions of and properties of  pseudo-Anosov flows on
              3-manifolds.       Group theory, the mathematical study of symmetry invented by
               E. Galois in the 1700's, has for much of its history been a subject  of
              abstract algebra, despite its geometric origins.  Starting with  work of M.
              Gromov, J. Cannon, W. Thurston and others in the 1970's  and 1980's, the newly
              emergent field of geometric group theory has  returned group theory to its
              origins.  The basic problem, proposed  by Gromov in his 1983 address to the
              International Congress of  Math ematics, is to take a "group" (an abstractly
              described  collection of symmetries) and to understand its geometry.  As a 
              particular case of Gromov's program, suppose that S is a  3-dimensional space,
              much like the space that we inhabit, and  suppose that G is a certain group of
              symmetries of S; in this  situation Thurston conjectured in the late 1970's
              that the geometry  of G should fall into a list of specific classes.  In most
              cases  Thurston's conjecture says that G should have "hyperbolic"  geometry, a
              type of geometry that describes how 3-dimensional space  fits into
              4-dimensional space-time in relativity theory.  The main  thrust of the current
              research project is an attempt to prove  Thurston's "hyperbolization
              conjecture."  Recent work of D. Gabai,  J. Cannon, and the investigator wih U.
              Oertel suggests a three-step  approach to proving the hyperbolization
              conjecture, and this  project is concerned with one step, the so-called "weak 
              hyperbolization conjecture."  While this is an ambitious project,  the
              investigator expects it to be productive; if it is completely  successful, and
              if the other two steps are finished as the work of  Cannon and of Gabai
              suggests, then the hyperbolization conjecture  will be proved.  ***
