Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Methods for Order Restricted Inference in
               Survival Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9504891

Award Number: 9504891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Dykstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jens Praestgaard  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504891  PI:  Jens Praestgaard  Institution:  University of Iowa 
              Title:  Asymptotic Methods for Order Restricted Inference in Survival Analysis 
                ABSTRACT:    The purpose of the research is to develop large-sample theory
              for   inference from survival data when the unknown parameters exhibit  order
              restrictions. Such restrictions occur frequently in survival   analysis. For
              example, if a clinical trial involves administering   a drug in increasing
              doses to the cohorts under study, then the   survival curves computed for each
              group should be ordered according to  dose level. In linkage analysis, for the
              purpose of   mapping a quantitative genetic trait, it may be known that the
              trait under  study  is more prevalent for one genotype than for others.   
              Although appropriate estimators in these settings   are known, their
              distributional properties have not been studied.   Thus, order restricted
              methods are often not used when it would   potentially help the data analysis. 
              For estimation purposes it would  give estimators with higher degree of
              accuracy.   For testing purposes it would give higher power to be able  to
              consider order restricted alternatives.        The research centers on
              investigating statistical methods in the   presence of order restrictions.
              These restrictions occur often in   biotechnological problems.  For instance,
              in a clinical trial to  determine drug efficacy, it is often the case that the
              drug is   administered in increasing doses. In genetical linkage analysis    it
              is often known that a certain genotype lowers the time until the  onset of a
              disease more than do other possible genotypes. If the   interest is on
              determining the drug efficacy (in the first case)  or finding out where the
              gene is located (second case), then the   statistical methods, which separate
              the noise in the data from the   signal, must incorporate these known
              orderings. The investigators  study ways of incorporating such information.
              They believe that   the resulting statistical method ology will be more
              appropriate   than present methods for dealing  with biotechnological data  
              where such orderings are present.
