Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9504637

Award Number: 9504637
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmichael S. Roberts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Carmichael S. Roberts  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Roberts received his doctoral degree from   Duke
              University under the supervision of Professor Bertram Fraser-Reid.    Dr.
              Roberts will continue research at Harvard University under the   sponsorship of
              Professor George M. Whitesides.  His postdoctoral research   will target cell
              adhesion processes relevant to the influenza virus.  The   research will focus
              on understanding better a structure-activity   relationship of neuraminidase, a
              catalyst in post-infection release of   newly formed virions from the host
              cell, by developing polymeric   inhibitors of its activity.  The interaction of
              biocompatible polymers   with the influenza virus will help define the
              importance of polyvalency   and multicooperative binding observed during
              infection, and in the cell   adhesion processes in general.  The Postdoctoral
              Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important
              infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of
              new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical
              research and teaching.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
