Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9504665

Award Number: 9504665
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana M. Watkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NY Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, NY  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Diana M. Watkins has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Watkins received her doctoral degree from   the University
              of Texas at Austin under the supervision of Professor   Marye Anne Fox.  Dr.
              Watkins  will continue research at Columbia   University under the sponsorship
              of Professor Nicholas Turro.  Her   postdoctoral research will focus on the
              investigation of host-guest   interactions between noncovalently bound donors
              and acceptors on a series   of dendrimer macromolecules.  The studies will
              examine rates of electron   transfer and binding affinities under a variety of
              conditions.  Transient   laser spectroscopy  will be used in the studies of the
              electron transfer   mechanisms and surface binding characteristics.  Knowledge
              of these   systems will contribute to the long-range goal of design of a  
              macromolecular system which can build up multiple long-lived charges on a  
              single array to catalyze multielectron reactions using light.  The Postdoctoral
              Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important
              infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of
              new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical
              research and teaching.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
