Title       : Transfer of Greenhouse and Other Trace Gases to the Oceans, Marine Stratus, and
               Sea Spray Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9504481

Award Number: 9504481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Z. Jacobson jacobson@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1045,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM-9504481  Jacobson     This project is funded through the Faculty Early
              Career Development (CAREER) program. It consists of a research and an
              educational component.   In the research part, the transfer of carbon dioxide,
              sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and other trace species from the atmosphere to
              ocean water, sea spray aerosols, and marine stratus will be studied. The
              resulting information will then be used in regional and global computer
              simulations. This will lead to a better treatment of atmosphere-ocean carbon
              dioxide exchange in climate models and to a better understanding of trace gas
              exchange between sea spray particles and the atmosphere. Particles that grow by
              gas absorption affect climate directly by attenuating short-wave radiation.
              Such particles also remove some acids from and release other acids to the gas
              phase. To carry out these studies, existing chemical, microphysical, and
              dynamical computer programs will be used, improved, and re-inserted into a
              larger modeling system. Mesoscale and global computer simulations as well as
              sensitivity studies will be carried out, and the results analyzed.   For the
              educational component, five courses will be developed covering (1) the science
              of urban, regional, and global air pollution, (2) computer modeling of
              atmospheric pollution, (3) meteorology and the atmospheric environment, (4)
              cloud microphysics and chemistry, and (5) atmospheric radiative transfer.
              Furthermore, the PI will work to improve classroom communication, write
              programs for and set up computer laboratories for course projects, evaluate the
              effects of courses and laboratories on student learning, encourage students
              from diverse disciplines and underrepresented groups to participate in courses,
              work to foster undergraduate education, advise undergraduate and graduate
              students, and encourage students to participate in research projects. Finally
              he will develop a course textbook and require students to take part in a small
              research project in some courses.
