Title       : A Cloud Profiling Radar for SHEBA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9504254

Award Number: 9504254
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Taneil Uttal Taneil.Uttal@noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Madison Post  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Moran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Kropfli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NOAA-Environ Research Lab
	      325 Broadway
	      Boulder, CO  803033328    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the Arctic Systems
              Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly sponsored by the
              Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs.  Work to be
              performed represents preliminary steps towards a major 5-year research project
              named SHEBA, which is envisioned to study the heat budget of the Arctic Ocean
              and its impact on global change.  The primary goals of SHEBA are:  (1) to
              develop, test and implement models of arctic ocean-atmosphere-ice processes
              that demonstrably improve simulations of the present day arctic climate,
              including its variability, using General Circulation Models (GCMs), and (2) to
              improve the interpretation of satellite remote sensing data in the Arctic for
              analysis of the arctic climate system and provide reliable data for model
              input, model validation and climate monitoring.     This work will develop,
              construct, and prepare for deployment a 35-GHz cloud monitoring radar which
              will be built specifically for autonomous operation at the main SHEBA ice camp.
               This unique instrumentation will be useful in addressing an identified
              scientific issue of SHEBA: the sea arctic cloud-radiation feedback mechanism. 
              Vertical profiles of cloud structural and microphysical properties will be
              measured continuously and under conditions when no other sensors are able to
              provide comparable observations.  Some of these properties are cloud
              boundaries, the existence of multiple layers and optically thick layers, ice
              crystal fallspeeds, and, with information from other systems, characteristic
              ice particle size, concentration, and mass content.
