Title       : Insect Immunity Against Parasitoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9504796

Award Number: 9504796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Nappi anappi@orion.it.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504796  Nappi      The overall objective of the proposed project is to gain a
              better understanding of the insect immune system by studying the cytotoxic
              responses made by the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster against the parasitoid
              Leptopilina boulardi.  When infected, immune reactive insects typically form
              darkly colored, melanotic capsules around the foreign objects, but virtually
              nothing is known of the cytotoxic molecules that specifically target and
              destroy encapsulated parasites.  The Drosophila Leptopilina model provides an
              excellent genetic system for the systematic analysis of the cellular and
              biochemical processes involved in insect immunity.  Using genetically
              well-defined strains of D. melanogaster, Dr. Nappi will monitor the
              parasite-induced generation of such potentially cytotoxic substances as melanin
              precursors (e.g., quinones, semiquinones), and reactive oxygen species (e.g.,
              superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide).  The identification
              of cytotoxic molecules and knowledge of the mechanisms by which they are
              produced will be extremely useful in answering some of the fundamental
              questions concerning immune recognition in insects.  Parasite-induced changes
              in melanin precursors and antioxidant enzymes will be monitored in known
              resistant and susceptible host strains, and in antioxidant deficient strains,
              by using high pressure liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection,
              UV/vis spectroscopy, and fluorometric detection.  Such a comprehensive approach
              for investigation the formation of cytotoxic molecules promises to provide
              interesting insights into the importance of certain free radicals and reactive
              precursors of melanin in insect immunity.  ***
