Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Localization and Periodicity in Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9504497

Award Number: 9504497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aldridge K. Bousfield bous@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504497  Bousfield       Bousfield will continue his research in homotopy
              theory, using  localization methods to expose and analyze unstable periodic 
              phenomena.  During the 1980's, remarkable progress was made toward  a global
              understanding of stable homotopy theory, showing that some  major features
              arise chromatically from an interplay of periodic  phenomena arranged in a
              hierarchy.  This project is part of an  effort to develop a similar
              understanding in unstable homotopy  theory.  In recent work, Bousfield
              introduced a hierarchy of  localizations, called the vn-periodizations for
              positive integers  n, which serve to resolve a given space into a chromatic
              tower with  monochromatic fibres.  He will work to understand these 
              vn-periodizations of spaces as well as the closely related  homological
              localizations.  He has already established strong links  between
              v1-periodizations and K-homology localizations of spaces,  leading to solutions
              of old problems concerning the K-theory of  iterated loop spaces.      
              Geometric objects or spaces play a central role in  mathematics, arising for
              instance from the solution sets of systems  of equations.  Beyond their usual
              measurements, such spaces have  deeper properties which persist even after
              drastic deformations.  These properties begin almost trivially with the number
              of separate  components and the number of holes but become tremendously rich
              and  informative in higher dimensions.  The field of homotopy theory is 
              devoted to their study using powerful algebraic and geometric  techniques. 
              Various periodic phenomena in homotopy theory have  been discovered since the
              1950's, and an exciting "chromatic"  approach to the subject was developed in
              the 1980's, allowing  resolutions of confusingly complicated phenomena into
              much simpler  periodic parts.  This approach was originally restricted to
              certain  simpler phenomena known as stable phenomena, but it is now being 
              extended to a full, fascinating, important range of unstable  homotopy
              theoretic phenome na.  ***
