Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Modelling with Applications to Markov Chain
               Monte Carlo Methods and Design and Analysis in Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9504561

Award Number: 9504561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Tweedie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean P. Meyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9504561 Tweedie  Abstract      This project aims to extend the stability theory
              mf Markov processes, and consider its application to two specific areas, namely
               the behavior of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods and the analysis of
              complex network systems. The theoretical work will involve (a) methods of
              evaluating model stability and instability, which will include both discrete
              and continuous time Markov models; (b) development of performance measures for
              stable models, and specifically comparison of rates at which such models
              achieve a stable regime; (b) detailed behavior of stochastically ordered or
              partially stochastically ordered models; and (d) robustness of system design
              against perturbations in assumptions. One application of these methods will be
              to MCMC methods, which  are currently revolutionizing Bayesian and
              computational statistics methods, and under this project it is hoped to develop
              on-line convergence criteria, methods of evaluating convergence rates, and ways
              of speeding up these algorithms. The other area of application is in the
              analysis of  complex network, queueing and storage systems. The specific types
              of such application envisaged include the currently high-priority area of
              manufacturing systems, and more general queueing systems with feedback, for
              which the stability and performance results to be developed are well suited.   
              In evaluating many complex systems, there are two steps where mathematical
              models, especially those in probability and statistics, play a critical role.
              The first step is in describing the system. This research addresses the
              modeling of ``manufacturing networks'', currently of central importance in the
              high-technology manufacturing sector. Here the aim is to describe the way in
              which items such as semiconductor components move around the various machines
              which work and rework components to get to a final product. As with many
              models, the mathematics that describes such manufacturing systems also
              describes other systems, such as the movement  of bits over an information
              network. The work proposed here will attack the vital question: when is such a
              system stable, in the sense of running in equilibrium rather than developing
              problems which cause shutdowns, backlogs or overflows. This modeling step helps
              define the crucial parameters that describe ranges when systems can be
              controlled: the second step is then in estimating such parameters, and here it
              is proposed to work on new simulation methods that enable such estimation to
              take place. These " Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)  algorithms" have very wide
              applicability, but are themselves "complex systems", and just as with real
              systems, they can develop overflows and backlogs in usage: the work here should
              provide methods of control for MCMC algorithms leading to faster and more
              accurate methods of simulation. These simulation methods have found application
              in a huge range of areas, from pattern recognition, to agricultural
              experiments, to clinical and epidemiological areas, to environmental
              assessments: the research supported in this proposal therefore propagates to
              usage in very many areas indeed.
