Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1996  
File        : a9504655

Award Number: 9504655
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew P. Augustine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Matthew P. Augustine  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Augustine received his doctoral degree from  
              Yale University under the supervision of Professor Kurt Zilm.  Dr.   Augustine
              will continue research at the University of California at   Berkeley under the
              sponsorship of Professor Alexander Pines.  His   postdoctoral research will
              target understanding chemical reactions of   adsorbates within zeolite
              catalysts.  Combination of separated local   field and chemical exchange NMR
              experiments will be used to correlate   dipolar interactions with isotropic
              chemical shifts in order to obtain   detailed structural information about the
              adsorbate molecule.  The   research pursues novel applications of solids NMR
              techniques to   structural questions in both materials, as well as biological
              science.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed
              as   an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge  
              and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
