Title       : RUI: A New Method to Obtain Highly Accurate Three Dimensional Analysis of Crack
               Propagation and Stress on Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9504562

Award Number: 9504562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45544              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hae-Soo Oh hso@math.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1037,9229,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Oh       The investigator develops numerical methods for solving 
              three-dimensional crack propagation problems.  In order to obtain  any
              practical solutions for crack propagation, the Finite Element  Method (FEM)
              requires use of either graded discretizations (very  small elements near the
              crack front, larger elements elsewhere) or  special singular basis functions. 
              The graded discretizations make  the computation very expensive, while singular
              basis functions  destroy the nice band structure of the FEM.  Thus, the
              standard FEM  is impractical for accurate numerical simulation of 3-D crack 
              propagation.  The accuracy of the FE solution depends on the  regularity of the
              true solution.  The investigator studies a new  method, called Method of
              Auxiliary Mapping (MAM), to deal with  three-dimensional singularities: vertex,
              edge, and edge-vertex.  To  remove the ineffectiveness of the FEM in the
              presence of  singularities, MAM transforms a region where the stress functions 
              are singular to a region where the transformed stress functions  are of higher
              regularity.  The investigator also studies three  auxiliary mappings for these
              purposes.       The annual cost of fracture-related damage in the United 
              States (human injury and loss of life aside) has been estimated at  more than
              $10 billion.  Metal fatigue has been cited as the  probable cause of several
              recent airline accidents, and the  airworthiness of aging fleets is a national
              concern.  Material  failures are a major concern for other large engineering 
              structures (ships, bridges, nuclear power plants, hydroelectric  dams, and so
              on).  Thus, for effective inspection and preventive  maintenance programs, an
              accurate fracture analysis is demanded.  However, because of the complicated
              geometry and nonlinearities  that characterize fracture mechanics, the use of
              analytical  techniques is very limited and in most cases not practical. 
              Numerical methods seem to be the only feasible approach for such  analysis.  On
              the basis of very successful results o f the stress  analysis for plane
              elasticity problems, the investigator studies a  new method that should yield
              highly accurate numerical simulation  of three-dimensional fracture analysis.
