Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9504671

Award Number: 9504671
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenbin Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IL Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, IL  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr.Wenbin Lin  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship   in
              Chemistry.  Dr. Lin received his doctoral degree from the University   of
              Illinois at Urbana-Champaign under the supervision of Professor   Gregory
              Girolami.  Dr. Lin will continue research at Northwestern   Univesity under the
              sponsorship of Professor Tobin Marks.  His   postdoctoral research will target
              the synthesis and characterization of   novel organic second-order nonlinear
              optical materials. The work seeks a   fundamental understanding of the
              microscopic structures of the acentric   chromophoric multilayers which are
              prepared using siloxane self-assembly   technology, as well as the
              interrelationships between microscopic   structures, bulk nonlinearities, and
              thermal and temporal stabilities of   these self-assembled films.  Better
              understanding of these   interrelationships is crucial to the development of
              novel second-order   nonlinear optical materials for application in practical
              devices.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed
              as   an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge  
              and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
