Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Processing Massive Noisy Data with Hidden Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9504414

Award Number: 9504414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianqing Fan jfan@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Marron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS  95-04414    PI(s):   Jianqing Fan - 1989, Stephen Marron - 1982  
                    Institution:   U of NC Chapel Hill   Title:    Processing Massive Noisy
              Data with Hidden Structure        Abstract:    This research involves a few
              inter-related statistical  problems ranging from processing images and finding
              informative structure   from massive data, to analyzing survival data,
              evaluating the success of a  business advertisement and understanding the home
              range of animals.  In contrast with traditional approaches,  the methods do not
              assume any restrictive form, and are flexible  enough to detect fine
              structures.  This project covers a wide  array of statistics methodological
              developments and foundational  research.  The new developments enhance the
              availability of   statistical tools, and can lead to significant improvements
              on  existing methods for extracting information from  noisy data. Specific
              objectives are  develop new statistical methodologies  and investigate their
              foundational properties for flexible statistical modeling  in processing
              high-dimensional data, nonparametric confidence intervals,  mode detection and
              signal processing.    Many scientific disciplines depend in some way on
              extracting structural  information from noisy data.  Fields ranging from
              processing noisy images  and evaluating business marketing, to analyzing
              survival data and   forecasting economic climates, which are universes apart in
              their backgrounds,  nevertheless have the common  problem  of drawing
              conclusions via processing noisy signals.  Such problems may be abstracted as a
              statistical function estimation   problem and can be analyzed by various
              techniques in this project.  The objective of this research is to develop and 
              evaluate flexible statistical modeling techniques.  These techniques  can be
              applied in the Federal Strategic Areas such as monitoring  environmental and
              global changes via processing massive collected data  where informative
              structures can hardly be detected by traditional approache s,   and building
              statistical modeling for economic and business activities  in the civil
              infrastructure. The investigators will take advantage of modern  computing
              facilities, and use statistical knowledge to avoid  unnecessary data mining and
              hence reduce significantly data processing time.  Thus, the knowledge gained in
              this study will also be useful   in high performance computing of a federal
              strategic area.
