Title       : Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Radial Basis Function Neural Networks for
               Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9504407

Award Number: 9504407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle H. Ungar ungar@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Ungar  Radial Basis Functions (RBFs) are a class of artificial neural
              networks for process  control applications.  Commonly, the k-Means clustering
              algorithm is applied to the predictor (  independent variables), after which a
              linear regression layer maps the hidden unit activations to the  appropriate
              responses (dependent variables).  The PIs plan to explore an RBF architecture
              which is  suited to statistical analysis.  The statistical model underlying the
              architecture is a mixture model  in which the mixture coefficients are radial
              basis functions and the mixture components are constant  or polynomial
              functions.  Depending on the assumptions used to generate the model, different 
              generalizations of radial and elliptical basis functions result.  This allows
              the use of the  expectation maximization (EM) technique for finding maximum
              likelihood estimators of the parameters.  In addition, algorithms will be
              developed to partially invert the networks, estimate the local  prediction
              error of the network, recognize novel data points, automatically select the
              number of basis  functions, and incrementally  update the network efficiently
              as data are collected.  The techniques  will be tested on real data from
              chemical plants, compared to other approximation methods with respect  to speed
              and accuracy, and modified as needed to achieve fast, accurate, and robust
              performance.  This  is a coordinated project between two investigators, a
              mathematician and a chemical engineer, at two  different institutions. 
              Industrial data are to be provided by the DuPont Company.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
