Title       : Protection and Translation in Multimodel Multiprocessors: The MIP FUGU
               Workstation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1995     
File        : a9504399

Award Number: 9504399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Foster                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant Agarwal agarwal@cag.lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is extending the Alewife multiprocessor to explore two  aspects of
              future scalable multiprocessors.  One aspect is  protection.  Protection is
              required on accesses to hardware  resources, with as little software overhead
              as possible.  For  example, when a message sender and receiver are part of the
              same  application, they should be able to directly access network  hardware. 
              The other aspect is address translation, so that each  application can have its
              own address space.  All processors  executing an application must have the same
              address space, however.   To ensure this, memory mapping hardware is placed at
              each node of  the multiprocessor, and must be kept coherent.    The FUGU system
              provides three modes of interprocessor  communication.  Shared memory is
              provided by hardware synthesized  messages among nodes, which maintain cache
              coherence.  Short  messages can be sent directly by performing loads and stores
              to I/O  registers that are in each node's address space.  Longer messages  are
              managed by a DMA engine that is separate from the processor.    Translation and
              protection for shared memory and for short messages  are provided by hardware
              enhancements that maintain coherence in  the translation lookaside buffers and
              ensure that messages are  received only by the processes that they are
              addressed to.  For  long messages, only minimal support for address translation
              is  provided by the hardware since the need for such translation is  likely to
              be rare.  Any needed translation will be provided by  software.
