Title       : Statistical and Computational Problems in Genetics and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9504393

Award Number: 9504393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1010540            (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Tavare stavare@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Waterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9184,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This   proposal   addresses   a  variety   of   statistical   and 
              computational  problems  that arise  in  genetics  and  molecular  biology. An
              important aim of the research project is the training  and   development  of 
              post-doctoral  research  fellows  in  this  interdisciplinary area. The
              problems described here are  part  of  our   ongoing  collaborations  with 
              geneticists  and   molecular  biologists  from USC and elsewhere. All of them
              have  significant  computational and statistical components.         We  are 
              studying  statistical and  algorithmic  aspects  of       physical mapping.
              Among these are optical       mapping,  by  which  ordered restriction maps 
              are  produced       using  fluorescence microscopy. The long  term  aim  is 
              the       development  of  an  online program that  produces  such  an      
              ordered map.              We  are analyzing the efficiency of various physical
              mapping       strategies   based   on  variants  of  sequence-tagged-sites     
               schemes. In particular, we are studying inhomogeneous  clone       and anchor
              distributions, the effects of false, ambiguous or       missing  anchors, and
              strategies that allow for mixtures  of       clone walking and random steps.   
                        We  are  developing statistical models for the evolution  of      
              genome   rearrangements  and  methods   for   reconstructing       phylogenetic
              trees from such data. This is motivated in part       by  data on
              rearrangements occurring in the promoter of GFAP       in the brain.           
                A  related  project addresses other aspects of  phylogenetic       tree
              reconstruction, in particular the effects of dependence       among  sites 
              when DNA sequence data is used  to  build  the       tree.  Motivated  by  data
              on rRNA promoters,  we  are  also       developing algorithms for fitting more
              detailed evolutionary       models when the underlying tree is known.          
                 We  are  investigating the statistics of pattern  counts  in       molecular
                sequences.   These  a re   frequently   used   to       characterize 
              biological features such  as  coding  regions,       regulatory sequences,
              splice sites and so on. Our  focus  is       on  the  development of useful
              computational algorithms  for       pattern  counts when the underlying
              sequence structure  must       be estimated from the data.              A
              further project addresses the estimation of deletion rates       in 
              mitochondrial genomes in humans. A PCR assay is used  to       detect  whether
              or not a cell line contains any mitochondria       with  the  deletion. The
              data comprise the  results  of  the       assay  on  several cell lines. We are
              developing analogs  of       the   Luria-Delbruck  method  of  fluctuation 
              analysis  for       estimating  the rate of deletions. The results are  used 
              to       study  the  role  of  the deletion in Kearns-Sayre  Syndrome      
              patients.              We   are  developing  Monte  Carlo  likelihood  methods 
              for       inference  in  genetics, aimed primarily  at  the  study  of      
              mitochondrial and nuclear gene variation in humans, and  its       use  in  the
              study of human evolution. One focus is  on  the       estimation  of 
              recombination rates, in  particular  between       human disease loci and a
              variety of marker loci.
