Title       : Global Optimization of Process Models Incorporating Detailed Chemical Kinetics
               Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9504827

Award Number: 9504827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Carr carrx002@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Carr 9504827    Chemical engineering is concerned with the design,
              construction, operation, and control of complex processes.  The associated
              system geometry can be complex because the chemical reactions involved take
              place within a time- and space-varying environment and/or the reactions
              themselves may be very complex, entailing hundreds of species participating in
              a network of many more reactions.  Optimization of the system or process may
              require a global search through a parameter space of high dimension, each step
              of the search requiring integration of the chemical-kinetic equations and the
              equations of mass and heat transport with time-dependent boundary conditions
              and spatial inhomogeneity.  Large demands are thus made for quantitative
              information on reactions rates and for computing power.    This research will
              address the problem by proceeding along two fronts: (1) the development of
              numerical analytic and visualization tools, and (2) the application of the
              available tools to kinetic and reactor models of varying complexity.  The PIs
              plan to develop a data parallel code for the local optimization of large sets
              of ordinary differential equations/differential algebraic equations (ODEs/DAEs)
              on the CM-5 (connection machine) at the Minnesota Supercomputer Institute.  An
              augmented Lagrangian code has been developed and another code incorporating
              successive quadratic programming will be written.  These codes will be tailored
              for simultaneous optimization and solution of the underlying ODEs/DAEs via
              orthogonal collocation and used to study larger and more detailed kinetic
              models for methane oxidation.   One dimensional transport and simple turbulence
              models may also be included.  The next stage of development will be to
              construct a code for Bayesian stopping rules in conjunction with multistart
              random search.  The construction of a small step methane oxidation kinetic
              mechanism will follow.  It will be optimized to match the output of the full
              kinetic scheme in a simple reactor in t he vicinity of the global optimum of
              the latter.
