Title       : Phase Retrieval Problems in Inverse Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9504611

Award Number: 9504611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Sacks psacks@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sacks       The investigator studies the one-dimensional inverse  scattering
              problem of quantum mechanics, in which the solution to  be found is a potential
              in the Schrodinger equation, and develops  effective numerical methods for
              computing the solution.  A variety  of inverse scattering problems are known to
              be uniquely solvable  when a complex valued function, known as the reflection 
              coefficient, is given as data.  In many interesting applications,  however, the
              reflection coefficient cannot be measured, but  instead only its amplitude can
              be determined experimentally.  The  phase problem in inverse scattering
              consists then in solving the  inverse scattering problem despite the lack of
              phase information  contained in the reflection coefficient.  In general these
              missing  data introduce genuine non-uniqueness into the problem, and one  must
              compensate by making use of other kinds of information.  For  example, one
              might restrict the class of admissible solutions in  some way consistent with
              the physics of the situation, or  alternatively one might have available some
              other kinds of data  related to the usual scattering data.  Aside from
              uniqueness  questions, there is also a need to develop accurate and reliable 
              computational techniques.  The model problem --- the  one-dimensional inverse
              scattering problem --- arises in neutr                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           on
               and x-ray reflection studies of surface structure.  Related  problems in
              optics are also studied.  It is natural in such  applications to require the
              potential to vanish on a half line,  and this substantially, although not
              completely, removes the  ambiguity due to the missing phase information.  A
              main goal of  this project is to identify various types of further
              supplementary  information whose specification allows for unique recovery of
              the  potential.  Also, numerical methods are developed for computation  of the
              potential in each case.  An important aspect of the  numerical approach
              developed here is that ultimately it is only  necessary to solve an
              optimization problem over a relatively small  dimensional parameter space.     
               In a number of areas of science and engineering it is of  interest to
              characterize the chemical structure of surfaces and  interfaces on very small
              length scales.  Aside from its intrinsic  theoretical interest, this kind of
              capability has technological  applications, especially in materials science and
              biology.  One  experimental technique which has received considerable attention
               in recent years is the use of so-called reflectivity data: a  carefully
              prepared beam of x-rays or neutrons is aimed at the  surface whose material
              properties are sought, and the reflected  beam is carefully measured.  Due to
              the interaction of                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              the beam  with the surface, the reflected beam
              encodes a great deal of  information about the surface, and one is thus
              confronted with the  problem of properly interpreting such data.  The main goal
              of this  project is to investigate certain analytical and numerical methods 
              for making such inferences.  The reflected beam may be  characterized by
              amplitude and phase components, but conventional  measuring devices are
              sensitive only to the amplitude component.  It is well understood that
              considerable ambiguity in the  interpretation of reflectivity data is
              associated with the absence  of the phase component.  To compensate for this
              one hopes to use  various kinds of supplementary information which may be
              available.  In this project the investigator seeks to elucidate from a 
              mathematical point of view how it may be possible to incorporate  such extra
              information into automatic data processing techniques.
