Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Percolation and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9504462

Award Number: 9504462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Alexander alexandr@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9504462 Alexander  Abstract    Percolation is perhaps the most fundamental model
              in which one can study how small-scale randomness produces large-scale
              phenomena, such as phase transitions, which are essentially nonrandom. 
              Alexander proposes to investigate the following aspects of the subject.  (1)
              The use of percolation ideas to analyze the behavior of two-dimensional
              incompressible flows with random potentials.  (2)  The properties of a new
              random cluster model which, like the standard FK random cluster model, is
              closely related to the Ising model.  (3) The use of percolation ideas to create
              a model, defined on a small scale, for large-scale phenomena which occur when
              water containing impurities freezes.  (4) The geometry of finite clusters, and
              its relation to the cluster size distribution, for certain continuum models of
              percolation. (5) The interrelation between percolation behavior of the graph
              and other properties for the "minimal spanning forest" of a stationary random
              labeled graph.  (6) The size of the fluctuations in the boundary of the region
              which can be reached by a fixed time in first-passage percolation. 
              Additionally, Alexander will investigate a string-matching problem related to
              the reconstruction of DNA sequences from many short overlapping segments.  
              This work is part of an ongoing effort by mathematicians and physicists to
              understand how small-scale randomness is reflected in large-scale, or
              "macroscopic," properties of various systems in the natural world.  A typical
              example is a piece of iron--each atom has a magnetic field aligned in a
              particular direction.  These directions are random, but nearby atoms tend to
              align in approximately the same direction, particularly when the temperature is
              low.  In essence, the tendency toward randomness, which increases with
              temperature, competes with the tendency to align.  Clusters of atoms with
              similar alignments--all "up,", all "down," etc.--are formed, and the random
              geometry of these clusters--what sizes of clusters occur with w hat
              probabilities--helps determine macroscopic properties of the iron.  When the
              temperature goes below a certain precise "critical point," there is a sudden
              change in the macroscopic behavior of the iron--the tendency to align wins out,
              so that a very large cluster of aligned atoms is formed, and the iron can
              become a magnet.  Such "critical phenomena"--sudden changes in macroscopic
              behavior when some measurement crosses a critical value--occur in a variety of
              contexts; recently, for example, there has been concern that the density of
              manmade junk orbiting the earth is approaching a critical level, above which
              the frequency of collisions will dramatically increase.  Other systems in which
              small-scale randomness determines macroscopic properties, and critical
              phenomena may occur, include (i) waves traveling through irregular materials,
              such as seismic waves through the earth's crust; (ii) transport of heat by
              ocean currents in the presence of turbulence, which affects global climate; and
              (iii) percolation of liquid through a porous material, such as water or oil
              through underground rock.  Mathematicians and physicists have long understood
              that many aspects of the relation between small-scale randomness and
              macroscopic properties, including critical phenomena, do not depend on the
              particular system being studied.  One can therefore gain insight into
              real-world phenomena by studying abstract systems not intended to model
              specifically magnets, or porous rock, or any other particular part of the
              physical world. The systems which Alexander will investigate are examples of
              such abstract systems.
